FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Platt Cline

Interview number NAU.OH.28.9

Platt Cline, the President of the Arizona Daily Sun, and author of They Came to the Mountain, and Mountain Town, both histories of the <Flagstaff, ()> area. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on December 17, 1975. Transcribed June 14, 1994. Transcriber: Nancy Warden.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in <Colorado, ()>, 1911 

    Early education 

    Newspaper jobs 

    <Colorado, ()> 

    Moved to <Flagstaff, ()> in 1938 

    Newspaper men 

    Columbus Giragi 

    Fred Breen 

    History of early <Flagstaff, ()> newspaper and editors 

    Newspaper man, Craig Pottinger 

    Other newspaper men in state 

    Opinions on changes in newspapers 

    <Flagstaff, ()> in 1930’s 

    Zane Grey’s comment

Tape 1, Side 2

    Houses lived in 

    Pow Wow magazine 

    Ray Manley 

    Howard Pyle 

    Andy Wolf 

    Fires 

    Blizzard in 1948 

    Plane crash in <Grand Canyon, ()> 

    Woman criminal caught in <Flagstaff, ()> 

    George Hochderffer

    Discussion of his book <Flagstaff, ()>, Whoa 

    Naming of <Flagstaff, ()> 

    Discussion of book writing 

    Billy Roden 

    Charles C. Stemmer 

    C.J. Babbitt 

    Coltons’

Tape 2, Side 1

    Newmans’ 

    Billy Switzer 

    Masonic Lodge 

    Different members 

    Early <Flagstaff, ()> 

    Famous people visiting <Flagstaff, ()> 

    John Wesley Powell 

    Scientists 

    Zane Grey 

    Educated men in <Flagstaff, ()>

TAPE 1, SIDE 1

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Platt Cline, who is the president of the Arizona Daily Sun. It is being conducted on December 17th, 1975 at 604 N. Bertrand, which is his home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mr. Cline, when and where were you born?

PLATT CLINE: I was born February 7, 1911 in <Mancos Colorado, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. And did you spend most of your childhood there, then?

PLATT CLINE: I spent, ah, all my early years there except for three years when I was in New Mexico Military Institute. I graduated at the Institute in 1930. I put in part of a year at Colorado University at Boulder. Then I was back. I lived in <Phoenix, ()> for a short time and then in the thirties I was back in <Mancos, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. So why and when did you come to <Flagstaff, ()>?

PLATT CLINE: I was always interested in newspapers. And I worked on the little newspaper in <Mancos, ()>. Oh, the first time I was there I was ah, let’s see, it was in 1930. I was the entire front office staff, and the fellow I was with did all the mechanical work. The two of us got out the little paper. Then I was, a little bit later, I was in the CCC camp, or the federal projects of that period. And of course my job very soon came to be editor of the little camp newspaper, in addition to working in the museum. And I got out that newspaper until 1936. I went to <Norwood Colorado, ()>. My wife and I were married the year before in <Norwood Colorado, ()> where we published a little weekly newspaper. This little town was about three hundred population. Then in thirty-eight we came to <Flagstaff, ()>, principally because my parents were here, and I had an interest in a proposed newspaper that was to be established at <Kanab Utah, ()>. It wasn’t established for many years, and when it was, I wasn’t involved in it. But that was the primary reason I came here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. So then how did you get involved in the newspaper here?

PLATT CLINE: When I came the first thing, of course, I did, I believe the day after we came in on the bus, I went down to the Sun, which was in the building across from the Monte Vista Hotel and got acquainted. There was Melvin Hutchinson, took care of all the advertising and wrote considerable amount of the news, and, ah, Billie Yost was bookkeeper and women’s page editor. Ah, there was a man named Del Strong, that was sort of manager, general manager for the people who owned it. People who owned it were a couple of sisters of Colonel Fred Breen, who had gotten the paper about 1908, approximately 1908, and published it ‘til his death until about 1932. At the time I went down there, ah, Giragi brothers, ah, were really weren’t brothers anymore. They consisted of, ah, just Columbus Giragi, his other brothers had died. They were publishing the <Winslow ()> Mail and the Holbrook Tribune. And they had arranged a little bit earlier to take over the sun, and they had Del Strong continuing with them as manager for the time being. I, ah, I got acquainted there, and at Christmas time that year, when Strong was going on vacation, I had a two weeks’ job. Then I worked to fill in from time to time in thirty-nine until I finally, ah, got a full time job as a- when Strong left the place, I got a full time job as local news reporter and ad, I suppose you’d say, ad director. I was the only ad salesman. I stayed there all during 1940. I think that was probably one of the best years we ever had as far as satisfactions were concerned. And then, ah, Mr. Giragi needed somebody to go to Holbrook and take over the operation of the Holbrook Tribune, because the man who had been doing it for him, Bob Eunson had left to go to work for the Associated Press. So early in forty-one I went to Holbrook and stayed there during the war years, and then about June of forty-five we came back up to <Flagstaff, ()>, and at that time I became, really in effect, a publisher, I suppose. I was editor and general manager. And I continued on that job until January 1, '46 when new owners came in and bought the property. And I joined the venture as one of the stockholders, and continued in general management of the property. What we were getting ready to do was make a daily out of it. And in early August of ’46, I think the first Monday in August, either the fourth or sixth, we started the Arizona Daily Sun. They had brought an experienced daily publisher in, in the meantime, a man named Paul Yeager, and I had my choice of other jobs, and I took the job as managing editor. So I continued with that job until about, oh, fifty-one or fifty-two, and when Yeager was out as publisher, the owners, the W.J. McGiffin Newspaper Co., gave me the job of publishing or being publisher and editor. I continued in that until about fifty-seven when I succeeded in putting together an arrangement with, oh, Burl Hagadon (?) of <Couer de line Idaho, ()>, and John and Ed Scripps, who also lived in the northwest, to purchase the McGiffen interests, which we did. Then I carried on as editor and publisher under the new ownership, but with quite a substantial increase in, ah, stock interests, as far as I was concerned, until about January, ’66 when I retired, or to some degree retired, brought in another man to take over the active management. And I served more or less in a consultant's capacity. Does that get us up to date?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

PLATT CLINE: About that time I became president of the corporation and continued up until the present.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you tell me a little bit about the Giragi brothers, their personality, particularly Columbus?

PLATT CLINE: Columbus was one of four brothers and a sister. Their parents were immigrants from <Sicily, ()>. They came over in the nineties, I believe. The father was an uneducated man, and he worked in the mines. Columbus was born at <Congress Junction, ()>. And you can hardly tell when you get to Congress Junction, as you probably know. You go down that road from <Prescott, ()> to <Wickenburg, ()>, around that way. And I think it’s marked, but maybe not. Anyway that’s whee he was born. And his father was working in the mine. And then they went on down to <Tombstone, ()>. And the boys were raised at Tombstone. And when Columbus was about sixteen, which would be probably about 1914 or something like that, the, ah, their mother borrowed a small sum of money, five hundred or perhaps it was fifteen hundred, I’ve forgotten. But Columbus told me, and they made some sort of arrangement to buy the "Tombstone Epitaph." And they seemed to have a natural talent for newspaper operation. They very quickly made a success out of it. And Columbus was sixteen years old, and his brothers were, one of them was younger; two of them were younger. His sister, perhaps was maybe a year older than he was, and there was the older brother, Carmel (?) who was two or three or four years older. They made quite a success out of it. They were people of great, great talent. Carmel died in a plane crash, I think, in the thirties. After they came to northern <Arizona, ()>, they sold their properties, the Tombstone, and bought the "<Winslow ()> Mail." Then they acquired the "Holbrook Tribune." Along in there somewhere Carmel was died in a plane accident, I think going to <Phoenix, ()>. George died of a heart attack about 1937 or 1938, and Columbus was a survivor. He was badly crippled. He had, he’d injured his spine in a plane accident when he was in the army air force during the war. It wasn’t a combat accident, but, ah, or injury, he injured his spine, and he developed a very, very painful and crippling arthritis. And as the years passed he became more and more bowed. He had to almost lie down on his back in order to see people, to see their faces. He had to walk with a cane, and this continued the rest of his life. I, I greatly admired him. He was very, really brilliant. He was highly talented as a speaker, public speaker. And he was in demand for talks of all kinds, everywhere. He was very active in politics for awhile until he sort of got disillusioned with the ah, with the New Deal policies. At one time he was director of some agency for the federal government for <Arizona, ()>. He, he really liked newspapers, and he liked printing, job printing, related, which in the early days, especially with the newspapers, was related to newspaper publishing. It’s where you kept your employees busy the rest of the week when they weren’t getting out the newspaper. And I was greatly impressed by Columbus and his clever column of comment that he wrote, and his just absolutely unrivaled ability to manage a newspaper, and to make it make money, and to put out a good editorial product. He did a superlative job. And so when the chance came to go down to Holbrook and work for him, and his home was in Holbrook, and he only came up here once or twice a month to <Flagstaff, ()>, which helped out, because it would mean every day contact with him. I greatly enjoyed my contacts with him. He was, he was very clever. Anytime you went anywhere, any sort of a gathering, press convention or whatever, within a minute or two after he’d get in, and he’d get a chair, and he’d get scooted down in the chair where he could see people’s faces, why he’d have a crowd around him. Sometimes you couldn’t see through the crowd. Ah, he was so witty and clever, and he had stories, illustrative anecdotes. He tailored his stories to fit the groups he was talking to. Ah, very, very, very clever, and his stories were just great. He was tremendously entertaining. He made friends or friends develop, friendship developed with, oh, people that were widely known at the time. I think of Eddie Rickenbacker, the World War I and World War II hero. And writers, for instance who were popular at the time, Westbrook Pegler, prominent figures of all sorts who were attracted to him. I remember when the, when the British Ambassador to the <United States, ()> during the war, when Lord Halifax visited the <United States, ()>, and he stopped briefly in <<Winslow ()>, ()>. <Winslow ()> used to be quitte important because it was the only stop in northern <Arizona, ()> for a regularly scheduled airline. If you wanted to go anywhere you had to go to <Winslow ()> to get on. And Halifax came there, and I drove Giragi up from <Holbrook ()> to meet him. And it was interesting to me, because Halifax was a man who had dealt with world figures, and had been raised as an aristocrat, and a man who was always in charge of any situation he found himself in. And within seconds, why Columbus was in charge of that, of that meeting and that conference. And Halifax was asking Columbus questions and laughing at his jokes; terrific, terrific talent; great abilities.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now what year did he die? Do you remember? Or about?

PLATT CLINE: Sixty-seven or sixty-eight.

SUSAN ROGERS: Not very long ago.

PLATT CLINE: Perhaps something like that. He wasn’t really very old. He was seventy-two or three or something like that, you know.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Now did you know Fred Breen yourself?

PLATT CLINE: No, he died in 1932, and I didn’t come here for years after. But I, I had access to the files at the Sun, including some of files that he had compiled, and I really got a flavor of his character and personality. And of course I started in very early reading all the old newspapers, just years and years of them I read. And I got quite well acquainted with him, really through that means. He was a man of great talent, too, extraordinary. He could write little routine news items about the coming and going of people in the community and visitors from other communities and give them witty, very clever, and strongly, with a strong element of human interest. And even the most routine news items, great, great talent. During his time of the teens and twenties, he was a national figure, and he was quoted nation-wide, sometimes, he was in a sense he was a small town newspaper man who was nationally recognized like <Emporia Kansas<Sun, ()>’ ________ White, you know. He was a republican at the right time. And newspapers used to take political associations pretty seriously, so he ran a republican newspaper. A very, very clever man. He came from a newspaper family. He came to <Flagstaff, ()> really for his health. And he had sort of a political job. His family had had some intimate association with Gifford Pinchot family back in <Pennsylvania, ()>. And Pinchot played an important part, you know, in establishing the Forest Service. And somewhere or another Breen ended up with a job, as what we would call it, a supervisor with the forest here.. At that time it was called the forest preserve. He was really, I believe, the first supervisor of what became Coconino National Forest. He was very, very clever and one of the funny things he did was when he resigned about 1907 or 08 to buy the newspaper, which is what he really wanted to do, he wrote this clever letter, and I found the carbon copy of the original letter. And I made copies of it down through the years I’ve given them to the forest supervisors here. A copy of it has been published in a history of this southwestern region of the forest. What he did in the letter was to say that he had just received another promotion and he couldn’t afford anymore promotions. ‘Cause every time he got a promotion his pay went down, and he got a better title so he was reluctantly giving up the job. It’s very, very clever, this letter. And I think the pay at that time was something like twelve or fifteen hundred dollars a year. It was probably a pretty good job as small jobs went, but for a man of his talents and ability, it really wasn’t much. So that’s when he got the newspaper. He really did a terrific job. The newspaper’s been fortunate at different times in having some of these men of extraordinary talents that were attracted to <Flagstaff, ()>, who wanted to live here. Just like today we have people prominent in various fields who live here, not because they couldn’t perhaps have bigger jobs somewhere else, but because they wanted to live here. Well, all of these extraordinary talents was Breen. In the early days, the founder of the paper at <Peach Springs, ()>, which is where it started in the fall of eighty-three, a man named Artemus E. Fays was another man of extraordinary talent. He was followed in due time by a man named George Tinker, who did fairly well, but was a man with a health problem, and finally died here. His son, then, had it for awhile. Then they had another man of very unusual talent came around named Funston. And on his death the paper was sold to Breen, who did such an extraordinary job.

Then there was a brief interim between Breen’s death and Giragi’s purchase. And then Giragi, with hes brilliance, really made the paper . That’s what happened in the early days.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, uh huh. Okay what about Craig Pottinger?

PLATT CLINE: He was an old friend of mine. Really not old in the sense of years, but I knew about him through the paper. So I contacted him in later years and got acquainted with him. He is either still living, or he’s died quite recently at an extreme age. He came here before, or at the beginning of World War I to start a newspaper, which I believe was to a considerable degree financed by Babbitts, most especially George Babbitt, senior. And he started this paper, the Northern Arizona Leader. He was very good. He was a good newspaper man. He left during part of the war to go into service. I think he sold the paper, and then when he came back I believe he bought it back again. And he ran it a year or two and then folded it up. Babbitts had invested, or at least George Babbitt had invested, I believe Craig told me one time, forty or fifty thousand dollars in it. The community couldn’t support two newspapers. And he really had some rough competition witn Col. Breen, brilliant, nationally noted figure.

Craig went down to <Nogales, ()> and started a newspaper called "Nogales International". There was already a little paper down there, a daily newspaper down there. I believe it’s the "Herald". And I believe it was republican. And politics was still important in the twenties as far as newspapers were concerned. So in due time, Pottinger with his democrratic newspaper, I might say that Breen was republican, Pottinger with his "Nogales International", became a leading figure in the democratic party in <Arizona, ()>. So in due time he was appointed collector of customs at <Nogales, ()>. Then he was out at some time or another. Then he got the job back again and I think he continued to publish that paper. I think in these last years he has not. Then I got acquainted with him on a personal level, in addition to having corresponded with him, was three or four years ago, he started coming to <Flagstaff, ()> fairly regularly, because he had a granddaughter going to the University. So when he’d come up, I’d find out about it and call him, or he’d call me, and we’d visit. And of course all we visited about was what happened in <Flagstaff, ()> back in the days when he was here. Very, very fine man.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of any other personalities that you’d like, you know newspaper personalities that you’d like to say something about?

PLATT CLINE: Well, not in relation to <Flagstaff, ()> particularly. I’ve known most of the men in the state during the years I’ve been here. Oh, Pulliam, the publisher of the <Phoenix, ()> papers who came, I believe during the war, or immediately after the war. We got to be pretty good friends. We were usually on opposite sides, but we respected each other. And Harry(?) Montgomery, who really managed the <Phoenix, ()> papers for him, was a good friend of mine, and I’d known him from the early days that I came here, because he had been the Associated Press Bureau Chief in <Phoenix, ()>. And when I worked on these newspapers he was a man I’d phone when I reported news.

Jones Osborn over at <Yuma, ()>, man that I’ve always admired very much. The Sisks(?) down at <Nogales, ()>, and many others. Frank Wells over at <Williams, ()> who published a paper there for many, many years, we were good friends.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, tell me about what you think how the newspapering has changed over the years. Has it been good or bad, or what changes have taken place?

PLATT CLINE: Now we’re talking about the level that I’ve worked on and not on the national level. In some ways the newspapers are improved. They are better printed, because of new processes; off-set printing; photographs have become important. Used to be the little newspapers really couldn’t afford pictures at all. And if they used them they’d have to send them off, have engravings made, take ten days or two weeks to get a picture back. So all we used to get in the old days were portraits, generally speaking, or some scenic picture that could be used. They were expensive for small papers, but off set changed that. Ah, the quality, I would say probably the reporters today, in many respects, are better educated. The good ones are very good; the run-of-the-mill of them are not as good as their predecessors years ago. Part of it is working, how much effort a person puts into jobs. And people, perhaps, many of them don’t, as seriously as when if you had a job you really wanted to keep it, because you might not ever find another. So people worked harder in the early days. And I have a, I would say that the <Flagstaff, ()> paper in the thirties and forties, as far as giving a complete picture of what was happening since. The community’s increased several sizes, several times in size. But there was a time when everything that happened in town, we had it in that week’s paper. We know that isn’t true any more, and it’s probably impossible to do it because of limitations of volume and time and so forth.

Changes that have taken place, I’d say they’re not as folksy, perhaps as countrified, as rural, I don’t say this is necessarily better. It is a change. The emphasis on individuals, which we used to have, has now shifted to a considerable degree to emphasis on organizations and groups. I think perhaps papers now are better edited in some regards. However some of these men, like Artemis Fays, who founded the paper, Funston, certainly Tinker, Giragi and these people. I don’t know if some of them had considerable amount of formal education. And Giragi, for instance, didn’t; all he had was high school. But these men were very literate and very, very good writers. They knew how to write good, really good journalism. But then there have been a lot of others that weren’t so good, early days and now. Papers are generally better maybe. They’re, they’ve changed their emphasis; they’ve changed their layout styles to things that nowadays they consider innovations, which are really repetitions of old, old patterns, typographical and so on that go way back.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let’s see. Let’s move into a different area for a little bit. Can you tell me about <Flagstaff, ()> when you first arrived? What it was like? Maybe start off with a description of some of the buildings?

PLATT CLINE: Well, I think of <Flagstaff, ()> that I knew when we came here as "old <Flagstaff, ()>", but then I know it really isn’t. I remember reading in the 1927 anniversary edition of the "Sun", and I believe it was published in ’27, a piece, a brief piece in there by Zane Grey, which he said that <Flagstaff, ()> wasn’t <Flagstaff, ()> any more. Well he’s talking about 1927. He said the wooden sidewalks were gone, and the cowboys, clicking of their heels and jingling of their spurs was somethin he couldn’t hear anymore and <Flagstaff, ()> now was just turning into another town. This was his feeling about it in ’27. Well we’re getting nostalgic, my wife and I, about old days in <Flagstaff, ()>, O L D (with emphasis) days in <Flagstaff, ()>. And then I remind myself that ah, well there was a lot here that Zane Grey apparently didn’t approve of that we thought was pretty good. And I suspect that right now this is true, too. But there was only a paved street or two downtown, maybe two or three. And they didn’t, the pavement didn’t run out very far, except the Front Street. Ah, the activity was, in the community, was, well, was confined generally in what we now call downtown <Flagstaff, ()>. There was a lot of the town here on the south side of the tracks or on the University, and what had been Mill Town from early days, a part of the town that joined the corporation I think about 1920. There were blocks of nice homes on the south side. But generally speaking things sort of rotated downtown around Babbitts, around the city hall, which was on Leroux, around the courthouse, which didn’t have that monstrosity tacked on to it; that horrible modernistic thing. It was a beautiful old sandstone building, beautifully carved stones around the entryways. All of which has been covered up with this plaster and these Indian designs that are really not real appropriate for that area. Around there, around that part of town, that was the town. I remember I didn’t have any automobile. And the news coverage that I did, I walked the town, it was small enough that I walked wherever I had to go. And there wasn’t the urgency timewise either. We were getting out a weekly, and we had a lot to do, but we had time to walk. I could walk over, six or eight or ten blocks some place and get something and come back. That’s the most noticeable change. The Old Weatherford, as I recalled still had that beautiful old balcony around the front that should have been kept. I hope they restore it some time. The newest building in town was, I believe, the Monte Vista Hotel. It had been built about ’27, ’26, ’27, ’28, only ten years before. The Sun building across the street from it was quite a modern building. Babbitts’ still looked like it had back in the nineties; beautiful sandstone building.

SUSAN ROGERS: When did they put that front on it?

PLATT CLINE: Oh, sometime after the war they modernized it. Other buildings downtown were ruined at the same time, about the same period.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, why don’t we hold for a minute and switch.

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE1, SIDE 2

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did you live when you first arrived?

PLATT CLINE: We lived on North Park in a duplex. It’s still there. We lived with my mother and father for a time. Then we lived on Birch, and then later we had a little house on Cherry, around back on the alley on Cherry, that we really enjoyed. A little house that’s been moved a few feet from where it used to be, and I see it’s still there. I drove down that alley a while back to take a look. That’s where we lived, and then we went to Holbrook.

SUSAN ROGERS: They used to move the houses around quite a bit didn’t they?

PLATT CLINE: Well they were easy to move if they were frame houses. Most of the moving took place here when development started, largely after the war. And places that had been residential areas became business areas, and houses were moved. Dozens of those old houses are in east <Flagstaff, ()> and also out on the Lake Mary Road in that little settlement out there near the water plant. Those are little houses that were moved from <Flagstaff, ()>. Some of them I think had, well, some historical interest.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you, did you go to any of those early Pow Wows on fourth of July?

PLATT CLINE: When I came here I started going to all of those. I became actively involved in that. Immediately after the war when I came back here, I became publicity director. And part of this job was to be editor of the POW WOW magazine. Incidentally I think I have probably the only complete file of POW WOW magazines that there is, which in due time will be up in Special Collections. It was a good magazine. I worked pretty hard on it. I remember I got special articles from men like Felix Comb(?) who was the authority on Indian law, laws relating to Indians; John Collier, who had been commissioner of Indian Affairs, a noted anthropologist and ethnologist. These people generally were pleased to either give special things without, without remuneration. We got Ray Manley, a quite noted figure in the business of photography in <Arizona, ()> for many years, still is, I believe. Manley is one of the ones who contributed to the fame of ARIZONA HIGHWAYS MAGAZINE. And I’d have Manley come up every year and take pictures, and we cooperated with him and arranged for Indians at the Pow Wow to pose for him in return for which he gave us pictures which we used in publicity. Beautiful, beautiful pictures; did that for many years. I made a tape recording of an entire Pow Wow program about 1951. I believe when Howard Pyle, who had been governor of radio station, went to <Washington, ()> to be a member of the staff of President Eisenhower, I taped his last show. He was very pleased when he was up here this summer to know that it had ever been taped. And he gave him a copy of it. Took it home with him. And then the next year I taped Andy Wolf’s Pow Wow presentation. And I have those tapes, and I have them with all the old POW WOW magazines. In due time they’ll be put up in the collections at the University. I was on the Pow Wow Committee for many years. I’ve forgotten how many. After I more or less gave up the direction of the publicity part of it, I served on the committee actively.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let’s see. Do you remember any big fires, floods, or blizzards?

PLATT CLINE: Well, the times of the big fires, of course, was over. We did have some spectacular fires. The old mill, the old <Flagstaff, ()> Lumber Company mill that was located over where South West Forest Industries is now, had been vacant and not in use for many years, when it burned, it was really something. There are other fires but-

SUSAN ROGERS: What year did it burn about, do you remember?

PLATT CLINE: What would you say, in the forties, probably forty-six or seven perhaps. The old Babbitt home up here in Pinecrest Terrace was quite a fire. I’ve forgotten the date. We had the big snow storms of course. We had one, I believe in 1947 or ’48. One of the great storms here. I made a collection of pictures at the time. I remember I wrote a- Associated Press wanted me to write a piece about how it feels to be snow bound in a community. And I wrote one, and it was, was widely reprinted all over the country. I got clippings of, or pages from <Kansas City, ()>, and oh, <California, ()> and other places. The story about the big storm in <Flagstaff, ()>. It was really fun, really it was fun.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell a little bit about it? Were you snow bound pretty much?

PLATT CLINE: Well, all the traffic stopped because the snow was five or six feet in the streets. They only opened up what they had to for such things as fire trucks. Nearly everyone walked. And it was really sort of fun for awhile. It got to where the fun wore thin. A few roofs caved in. The buildings were not as well constructed as others. And it was a sort of a community experience in a way. Everybody was in it. There was a little concern about food, but the railroads, of course, the trains were running; there were plows, but there really wasn’t any problems. It was mostly inconvenience. The problem (?), we never missed a day getting the paper published. Some days we only managed to distribute a few hundred, because the carriers, the boys, some of them, the snow was deeper than the boys were tall. (Both laugh)

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, working on the newspaper do you remember any special big crimes that happened?

PLATT CLINE: Oh, we had some interesting things happen. We had the crash of the two big airliners over <Grand Canyon, ()>. And I remember that happened on a Saturday night or something. And we got out an extra on Sunday. We flew one of our staff members up to take some pictures, which weren’t very good, but were the only pictures printed. We got out a few other extras at different times. The thing that isn’t done anymore, ‘cause now with the tv, why it isn’t practical to try to publish extras generally. We had, oh some famous murder cases, or famous locally, you know, nothing really unique about them. Some other things I remember when, when the FBI had been trailing a woman who had stolen, oh, I don’t know. This is from memory, so maybe I’m wrong, I think about one half million dollars worth of bonds from some man either in <Las Vegas, ()> or <Reno, ()>. And they had traced her to <Los Angeles, ()>, and then they found where she had gotten on a train to go east. So they were riding the train with her, and when they got here, they took her off the train here. Michaud(?) was her name, Jeanie Michaud(?), French Canadian. I’m probably mispronouncing it. I managed to get one picture of her. The FBI didn’t want her photographed, and neither did the Sheriff’s Office. They had her in the county jail. But I did, I had a press camera of my own in those days, an old "speed graphic," and I managed to get one picture of her, and that picture was printed everywhere, LOOK, and TIME, and LIFE, and Associated Press and United Press. Everybody used that picture, because it was about the only picture there was of her. That was kind of fun.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Let’s see if I can ask you about some different personalities you can tell me a little bit, okay? We’ll start off with George Hochderffer.

PLATT CLINE: I got very well acquainted with George, and I greatly enjoyed my contacts with him. I knew him here, and then he went, as he got near ninety, he moved to <Cottonwood, ()> and bought a little house. And along about the same time, I bought a house down there about a block from him. So we would visit, and he’d come to see me once in awhile. I took, I went to his ninetieth birthday party, which was at <Cottonwood, ()>, and it was quite an enjoyable event. And he was dressed with a tuxedo and hard-boiled collar and bow tie for the occasion. And I took pictures. One of them appears in his book Flagstaff Whoa, him standing at the gate. I met his brothers. I already knew his son, his daughter. It was quite an experience. One day he came to see me at <Cottonwood, ()>. I know it was after he was ninety, and shortly before his death, I think he lived to ninety-one or thereabouts. And he was limping a little bit. He was a big, tall fellow with military bearing. Ah, he greatly prided himself on his physique and his bearing. He was every inch a colonel, which he was in the National Guard, and he thought of himself that way. And he had a cane stuck under his arm, and I asked him, when he came to the house, I said, "What are you carrying that cane for, George?" And he says, "Well", he said, "I fell and hurt myself a while back, and the doctor told me I should carry a cane so I’m carrying it." He had a very horse voice, and he had, what I think, was a real strong German accent, even though he was born in the <United States, ()>. Apparently his parents were from the old country and spoke probably German at home, and he got this accent as a child. Anyway he was hard to understand. He was one of these fellows that wanted to be wherever history was being made, as far as he could. When he was a little tiny baby, a few months old, he told me his hand was shaken by President Lincoln, who at that time was campaigning for office in <Illinois, ()>. I believe it was <Illinois, ()>. And so he made it a point then to shake hands with every president, and I think the only one he ever missed was Andrew Johnson, which is understandable, because George at that time would have been a very small child, immediately following Lincoln’s time. And he shook hands with every one of them up ‘til Truman’s time. And then he got interested in democratic policies, and he always managed to become, in one way or another, a delegate to the national conventions. This is where he met a lot of these figures. He went to, he went to the Navy Yard, I believe, Hampton Roads(?) or some place in the early years, maybe 1915, when they christened the Arizona battleship. Yeah, he was one of these fellows who wanted to be there when these things happened, you know. He was a most interesting fellow. He was a botanist, and a rancher, and a farmer, and a carpenter. He knew how to make bricks. And he was very talented in water colors and oils and painting. He was a historian and did a good job of keeping a record of <Flagstaff, ()> doings during his very long life, as his book is evidence. He was a, he was- I think, I mentioned botany.

I believe there are plants, at least one plant, some, one of the juniper family, that’s named for him, or I’ve heard this was so. He was interested in history. He knew all the colorful characters and important people in <Flagstaff, ()>’s history. I was, I’ve considered it a great privilege to be his friend.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you think that everything in his book really happened, or do you think maybe he played some of it up a little?

PLATT CLINE: I don’t think he deliberately concocted stories. He didn’t really have an understanding of how research is done. So to settle things he didn’t, he didn’t know where to go, where original sources are. He did things from memory and from clippings from the newspaper. Sometimes clippings that didn’t have dates on them, and from what people had told him. He didn’t, he was not a trained researcher, but he did pretty well. Of course he invents dialogue that happened seventy years before he wrote it. But it didn’t hurt his book any, but probably the dialogue was probably quite a bit like the way he recorded it, or at least remembered it.

SUSAN ROGERS: In doing your own research, have you found that you disagree with any of the incidences that he recorded in his book?

PLATT CLINE: I think one place we would differ, he was convinced that the, that the flag staff for which the town was named was a big tall trimmed tree that stood down here near Santa Fe Avenue in the vicinity of that Straw Hat Pizza and the Shell Oil bulk plant down there. He was convinced of this, because P.J. Brannen, who had run the pioneer store in <Flagstaff, ()> from eighty-one, told him that when he named the town "<Flagstaff, ()>", he had that tree in mind. Well they didn’t realize, they didn’t really know. They had heard stories about an older flagstaff for flag staffs over north of Flagstaff High School in that open area, that football field area. That was where the Boston Party had their activities and where the July Fourth think took place, in my opinion. They didn’t have access, or they didn’t know how to go about finding the sources. They didn’t know about the Loring letters. This fellow Loring wrote a whole series, a stack of letters to his wife. He was a member of the Boston Party. They never thought to check county records in <Prescott, ()>, early day minutes. So there I would disagree with him. I don’t doubt but what Brannen did what he said he did on that historic occasion, if that’s what it was, when he said we’ll call it <Flagstaff, ()>. But the truth is that at least three years before that the area here was known as <Flagstaff, ()>, and there’s documentary proof, and this is one of the things that I devote a chapter to in my book. There I would part with him. But I think, generally, what he did was a real service. We don’t have any other record kept by anyone here. I have not, oh, he showed me many years ago, he showed me the original manuscript, and I think only a certain fraction of it is in his book. And I don’t know what the rest of it is. It’s probably repetitious material, but he did it. And no one else was doing it. It’s pretty good.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. How did you get interested in writing a book? How did that come about?

PLATT CLINE: Well, I’ve always been interested in history and local history. My first newspaper venture, when I was about twenty years old in <Colorado, ()>, I was interested in local place names, and I believe I found some place a copy of Escalante’s journal. The Spanish priest what went from <Santa Fe, ()> up through south western <Colorado, ()> in 1776 and circled around in <Utah, ()> and came down the "Crossing of the Fathers", and through the Hopi villages and on back to <Santa Fe, ()>. He’s the first, I believe, record we have of some of those names of south western <Colorado, ()>. And I was interested at that time in that sort of thing. When I came down here and knew that I was going to be here, forever, I immediately became interested in local history, and I always have enjoyed old people. So any old timer that I met at a lodge meeting or anywhere else, why I would, I would visit with these people. As far as my own efforts were concerned, I filed this stuff, all this stuff for years. Every letter that came to the newspaper, for instance, from old Senator Ashurst, I would keep it. Or Ralph Cameron, who was one of the senators in the early days of statehood. I’d put these things away, because I knew they had historical vallue. I cultivated acquaintances and friendship with men like Billy Switzer, who lived to be ninety-eight. And old Al Beasley, who came in the eighties, and Hochderffer, and Billy Roden, and these other people. And I did it not with the idea that someday I’m going to write a history, but that this should be preserved.

Then about 1970 I got interested in writing a history of my own family. I’d known for years that I was going to do that, and I’d been accumulating stuff. So I spent two years doing that. I went to <Virginia, ()>, <Nebraska, ()>, and <Colorado, ()>, and so forth, and I completed that project, and I was happy with it. I succeeded in finding lines that we had never had any knowledge of. And after I completed this family history of about thirty copies, I just did it for the family. I did it as frankly as I could. I didn’t really launder it for public consumption. I described them like they were, with the warts and the rest of it, and divorces and all the other things that happen in families. And I was quite pleased with it, and I found that I enjoyed research and that I had an understanding of how one goes about doing historical research in a period like, oh, say a hundred or two hundred years since it’s been <USA, ()> really; county records and so forth.

I really never had any difficulty in finding sources. I sort of had a feel for it, or an interest in it. So I, after I finished that job, I was walking up the street one day, here right here where we live, and it was in the middle of winter, snow on the ground, and I passed Dr. Lyons. He’s a professor of history at Northern Arizona University. And passed his house, he lives across the street and a couple of doors south. And he was shoveling snow, and I stopped to visit with him. He said, "Say, why don’t you write a history of <Flagstaff, ()>?" And I thought, "Well, why don’t I?" (both laugh) So I thought about it a bit, and I visited with him, and he gave me an idea or two of how it might be, how I might approach it. And so I started looking at these files that I’d accumulated, and gradually I worked out a pattern. And my first thought was a complete history up to the present time. And then I could see that that would require actually a staff of researchers and a lot of expense and a lot of time, and I wanted to do something. So I was especially interested in the early days, and I finally hit on the idea of completing a history up to the time that the county was established in 1891. And then leave that later period, either for later reference by myself or for other people in years to come. I thought the early part should be done in some way in some association with the centennial, actually, <Flagstaff, ()> centennial might be seventy-six, when the Boston Party was here, and it might be seventy-eight, when a surveyor designated <Flagstaff, ()> on a map. It might be eighty-one when the- or eighty when the Yavapai County Board of Supervisors referred to the little settlement here. I really don’t know when our centennial is. I think it actually, we could celebrate for five years starting in seventy-six and probably cover most of the important early happenings, or at least the founding items.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. Okay. Let’s go back to some personalities. Some- you’ve done some research on Billy Roden, you said?

PLATT CLINE: We were very fortunate when we rented the little house on West Cherryto find that we were right across the fence from Billy Roden. He had a house where he spent the summers, and he spent the winter in <California, ()>. He had- he was about seventy, I believe, he had a younger wife, perhaps in her thirties, and they had a little girl about three years old. We got quite well acquainted across the back fence. And I got some real feelings about early days. He’d had some scrapes. He’d been wounded in a battle with the Indians, and so forth. I got some feeling for him. I had sort of an understanding or at least an appreciation of people like him, because I’d been raised in a little pioneer community in <Colorado, ()>, livestock and farming community. Where when I was a child, where we had these fellows that had had really been frontiersmen, real pioneers. So he was typical. So I, that was when I got acquainted with Billy Roden.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he tell you any particular adventures on the reservation that you’d like to-

PLATT CLINE: I think he told me about one of these scrapes with the Indians where he got shot. And I’m sorry to say I didn’t make any record. But I remember vaguely about it. What I remember mostly was his front yard, being gone much of the year he couldn’t really take care of a lawn. And his front yard was, as I recall, was full of gramma grass. Gramma grass is a native grass that'’ ah, was really the foundation of the livestock business in northern <Arizona, ()>. It’s highly nutritious; high level of protein. And this is what made the big herds of cattle and sheep, and as I recall, there was some reference to the gramma grasses, how beautiful it was, because he had a definite interest in gramma grass, you see. He was, he was a typical gruff, hardy, courtly in manners, as many of these old timers were; fine, fine gentlemen; real privilege to know him.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, is he the one that is mentioned in Hochderffer’s book?

PLATT CLINE: He and his father.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

PLATT CLINE: He and his father. Yeah. The Billy Roden that he talks about on the <Little Colorado, ()> is probably this one.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, right. Okay. What do you remember about Charles Stemner (sic)?

PLATT CLINE: Charles Stemmer?

SUSAN ROGERS: Stemmer.

PLATT CLINE: C. C. Stemmer. The most note, well at least the thing I remember most easily, or what comes to mind most easily about Stemmer, was the fact that he and I had the same birthdays. So we got acquainted every year, we always exchanged birthday cards with some jokes. And he was postmaster at <Cottonwood, ()>, when I got acquainted with him. He’d a long time before left <Flagstaff, ()>. I encouraged him along in the fifties, after we got acquainted, to write articles for the Sun. And he wrote quite a series. We printed either most or all of them. And I have the original manuscripts here. Ah, reminiscences of <Flagstaff, ()> in early days, things the way he remembered them. And he always signed them "That Kid." He was, he was pretty good. He wrote a little book you probably know about.

SUSAN ROGERS: I read it, uh huh.

PLATT CLINE: and there’s a little bit of historical data in it. I enjoyed Charlie Stemmer. And he and I just hit it off fine. We just- maybe because we had the same birthday. And it seems to me, he was left-handed too, or something. Anyway, we had some things in common. And he knew that I really enjoyed visiting with him so he, he’d really talk when I’d go to see him at the- and visit with him in <Cottonwood, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he ever relay any of his mystical experiences to you?

PLATT CLINE: No. He- I, I think he tried to, as I recall, and I visited with him in <Cottonwood, ()>. I think he’d get off on to this thing about this, this, Indian maiden, or whoever it was that was the communication means. You know whenever I, I kept trying to talk about <Flagstaff, ()> history, see. And I think he told me a little of that. But anyway, he gave me one of his books. And I know in his last years, he’d go, seems to me every year, at least for two or three years, every year he’d go on a long, long automobile trip back east someplace to where there were some people that were involved in this same thing, kind of a religious movement, or spiritual movement, or whatever it was. He took it quite seriously. He smoked cigars all the time. And he was one of these fellows that chewed them. And you know there’s an old joke, an old western joke about, "Hey, you’re chewin’ tobacco’s on fire." But he always had this old, great big old mashed up cigar in his face. He was very abrupt in his manner. And nervous, ah, sort of tense, a man under a sort of stresses I would say. He was active politically, or he wouldn’t have been postmaster. He’d had a bad time as a child in <Flagstaff, ()>. Really scarred him. He sort of lived, if you could say so, there really wasn’t a wrong side of the tracks, but if you could give the feeling of it by saying that he was raised on the wrong side of the tracks, ah, sort of. He just, he’d had a hard time as a child. I think this had something to do with why he wanted a by-line of "That Kid." As a child he’d probably been referred to as "that kid", or something of that sort. I liked him very much. I really enjoyed Charlie.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Were you acquainted with the Babbitts’, particularly maybe C.J.?

PLATT CLINE: C.J. was the only one of the original brothers who was still living when I came here, and I spent some time with him, writing some special articles for the Babbitt anniversary, I think in 1939. I wrote a history of Babbitts’, and he approved. I checked it with him, and I think now it has a little bit of value as an original source of dates and names and things. He was very, very fine. Very courtly gentleman, quiet, reserved. I always had the feeling around him that he’d had great sadness in his life. He wasn’t a joyous man. He was business-like, but he was kind. And he had had some tragedies in his family; the deaths of children and so forth. Fine old gentleman.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Were you acquainted with Dr. Colton?

PLATT CLINE: Yes, I knew Dr. Colton from my years at the newspaper in the forties and in some of the fifties. We did his job work. We printed "Plateau" and the bulletins and things. And he was in the office frequently. I knew him and admired him very much. We certainly weren’t intimate friends, but I respected the man and his great qualities. We had a very good relationship.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. I think I’ll turn this tape off.

END TAPE 1, SIDE 2, BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1

PLATT CLINE: Some of the real old timers in this part of the world were the Newmans. And prior to 1880 they were in the country. A family of boys, maybe a sister or two; the father died when they were little, bitty kids; the mother raised them. And she brought them to <Flagstaff, ()> to school after there was a school here. I knew, I believe it was Jeff that I interviewed one time for the Sun, at least it’ll show up in the Sun files. And I knew Zeke in <Holbrook, ()>. This was a good experience for me, because these men were really frontiersmen. They were, they were good people; they had been involved, or one or two of them had been involved, in some violence. They were handy with pistols. They were old west, really old west. Zeke, maybe I was projecting in my contacts with him, but it seemed to me that he really had a "curled eye" when he looked at you, you know? But maybe it was just what I’d heard about them and so on. But they came to <Flagstaff, ()> before, well before 1880, in and out of here and back and forth. They had a stock interest out south of here. So I believe those were the two, I’m not sure about he Jeff, I think it was Jeff, but I certainly knew Zeke. And I, I had a feeling about them, and I knew the kind of people they were. They were like people that I’d known as a child. They were, they could take care of themselves, "sufferin eye"(?) people; people that had a great degree of pride. Dangerous people to monkey with. If you offended a man in some unnecessary way or made derogatory statements, you might have a real problem. This was the feeling I had about them. And I think this is generally true, most of these early day men. They had a real sense of pride, and you didn’t trifle with them.

I knew Billy Switzer and everybody in recent years has known Billy, because he lived to nearly a hundred. But we were good friends, and I knew him, and he wrote things for me, which I have, historical value and so forth. Lots, lots of visits with him.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Let’s see. Okay. Can you tell me about the development of the Masonic Lodge?

PLATT CLINE: I really don’t know(?) or date history for the Masons. When I was secretary, I served in that office for a number of years, forties and fifties. And they included in a little pamphlet that we gave the members, the bylaws, the constitution and a brief historical sketch. But I’ve done a little more work lately, and I know that they moved toward establishment of a Masonic lodge, started here very early, the early eighties. And I believe in eighty-eight they succeeded in establishing a lodge. Lodges nowadays aren’t as- don’t play as important a part in the communities as they once did. But they served an important function, performed an important function. And this is something that I’ve, in what I’ve written about the establishments of the Masons, the Oddfellows, the Knights of Pythias and so forth. They weren’t just grown men playing games, they took it seriously. They, they brought men together with like interests and backgrounds, values. They provided at least a little bit of a ethical instruction. They provided a lot, but maybe all of them accepted a certain amount of it. But to some degree it provided some spiritual sustenance to people who weren’t active in churches. At the same time many people in churches were active in lodges. One of the leading lights in organizing or starting the move toward organization of the Masons here was a Methodist minister in the community. They played a part. And they still play a part, important part in the communities. Now it’s not as apparent as it was. The Masons here at different times as masters, they had some of the real pioneers. There was Walter J. Hill, the sheep man at what is now Bellemont. In the early days he was first master. W. H. Anderson, real- one of the real solid people here in the eighties and nineties. David F. Hart, Hart Prairie is named for, came here in seventy-six, the time that McMillan came here. McMillan was Catholic. Many of these, down through the years- Ralph Cameron became <United States, ()> Senator, his brother Niles. These were men who headed it, so you can see that it carried some weight in the community with men of this stature involved in it. And I think that’s true up to now. It isn’t something and it isn’t a joke, and they don’t take it lightly, and this is true of the Odd Fellows. And I don’t have a first hand knowledge of the Knights of Pythias, but I’m sure that their thing was quite similar; their teachings probably. These things served, ah, performed a very useful function in those days. They provided part of the framework that made it a community rather than a settlement. First of all you’d have the schools and churches, most necessary, and then here would come the lodges. All of these are factors in social organizations. They were very important.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. What do you remember about the early public library, or its development?

PLATT CLINE: When we came here the library was on West Aspen in what they call the Women’s Club Building. And, to my wife and me, it was, it was a gold mine, because we’d lived in communities where the libraries were almost non-existent. And here there was what to us was a great feast of books, and we just- we had armloads of books every week, both of us, out of that library. And we really enjoyed thirty-nine, forty, along in there. And then in- later on after we came back here, we really enjoyed and appreciated that library. It may not have compared in a great way with some of the libraries for instance, we have here now, like the university library, and as far as that goes, the city library, but, the city-county library, but it was pretty good for a couple of people from way out in the sticks, like we were. We really enjoyed it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did it- did you feel that a lot of people were using the library then?

PLATT CLINE: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Well that just about covers my questions. Can you think of anything- let me just ask you one more. I see another one here. Do you remember any particularly famous painters or musicians in the area? Is there any, you know, arts and crafts people maybe that you did articles on that were-

PLATT CLINE: Not without doing some head scratching, I can’t.

SUSAN ROGERS: You can’t come up with any, or any that came through town, famous personalities?

PLATT CLINE: You see, starting at a very early time, right at the beginning of the community, <Flagstaff, ()> had a unique opportunity that a lot of frontier communities didn’t have. Because we were on the main ride of the railroad that you could say goes- went, and does go from <Chicago, ()> to <Los Angeles, ()>. And it’s also- was right in the area where people from all over the world would come to see <Grand Canyon, ()>. So from the earliest times there were people in the community that were eminent, nationally known, world famous scientists, observers, painters, writers, and sometimes these people would stay over in <Flagstaff, ()>. J. Wesley Powell, that <Lake Powell, ()> is named for, you know, the founder of various scientific and learned bureaus of the federal government, the Civil War veteran. He was a guest here at least a time or two and maybe more frequently, or more often than that at the Riordans. They’re the people that came in here. Mendele(?) the archeologist, and others. And this was the headquarters for them. Then at another level you’d have people like Zane Grey who came here for color, for popular works of fiction. And the Call of the Canyon, of course deals with <Oak Creek Canyon, ()>, and Under the Tonto Rim, deals with the <Tonto Rim, ()>, and To the Last Man, deals with the Graham Tewksberry feud, and ah, these people were in here. It made a difference in the community, and I think it was the basis, or at least it was the underfooting, in a sense, of the community we have today, which is oriented toward academic, scientific research, and artistic achievement, and so forth. We have a man, to think(?) of Hochderffer, who came here with a buggy and mules in the eighties, and his hobby is painting. We have John Francis, who ran one of the first saloons in town, who filled in for the schoolteacher when she was sick, because he was a graduate of a normal school. Some of these people were educated people who had values you wouldn’t expect to find in a frontier community. This is one of the things that made a difference in <Flagstaff, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you think of anything else you want to add, or thought about?


