FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Verner Benson

Interview number NAU.OH.28.5

Verner S. Benson, who is a <Flagstaff, ()> native, born in 1914. He is the Office Manager of the physical plant at Northern Arizona University. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on January 13, 1976. Transcriber: Nancy Warden

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1 Side 1

    Born in <Flagstaff, ()>, 1914 

    Parent’s background 

    Houses lived in 

    Sheriff Campbell

    Children 

    Brothers and sisters 

    Played war and hockey at Emerson School 

    Emerson School 

    Bertha Kennedy 

    Laura Kinsey 

    Discipline 

    Chinese students 

    Mexicans 

    Catholic students 

    Sports 

    Flagstaff High School 

    Bud Brown 

    Other teachers 

    Clubs and organizations 

    Days of ’49 celebration 

    Swedish customs in <Flagstaff, ()> 

    Bootlegging in <Flagstaff, ()> 

    Depression (1930’s) 

    Ed Whipple 

    Zella Jones 

    Snow storms 

    Oak Creek Rd. 

    Weatherford Rd. 

    Tourists 

    Monte Vista 

    Shopping 

    Fire in 1930’s 

    S. San Francisco Street

Tape 1 Side 2

    The Baron, opera singer 

    Different movie stars in the area 

    Forest Service, fire guard 

    Frank Conrard 

    Escapes police

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Verner S. Benson who is a <Flagstaff, ()> native born here in 1914. He is the office manager of the physical plant at NAU. The interview is being conducted on January 13, 1976 at 1309 McMillan Road which is his home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers representing the Flagstaff City Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mr. Benson when and where were you born?

VERNER BENSON: I was born in <Flagstaff, ()> in 1914.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you want to tell me a little bit about your parents' background and where they came from?

VERNER BENSON: Oh they both came from <Sweden, ()> and they came by way of <Texas, ()>. They settled in <Texas, ()> first and then they were lucky enough to get out of <Texas, ()> and come here. The reason they came here my father had asthma so they had to get out of <Texas, ()>. They lived in <Galveston, ()> so they came out to <Flagstaff, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what year did they come?

VERNER BENSON: I think 1912.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and what did your father do?

VERNER BENSON: He was a, no, he was a sea captain and he also worked on pile drivers and so forth.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now what was his name and you want to tell me what your mother's name was?

VERNER BENSON: It was, ah, Charles Benson; mother's name was Matilda.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what was her maiden name for the records?

VERNER BENSON: Carlson.

SUSAN ROGERS: Carlson, okay. And when you first moved to <Flagstaff, ()> or I guess when you were born, what houses did you live in?

VERNER BENSON: It's on 5 North Park. The house is still standing there. It isn't, ah, there's an apartment house there and the house is abandoned, but the house is still standing.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay and is that where you lived most of your life?

VERNER BENSON: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and can you tell me about your neighborhood like how many houses were around, some of your neighbors?

VERNER BENSON: There were, that, ah, actually that's in the west part of town and actually the west part of town is almost the same now as it was then. There really hadn't been that many changes because it's remained the same for years and years and years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay and can you tell me about any of your neighbors? Do you remember any particular ones?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, we had the sheriff next door and then there was up the street, there was the judge, so it was a pretty well ordered neighborhood, except there were pretty mean kids that belonged to the sheriff and the judge.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now is that-

VERNER BENSON: They were good friends of mine but they were nice kids.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that Judge Jones?

VERNER BENSON: Yes, Judge Jones.

SUSAN ROGERS: And then what, who was the deputy?

VERNER BENSON: Ah, Campbell was the sheriff.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you know them personally?

VERNER BENSON: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: And can you tell me a little bit about them?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, Campbell was a typical old western sheriff. He always wore a big hat and white muff(?) shirts. You know he always had to talk loud. For some reason the sheriff always talked loud and he had, ah, two kids and ah, ah, one of um was Bruce and I can't think of the other one's name, and then, ah, they had a little girl named Ava and she had red hair and freckles and she was really a character. She was really a lot of fun. She was, ah, oh she used to be all over the neighborhood, and she was really something to see and the clothes she wore were quite unusual, because they, ah, I wonder where she got um.

SUSAN ROGERS: What did they look like? Can you describe um?

VERNER BENSON: Oh they were, ah, it seemed like she always had a checked coat and then she had a striped, ah, suit and so forth. They didn't match up very well, and she wasn't, she was a pretty casual kid.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, can you tell me about, did you have any brothers and sisters?

VERNER BENSON: Yes, I had, ah, one brother and four sisters.

SUSAN ROGERS: You just want to run through their names and where they're located now?

VERNER BENSON: Well, Walter Benson was my brother, and he's dead now. He died six years ago, and then I have a sister Julia, in <Yuma, ()> and a sister Minnie in <Blythe, ()>, sister Mabel in <Los Angeles, ()>, and sister Bessie in <Salt Lake, ()>, and I think that covers um all _____________.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, can you tell me what some of your daily activities were? Did you have chores around the house, and maybe your activities during the summer time in <Flagstaff, ()>?

VERNER BENSON: It was, it really wasn't too much different from now, because the kids played a lot, the same games, the kick the can and of course we always used to, ah, play on the roofs around there. One of the kids got a hold of some surplus rifles and, ah, they were dumbies but he traded them off some books which shows that, ah, how intellectual the community was. We used to play around in the garages and so forth with war all the time, and, ah, another thing I always remember to, like we used to play hockey and there was a cement pad in front of Emerson school, and we used to play hockey with tin cans on roller skates, and almost every Monday morning we ah, her name was Kennedy, she was the principal of the school, and she'd come in and roust us up so as to pick up all the tin cans. She was nice the rest of the week.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Did you, you went to Emerson?

VERNER BENSON: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, can you tell me a little bit about, maybe, some of your teachers and different classrooms and stuff?

VERNER BENSON: Well, this, ah, Bertha S. Kennedy was principal, then at that time she was teaching, she was, ah, later on when she was principal, but she was, she was really a wonderful woman and she was also very rough. There was a big kid in there named Bill Flager. He was a pretty good sized kid. This was about fifth grade, but he was pretty good sized. He got flip one time, and she flipped him around just like she was a judo expert, and after that she had very good discipline, but she was, ah, a wonderful person. And then Lura Kinsey was there at the same time, and she was also another very nice person, and also very hard boiled.

SUSAN ROGERS: How, what did you feel about the discipline? Did you think it was rather strict or what?

VERNER BENSON: Not really because, ah, the things they could do then they could, ah, wop you one or something, but actually the discipline wasn't, ah, wasn't too much different then because, because they could belt you one if they wanted to, and occasionally I suppose it was abused by teachers and of course it was abused by the kids, too.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now did you remember going to school with any Mexicans, Chinese, Indians. Can you tell me about this?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, there were a, ah, Chinese family, the Junes, there then, and I knew most of them, and they were very nice people. And there were quite a few Mexican kids at, ah, Emerson, and it always seemed to me like the kids got along pretty well. There was, there was discrimination against them though. There's no getting away from it, but in kids, if you leave kids alone, then they very seldom discriminate. It's only when they get older that they do, because they pick it up from their parents.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any particular episodes, ah, some problems with the Mexicans and maybe the blacks?

VERNER BENSON: Well, all I can think of is one of my own, is that we went up, now this would have to be truth, we were up at the city park, lake one time was built there, and there were some Mexican kids, and, ah, we were shooting at them, not trying to hit um but with a, ah, sling shots bobeanies(?) as we used to call them then, and then some of the bigger kids came along with sling shots that threw rocks about, ah, oh, about the size of a baseball, the kind you whirl around your head, and we, we retreated in quite a lot of a hurry, and of course the kids were always fighting. I mean the Mexican kids, and, ah, the other kids did fight, but so did the rest of the kids, too. But there was discrimination, because I, I can't say there wasn't, there was.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember any kind of competition with the parochial school kids at all? Did you stick around with them, or-

VERNER BENSON: No, not really. The only thing I can remember around then is ah, ah, one of my friends there, she got in an argument with another of her friends, and the only thing that she could think to say was you, you, Catholic you.

SUSAN ROGERS: That was about the extent of it, then? What extracurricular activities did they have at Emerson? Did they have any sports teams or anything like that?

VERNER BENSON: Not too much. They had, ah, oh, they had a baseball team and so forth, but it wasn't nearly as well organized as it is today.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you-

VERNER BENSON: They had track meets and some of um, but the sports weren't nearly as well organized as they are now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, who would you play?

VERNER BENSON: Mostly, the different grades, we played each other or another school in <Flagstaff, ()>, but it very seldom went out of <Flagstaff, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and you went to school there through eighth grade or was there-

VERNER BENSON: No, it was I think it was, ah, the seventh grade. I think eighth grade was in the Flagstaff high school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and then you went up there?

VERNER BENSON: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about that?

VERNER BENSON: Well, that was quite a bit the same as Emerson, because it was, ah, the only high school in <Flagstaff, ()> at the time, and of course it was everyone that went to the same high school. There was only one high school. And it was a great deal the same as the other school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any particular teachers there that stand out in your mind?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, there was a Bud Brown from <Phoenix, ()>. I still think he still lives in <Phoenix, ()>. He has Bud Brown's Barn. The first time we ever saw him, and he was riding a horse, and he had just come out from the east, and he was riding a horse, and he had one hoof of the horse pulled up with a rope, and I remember that we sat on the fence and made comments about breaking a horse with one foot up. Then he showed up as an English teacher next year. He was, he had a good sense of humor, and he's, ah, he was a very good singer. He sang a lot, and a very nice personality, and of course he was always making comments about the west, because he did come from some place in the east, I'm not sure. I think it was <New England, ()> somewhere, and that's, ah, you know in <New England, ()> and that's where they say "yup" you know, and so forth.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember any others that stick out in your mind?

VERNER BENSON: Well, there was, ah, Miss Jones who taught drama, and she was a small woman. They really gave her a bad time, but they really liked her, but she was small. She didn't have very good discipline, and the kids were always hanging out of the upper windows by their hands, and if she'd do anything to um they wouldn't come in, and so she'd say she'd forgive um and wouldn't send um down to the principal, and she almost, almost always did. And, ah, we had an art teacher who was a dentist and an art teacher. Her name was Miller, and she was, ah, I always remember her very well because she had a lot of personality, too.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and what about the discipline up there, or the classrooms. How much did you feel like you had too much homework, just the right amount? What were some of the subjects you took?

VERNER BENSON: I don't know. It's, ah, I was, I wasn't a very good student so I didn't worry too much about the homework a lot of the time. No I don't think we had too much homework.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, can you tell me some of the classes you took?

VERNER BENSON: Mostly it was, it would really be the same standard as is practiced now, English, history, biology, and your regular high school courses. I think they'd be quite the same as it was then.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Did they have any special clubs or organizations or extra-curricular activities up there?

VERNER BENSON: Yes, there was, ah, there was a lot more activity in football and baseball and your drama clubs and your other clubs there. There was a lot more in the high school than there was in the lower grades.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, okay, ah let's see. What do you remember about some of those early fourth of Julys and powwows? Can you tell me about any particular one?

VERNER BENSON: There was before that, if I remember correctly, we used to have a local celebration that was called the "days of '49" and that was, ah,

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you need to get that? (ringing phone)

VERNER BENSON: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

VERNER BENSON: Because, ah, it was sponsored by the local merchants, and I don't remember just where it was held, but it was held in the downtown area. They'd get slabs from the mill, and they'd build oh, booths and so forth, and they had different shows, mostly local talent, and this is just before the powwow that they had it, because I think the powwow started somewhere in the, oh, I don't know when it was, during the thirties somewhere. Early thirties I think it was, and this was just before they had it, and that was about the celebration that they had on this. The Days of '49. But it was, it was a nice celebration. It was much more for local people than the pow wow has been recently.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me something about one of the early pow wows? Do you remember anything particular?

VERNER BENSON: I always remember like on, ah, Jack Fuss I think was one of the main instigators of the powwow, and it was, ah, oh it was, it was the people I think were closer. The Indians really enjoyed coming to town and it wasn't as commercialized then. Of course there was always the interest in making money, and there was always someone selling wine to the Indians, because they couldn't have it then, and there was one gentleman here who made quite a good deal out of watermelons, and he sold a lot of watermelons, but then when they found out eventually that when you opened the watermelon there was a bottle of wine in it, and then when they found that out then some of the rest of um would needle the watermelons for the bottle they'd put in a syringe in it, and they'd fill it full of wine or beer, and then they'd eat the watermelon which was very, oh, it made a delicious watermelon.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember any special Christmases, you know any kind of special Christmas celebration, maybe just within your own home or anything?

VERNER BENSON: No, it was mostly a home thing, just as Christmas is now, and ah, oh, they'd, this was my family were all Swedish, and it was always one of the things that they had on Christmas is Luthafisk(?).

SUSAN ROGERS: I'm Swedish, too.

VERNER BENSON: Are you Swedish? Then you know all about Luthafisk(?). You know how they take an old piece of dried fish, and they hang it outside, and they beat on it, and then they soak it, and then they soak it in ashes, and they wash the ashes off, and about six months it takes them to do it, and what they finally they end up with is cod fish.

SUSAN ROGERS: It tastes like rubber.

VERNER BENSON: Did you ever taste Bruner(?) brown beans?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, we have it every Christmas eve.

VERNER BENSON: Have you? Do you, where do you get the Bruner brown beans from?

SUSAN ROGERS: Well, my, ah, grandmother comes over from <L.A., ()>, and I don't know whether they, my mom and she get together and make some kind of recipe out of it. Probably not the real, real thing.

VERNER BENSON: Oh those are good of course, now forget about <Flagstaff, ()> and we'll go on to, what about Lingonberry?

SUSAN ROGERS: Lingonberries, we have to, in fact we were in <Sweden, ()> last March.

VERNER BENSON: Oh, that was my sister was over in <Sweden, ()> a couple of years ago.

SUSAN ROGERS: Really, we brought back some lingonberries with us.

VERNER BENSON: Did you, because those things are really hard to get.

SUSAN ROGERS: I know, they're terrible. My grandfather just loves um so we try to find some every year to send to him.

VERNER BENSON: I know, I always I always remember, like my mother, and so many times, like they came over from <Sweden, ()>, and she spoke really very excellent English, because when she worked here, she worked as a cook first and most of the people that she worked for spoke excellent English, and she really, her English was excellent, but every now and then it was, it was always on the English, and, ah, when she got a little excited, a little mad, why the, it would be part English, and then if she couldn't find the English word she wanted, she put in the Swedish word. And if she couldn't find an English word or a Swedish word, she'd make up one of her own. Like I, I still think my, my brother got in an argument with a teacher one time on the weasers of a crop(?), now that's not Swedish, and I'm sure and it's not English, and I don't know who won the argument, but I think that was strictly Bensonese, because she would make up a word when she did.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there much of a Swedish community in <Flagstaff, ()> at all?

VERNER BENSON: There were quite a few. You see, when the logging camps came, and there were quite a few Swedes working in logging camps, and then I think a lot of um went on to other camps after the woods closed down more or less and, ah, but there, but there were still quite a few Swedes in <Flagstaff, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did the Swedes used to get together and have any special parties or anything?

VERNER BENSON: Most of the Swedes I knew were usually fighting about something.

SUSAN ROGERS: They were, huh?

VERNER BENSON: Yeah. But, ah, well for one thing like the being a Swede yourself, you know there are certain, I don't know whether they're districts or provinces in <Sweden, ()> like the Dolmasa(?) and so forth, but the Dolmasas(?) didn't have any use for the Smolerman(?) and as long as the only time they got together if there was a Fin around, then the Dolmases(?) and the Smollerman(?) would get together and gang up on the Fin.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right and that's just the way it was over here too, huh?

VERNER BENSON: Yeah. And just as I mean, of course everybody, I mean the Norwegians and the Lappers just more or less overseas.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right, right. Okay ah let's see do you remember the ending of World War I or anything?

VERNER BENSON: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay you were too young. How about the prohibition? Do you remember those bootlegging days at all? Can you tell me anything about that?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, yes, because, ah, well I never got to drink any of it. I was too young then, but this, ah, prohibition was, was, ah, it was just like any other place. Something that people weren't going to do without. And there was one woman here, she was upright and honest and upstanding and my mother told me as soon as they would pass the, ah, prohibition law, she went down and got the ingredients and started making beer. And she really, I did taste some of the beer, and it was excellent beer. And, but, ah, the bootleggers were really clever. They usually had a lot of ideas. I always remember one bootlegger here that, ah, went to great trouble and pains, and he took milk bottles and painted the inside of um white, and then he filled um with booze, and then he put a cap on um and delivered to people, and everyone thought he was in the milk business because you, you put it on the porch and nobody paid any attention to it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and at the same time do you remember the depression and its affect at all?

VERNER BENSON: Yes. It was, I, I think it affected everybody in <Flagstaff, ()>, but I don't think <Flagstaff, ()> was ever as hard hit as say the bigger cities were, but it was bad. And, ah, one thing I think that it knitted people closer together. No one really had too much, and that did help because there was, they were just lucky to have a job and have enough. Now the people that it really hit were, again, the Mexican people I think were hit very hard by it, and the people with the lower incomes were hit harder than anyone else, and it was for this, some of them it really was rough here, but it wasn't as bad for most of the people as it was say in <Chicago, ()> or <New York, ()>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now do you remember anything about the flu epidemic of 1918 or were you too young then?

VERNER BENSON: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, how about any prominent people when you were young, or prominent in the sense of maybe being outlaws or a little rough or else prominent in the community, any personalities you can remember at all?

VERNER BENSON: None that I'd, I don't know as you'd call um prominent or not, but there was one undertaker and his name was Ed Whipple, and the thing I always liked about him, he used to be an undertaker and he had a dog named Zip and an old Model T Ford truck, and he'd go down the street with a corpse on the back and Zip would be in the back. Zip would be arguing with another dog and he'd be smoking a cigar and driving on and not paying any attention to it. He was, ah, he was really a remarkable man though he was, ah, he was exceptionally good at anything. It seemed like he could do anything, but one. He almost had a phobia with the perpetual motion machine, and he worked on that for years. And knowing him, I'm rather surprised that he didn't get it, because he really was good. He could, he could do almost anything. He was really a remarkable man, and he had a, a hawk nose and a big white mustache, and with the dog in the back and the cigar, he was wonderful to see. This was a St. Bernard dog. He made a lot of noise, but the people that were riding, they didn't gripe, really didn’t complain.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, anybody else you remember in particular?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, there was ah, one bootlegger that well, he had been a bootlegger, and when I remember him, why he retired because they withdrew prohibition. But I remember he was crippled in one leg, and I think after an argument with somebody, he shot himself in the hand so that made a crippled hand and a crippled leg on him, but, ah, he was, he bootlegged for years, and he really made a nice living out of it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, uh huh. Okay, can you tell me a little bit about Judge Jones?

VERNER BENSON: He was, ah, I really didn't know him too well. He was quite a well known judge, and he was, ah, he was a striking looking man you know. I think he had a mustache too, a rather short man. But ah, he had a daughter, the one that I remember much better. Her name was Eella(?), and, ah, she was quite a character. As I remember, she must have been in her forties then, and I'd come by on a bicycle, and she'd hop on the handle bars, and I'd ride her home. She, she really had, ah, she was lots of fun.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, okay, what about any special crimes you remember either when you were young or when you were older?

VERNER BENSON: I can't think of any special crimes. There weren't any too spectacular ones that I remember.

SUSAN ROGERS: None that really stuck out in your mind as a kid or anything like that? Okay, what about any big fires? Do you remember anything in particular?

VERNER BENSON: Well, the mill was always burning down, but that was kind of a regular thing. It usually happened every other year. Yeah, we more or less expected it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, ah, what about either floods or blizzards? I know there are lots of blizzards. Do you remember anything special?

VERNER BENSON: No. I think the one, the most spectacular one I remember was in 1936, and that was, ah, oh it started to snow just about on Christmas night I think, and it didn't stop until March. And it really got deep and of course they didn't have the snow removal equipment, so they more or less let it pile up, and they finally had to take it away with a carryall, but it was quite a snow.

SUSAN ROGERS: Ah, do you remember any incidents happening out of it? Anybody hurt or any of that type of thing? How did people handle it? Just walk a lot then or-

VERNER BENSON: Well, you just walked to . Most of the people, the town was small then, and most of the people could walk to work then so your traffic really wasn't a problem that it would be now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, in those early days, did you ever used to take any trips down to <Oak Creek, ()>, and if you did, can you describe it to me?

VERNER BENSON: Yeah, that was, ah, a trip to <Oak Creek, ()> was quite a trip in those days, because it was the old road, and it was, ah, one way road all the way down, and if you met somebody then, you'd have to back up, because it wasn't enough room to make the turn. Yes mam, you're taking off. You're mad huh, you're taking it apart. Get the Watergate tape here. (Remarks to his wife).

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

VERNER BENSON: But, ah, and it, it really was because so many people were, it was a scary road 'cause I never had driven it, because I was too young to drive, but I've gone down with people, and there was always somebody getting out and walking, and ah, they just wouldn't drive the road, and it was, ah, it was really a one, one way road. And if you met someone you had to back up until you came to a place that was wide enough to turn around. And there were some of the curves that you had to back up to make it around the curve. You can still see some of the old roads up there in places.

SUSAN ROGERS: Does it pretty much follow the new one more or less, or?

VERNER BENSON: No, 'cause it's, it's, ah, in the same area but there are the, you can see places where the old road is still, especially where the stones were where they built up around a corner, and of course when you went around the corner some of the stones would fall off which made people very happy.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now do you remember the Weatherford road going up to the peaks?

VERNER BENSON: Yes, but not, not when it was built, but, ah, I'd been up there and it really was. Weatherford, I guess, had an idea on that and, ah, I, I never have been able to find out too much about it whether it was built, I've tried, but it was, ah, it was really quite a spectacular road. And for a long time it was in good shape because one area up there where they, it caused him a lot of trouble, but, ah, it just kept sliding, but the ground was too, ah, unstable to keep the road up, and that really ended up, the closing it up to the top. For a long time you could go a long way up there, and it was fairly good road. I think you can still get up it with a four wheel drive now. There are some bad spots on it, rocky places, but if you get further up, I walked up it recently. Then theres a great many places where the road is still in good shape.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now where do you pick it up? Where does it start?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, you got, ah, you know where you go to the Flagstaff Country Club? Well you know that house that sits just as you turn the corner, that's the old, ah, entrance house. There used to be a gate there that you went in, and then you go up on the road that goes through Schultz Pass, and you go, go a mile or so and there are several places that you can cut off to the left and hit the old Weatherford road. It, it really is a nice walk if you want to walk it sometime.

SUSAN ROGERS: Ah, you never went up it when it was a toll road then?

VERNER BENSON: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, so you weren't aware of how much it cost?

VERNER BENSON: No, I, I think I'm not sure. I think it was a dollar a car.

SUSAN ROGERS: That's what I heard. That seems rather expensive at that time.

VERNER BENSON: It was, it was high at that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: He spent a lot of money on it, I guess.

VERNER BENSON: "Cause he, he spent a lot of money on that road. Oh I don't think he spent it. I think that most of it was that he, ah, had people invest in it, and I think a lot of it was other people's money that they, he sold stock in the road. I believe where he got most of the money for it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he probably lose money on it then?

VERNER BENSON: I imagine he did, because, ah, he was, ah, oh he had the Weatherford Hotel. He was quite a businessman. He was, oh, the not a gambler, but a man who always had promoted something. But I imagine on that, that he, he probably lost money on it. Now, how much of his own, because I think he did use other people's money to build it, because he was a pretty smart character.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. Do you remember any of the Doyles?

VERNER BENSON: I knew Lee Doyle.

SUSAN ROGERS: You didn't. Oh okay, so you didn't know his father very well then?

VERNER BENSON: No I just heard about his father, but the only one I knew was Lee.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

VERNER BENSON: Did Frank tell you about, I think Frank knew his father.

SUSAN ROGERS: They told me a little bit, yeah, that's what brought him to mind.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, ah, while you were young, did you notice lots of tourists coming in? How do you think the tourist trade got developed?

VERNER BENSON: Well I, I think probably across 66. There was always quite a bit of travel across it because it was really the only road across from anywhere(?). You either, ah, you either had to go off almost in <Utah, ()> or you had to go through <Phoenix, ()>, and it was a shortcut between <New Mexico, ()> and <Los Angeles, ()> so that there was always quite a bit of traffic on 66.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, did you feel there was quite a bit of tourists in town at that time, or did you just not pay much attention?

VERNER BENSON: I didn't really pay much attention to tourists.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember any of the big social events that happened, and also, like where big events of this sort would take place?

VERNER BENSON: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don't remember anything like the Monte Vista or the Weatherford? Did they have big functions there, or?

VERNER BENSON: Monte Vista, Monte Vista had a very nice bar, but it was the Monte Vista bar. Now this isn't a social event, but they kept moving it around when they'd get busy. It started out on the ah, west side, and it was a very small bar. Then they moved it to the corner. Then they moved down in its present location, and it was, ah, it was really a very nice bar and a very popular bar for years, and then, then if you wanted to see anybody, you'd probably catch um there. That is the right type, too, if you're gonna catch him in a bar why you'd catch him there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, while we're talking about the downtown area, can you tell me anything else about different buildings that or businesses that have moved, or what you remember about it ?

VERNER BENSON: Not too much, because I think like Babbitts is still pretty much the same place they were and the businesses have changed so much from the different places over there that I really can't remember. Though I do remember one place in particular is the Flagstaff theatre. It was always referred to as the Garlic Opera, and I always remember that because it was such a comfortable little theatre. And you went in and it always seemed to smell of wet dogs, that's from the wool on the coat. And they had class B pictures, but it really was a pleasant little theatre.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now where was that located?

VERNER BENSON: That was, ah, I think about where, there's a shoe shop there now on North San Francisco, on the first block of North San Francisco.

SUSAN ROGERS: Karl's, I think.

VERNER BENSON: Karl's, I think it was, and I think that's where the Flagstaff theatre was.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, okay, ah, where did your mother do most of her shopping in those days?

VERNER BENSON: Well there used to be a store right across from us, and she did a lot of. It was Brook's Store. It was right across from where they lived, and she did quite a bit of shopping there, but later on it burned, and it burned completely down to the ground. That was, ah, come to think of fires, that was a pretty spectacular fire.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, when was that one?

VERNER BENSON: Yeah, well, that was sometime in the thirties, and I was trying to keep the roof wet down so the house wouldn't catch on fire, and people kept on, you know friends going by, and they're telling me that there was no use watering up there because you couldn't get anything to go (grow?) up there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, ah, did you ever get down to South San Francisco at all?

VERNER BENSON: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you describe what that was like then, that area?

VERNER BENSON: Quite a bit like it is now. It was almost as though it were in a, in a different town really, because it is, it was then, it still is quite a bit like old <Mexico, ()>, the same type of buildings and so forth, and, of course <San Francisco, ()>, South San Franciso has had a very bad reputation, and that made it very desirable to go there. That the bars and the Miguel’s used to have a place down there, and it was quite a hangout for the college kids, and it was a very nice place. And he had one of the nicest little bands, three piece bands that I've ever heard in my life, and I don't remember what the name of it is.

SUSAN ROGERS: Just a little, ah, Mexican band or something, or?

VERNER BENSON: No, it was, ah, just an ordinary band. It wasn't a Mexican band, but he really had a nice place down there, and it was quite a hangout, and he had

END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2

SUSAN ROGERS: Ah, can you remember any big names coming through <Flagstaff, ()>, any famous people maybe either painters, musicians, any particular performances that stick out in your mind?

VERNER BENSON: No, there was a gentleman here that was named, ah, he used to have a thing they call Chatauqua, and there was a Baron Oriama(?). He was a very fat man. He was an opera singer, and I don't know how well he sang, but he certainly sang loud, and, ah, he was he was quite the ladies' man and so forth, and they frittered over the Baron. And I, I don't know really how good he was, because I wasn't able to judge.

SUSAN ROGERS: About what years were these?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, that was I think in the late '20s if I remember. I believe the Baron was here and of course every now and then there were usually quite a few movie stars, but, ah, oh one that I always liked a great deal, the ones I talked to were Errol Flynn and Alan Hale, because I was always a great admirer of Alan Hale, because he was always breaking up cars in an act or something like that, and- You don't remember him?

SUSAN ROGERS: No.

VERNER BENSON: Do you remember if you've seen his son Alan Hale, Jr.?

SUSAN ROGERS: No.

VERNER BENSON: Didn't you ever watch Gilligan's <Island, ()>?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. I don't watch that.

VERNER BENSON: You didn't, heavens you missed one of the best.

SUSAN ROGERS: I don't know names at all. I know I watch it occasionally, but, yeah. Now what were they here, now, why were there so many movies stars in the area?

VERNER BENSON: Well, they used to make quite a few pictures here.

SUSAN ROGERS: They did, huh?

VERNER BENSON: And I think the reason a lot of it stopped, because they got into some kind of a hassle over the Industrial Commission on paying in case one of em happened to be injured, because they were afraid that a movie star would get injured here, be covered by Arizona Industrial Commission, and then the payments would be so high that it would be, considering the salary and so forth, it would be not to <Arizona, ()>'s advantage to have em, so I think that's one of the main hassles why a lot of them stopped. They still come, but for a while there were a lot of westerns, especially, western pictures made down through <Oak Creek, ()> and <Sedona, ()> area because it is spectacular.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, where would they stay when they came to town usually?

VERNER BENSON: Oh, usually they would stay at a quite a few times at the Monte Vista. A lot of times they stayed on location and then in <Oak Creek, ()> they built a special place. Oh it's about were the hotel is now. I can't think of the name of the hotel, but they did have cabins there and they'd use those for the companies that came in so most of em, after they built those, most of the companies that came here stayed there, because they had small individual cabins.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now after you finished high school you want to tell me a little bit about what you've done?

VERNER BENSON: Oh.

SUSAN ROGERS: How you got into your job at NAU ?

VERNER BENSON: I worked at the Forest Service there for awhile and then, ah, with was some of those characters.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now tell me a little bit about the Forest Service and what years were you working there and ?

VERNER BENSON: That was in the in the '40s and that was it was really nice and I really enjoyed it because we really had some nice people. I don't mean they aren't nice people now, but, ah, there were two I especially remember, Oscar McClure. My private name for him was "The Pirate" because he did look a little bit like a pirate and then Ed Oldham. They were always quarreling and bickering between themselves in a, in a fun way, and they would borrow each other's equipment, and if they were short an axe, they'd go lookin' for the other one, and ah, they were really very nice people, and it was a lot of fun working for em.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, what did you actually do in the fire service?

VERNER BENSON: I was a fire guard.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, now were you on location somewhere or what?

VERNER BENSON: No. I worked out at the, ah, Flagstaff district for Oscar McClure, and then in the winter time I was, let's see, I think I was an assistant ecologist, though I really didn't know what an ecologist was.

SUSAN ROGERS: So what were you doing? Considering-

VERNER BENSON: And then when they built the, ah, ordnance (Navajo Army Depot) I, ah, worked for Atkinson(?) Cure(?), there, and then I went in the Army. I volunteered with handcuffs, and then when I came back I went to work for the county for the treasurer's office, and then I went to work for the city, and then I went to work NAU and that's about it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. How did you meet your wife and do you have any kids?

VERNER BENSON: Yes. I have one daughter, Julie, and my wife came out here from <Connecticut, ()> during the war, and I met her after the war, and I just have the one girl, Julie.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you met your wife here in <Flagstaff, ()>?

VERNER BENSON: <Flagstaff, ()>, yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let's go back on this Forest Service a little bit. We don't have very many interviews on the Forest Service at all. Ah, can you just tell me what you did in a daily day or maybe when there was a fire, what you did?

VERNER BENSON: Well it was, ah, they didn't have radios then so it was all by telephone lines that ran up to the lookout, and they had one guy on, ah, Elden. He's an Indian whose name was Bill Crab(?), and he had the most marvelous eyes of anybody I ever saw in my life. And of course he always used to fool people, because he knew the country. In the summertime when, when the forest danger was off, he'd ride all over the country in an old Lincoln that he had and he knew every foot of the country, but he would call down and he'd have somebody new, and he'd tell em where the fire was and tell em how to get there, that you come to a gate, and the initials are on the gate and what the initial say and so forth, and they wouldn't believe him, and then when they went out there it was so. But it wasn't really that he could see that well. He had been over the road or he knew the initials were on the gate. But he was really marvelous, because he knew every bit of this country, and he could tell you exactly where the fire was, and the ones that he could see. Now there was one blind area. They didn't have O'Leary for a lookout then, and at first there was a blind area behind O'Leary that he couldn't see into, but the rest of it that he could really see, and of course they, ah, I had an old International truck. It was, I think it had twenty-one inch wheels, and it had a two hundred gallon tank of water on it, and it would just go about anywhere because it was geared so low, and then the big wheels, and you could get into places that you couldn't get anything else, 'course there was no four wheel drive then. It was all, ah, but it just was a a good truck for getting out in the woods with.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you have just one crew member then?

VERNER BENSON: Well we used to, we used to go out by yourself and what you could do was pick up a crew when you went out. We used to refer to them as "coots". And then my brother-in-law came over, and I called him a "coot", and while I was in the Army he took it away, and when I came back, he was a "super coot", so then he pulled his rank on me because he'd worked for the Forest Service after I left and was in the Army. But we'd pick up, oh, there were a couple of guys, Jim Hightower and a Russian, and, ah, I used to take them out because they were really good. We took them on fires so you could pick up your crew when you went out.

SUSAN ROGERS: And how did you actually go about fighting the fires?

VERNER BENSON: Well mostly we used a combination tool which is the same thing now. It'd depend on the fire and any fire that was a reasonable size then we could cut a trench around or build a line around it and usually stop it that way, but of course if the wind was too high and it got away, well then we'd have to have more involved fire fighting methods. But most of the time it was a case of just clearing the line around the trees. Now this truck that you had, if the area was right that you could take and go around the fire with the hose and put the nozzle on a fog spray and slow the fire down, but you couldn't put the fire out with it but you could slow the fire down till you got a line around it and that was really helpful.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, mm. Okay, how often would you say you had fire, on the average you know?

VERNER BENSON: You really can't, can't say because they'd come and maybe you wouldn't have any and then you'd have three or four at one time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember any particularly big fires?

VERNER BENSON: Yeah, there was one fire out there that, ah, oh I can't, it's on the, let's see, it must be on the east side of the peaks where you can still see where it went up the side of the peaks, and it was a very bad fire. And then there was a, a later fire that I wasn't on, was when what we call the A-1 Mountain fire and that topped out, and it was a very bad fire because those are scary when they top out.

SUSAN ROGERS: What's that mean?

VERNER BENSON: Oh that's when the whole tree just bursts into flames all at once. A tree that's a big around and having the whole thing goes up like a candle, it's scary.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, okay, ah, I think that has answered quite a few of my questions. Can you think of any stories you want to add or anything or anymore personalities that you remember?

VERNER BENSON: No, because all the stories I have of people, if I told them then I'd get in a great deal of trouble.

SUSAN ROGERS: Trouble (laughs), okay, let me (tape skips) 'cause, ah, he mentioned a little bit about it but didn't go into detail so _________.

VERNER BENSON: Oh, I was remembering a friend of mine, Frank Conrard and anyway, but, ah, at one time he, the cops picked him up for something and he hadn't done anything really, which is one of the rare occasions when he hadn't, but he escaped so the cops were looking all over for him and running down alleys and so forth and what Frank had done is, is gone back to the city hall, gone upstairs in the fire department, slid down the pole, went in the jail cell, closed the door and went to bed. They came in at four o'clock all tired out from looking for Frank. Frank was in the bed. He'd been there all the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

