Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

Katie Lee Interview

Interview number: 53.31



[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A] 

This is the River Runners Oral History Project, and we're here in <Jerome Arizona, ()>, with Katie Lee. This is Lew Steiger doing the interview. It's December 1, 1996. 

Steiger: Okay, so we're rollin'. For starters, what I'd like to do is just hear about who you are and where you came from before you ever got to the river. And that's a standard thing we do with everybody, just 'cause it sort of puts your impressions in perspective. So if we could just start with a little biographical data, as in where were you born? 

Lee: Okay, I was born in 1919, and I was born in <Arizona, ()> -<Tucson, ()>. I really wasn't, but that's okay. I was born in <Illinois, ()>, and at three months old, we moved to <Tucson, ()>, where my family had property. So on my birth certificate and in my passport it says <Aledo Illinois, ()>. I went back there twice in my life. I'm a westerner, born and bred, whether my birth certificate shows it or not. And I was raised in <Tucson, ()>, I went to college in <Tucson, ()>. My dad was a contractor, my mother was a housewife, and a lot smarter than my dad about money matters and things, because she actually got us through the Depression. My dad had quite a bit of money, and we lived very high off the hog, as far as I can tell, when I was little. After being in <Tucson, ()>, I remember we spent six years in <Hollywood, ()>. My dad built the first houses above Sunset Towers, up on those hills -like the houses here in <Jerome, ()>, you know, they went straight up and down the mountain. When the crash came, why, he just sort of fell apart. He said, "Well, I just can't...." He said, I can remember that phrase, "Down and out, down and out." And he'd owned property in <Cuba, ()>, a finca, and everything seemed to be lost. My mom took the reins, took my brother and me, and went across the <Yuma, ()> desert when it was nothing but railroad ties, a boardwalk across the <Yuma, ()> desert dunes. I remember being in that Willis Knight [phonetic spelling]. We'd done it once before with my dad, my brother -but my brother was about three and I was just eight or nine. And we went across the dunes in that Willis Knight with my mom, and she saved all that property we had in <Tucson, ()>, and collected the rent, and we moved there for good then. I went to college there. My dad came over a few months later, I guess it was. He'd been diggin' ditches in <California, ()>, just to try to send the family a few dollars. So I think that must have really made a kind of a dent in my poor daddy. My dad was a kid, he never grew up, thank God, because he kept the kid in me -he let me have the kid in me. My mother was the artistic, intellectual type, and my dad was the earthy one.

And I don't remember in my years in <Tucson, ()>, ever going inside until evening came, when I had to go inside, until I went to school, and then, of course, I had to go inside to go to school. But I spent almost all of my time outdoors, my brother and I. So I think that's probably where I got the affinity for the land and the desert -especially the desert. I would go back East to my aunt and my grandparents a couple of times in the summertime, spend a couple of months in the green, green, green, and I couldn't wait to get back to the reds, oranges, yellows, blues, purples. I thought green was a bad color. (chuckles) 

Steiger: Wow. <Hollywood, ()> must have been pretty green when you guys were over there. 

Lee: Yeah, that's true too. So after I got out of college, graduated and everything, got married -during the war, this was -married an idiot. (laughter) That's what we always do first, we always marry idiots. It's a good thing you haven't gotten married yet, Lew. Anyway, your brother didn't marry no idiot, he waited 'til he had a beauty.

Anyhow, I married and had a son, and I left my Ronny with my ex-husband and his new wife, because he'd gotten married to a lady by then. And I came back to pick him up six months later. I mean, I was really out there in <Hollywood, ()>, living on ten bucks a week, practically not a nickel, really struggling. Nobody was taking care of me, nobody was sending me money, I was working for a decorator on the side, and trying to go to interviews. And I had opened at the Pasadena Playhouse, which is one of the, you know, the ultimate places where you get to be seen, and I was trying to break into movies -which I did! And I had the leading role in this play at the Pasadena Playhouse, and then I had some other roles in theaters around <Hollywood, ()>, 'til I finally wedged my way into casting offices and places like that, where people knew me, put my name in the big book, you know, and my photo and parts I had played. The trouble was, I wasn't an ingenue, because I went there in '48, so I had to be twenty-eight years old when I went there. And I was too young to be a character actress, and in those days in <Hollywood, ()> (laughing) there was nothing in between! But anyway, I struggled along until I got onto radio, and then I had really good parts in radio, national radio shows. I had a running part on the [Great] Gildersleeve show, the Halls of Ivy show with Gordon MacRae -no excuse me, the Halls of Ivy show was with Ronald Colman and Bonita, his wife, where I played a part called Glory Golightly. And I was a country girl, was the forty-year-old freshman wife. And I had running parts on that show with Ronny and with his lovely wife Bonita. And, as I said, Gildersleeve. And then I did the summer shows with Gordy MacRae on the railroad hour. These are all national shows, broadcast all over. And so I was making a decent living, but still always a struggle. And always I kept thinking in the back of my head, "Geez, what am I doing here?" I wanted to be there, and I wanted to pursue my career, because I knew when I first stepped out on a stage, that that was going to be what I wanted to do. And that happened to me my first year in high school. I walked out on that stage, I knew my lines, everybody else's lines, and from that minute one, I set the goal and I went for it, and I have never, in all these years, ever set a goal that I didn't accomplish it. (pause for effect) That's saying something, isn't it? I guess it is. 

Steiger: What year was that, what year were you in high school? 

Lee: I was sixteen years old. I'm twenty years behind the century, so sixteen years old, that was 1936. And in 1948 I went to <Hollywood, ()> and I stayed there for six years and I worked in pictures and I worked in television, and I was on the first television show that was broadcast statewide out of <Hollywood, ()> called Armchair Detective. I played character parts, I played walk-ons, I played little tiny bit parts, and never star parts, nothing like that. But I made it okay. And in that time, at the time right about the middle of there, like around '51 or '52, I started playing guitar. I had been playing it before -I mean, not very much, but I learned to play my guitar down in <Mexico, ()>, really, in 1942. Just after I was married, I went to <Mexico, ()> during the war. Whereas I'd done a lot of singing with my cowboys friends, people I knew in <Tucson, ()>, we'd go out in riverbeds at night and sing and warble, and I'd go down to <Nogales, ()> with these guys and we'd sing in the whorehouses. (laughs) That's where we learned all our Mexican songs -great place to do it. Anyway, practically every bar in <Nogales, ()> in those days was a pickup joint or a whorehouse or something. And all the girls would climb all over my two friends, and they'd brush them off and start singing. The girls probably wondered what I was doing there. I knew what I was doing there (laughs) I was learning the music. So anyway, I learned the music there, and when I go into <Mexico, ()>, I learned to play the guitar there. Actually, learned to sing and play guitar in Spanish before I learned it in English, because George and Johnny, the guys that were my buddies in school, taught me how to hunt and fish and all that.... Not fish, I hate fish, never learned to fish. They used to take me hunting, and during the war years I kept my family in food. I shot rabbits, I'd go down in the bottom of the creek or in the dry riverbed by the house. We always had property way, way out in the country, ten miles out. We had ranch property way out of town. The only time we ever lived in town was during the heavy parts of the Depression when we'd have to rent our big house to some E.V. -that's an Eastern Visitor in your terms -and move into town into some house that was about one-quarter the rent that we were getting for the big house. So (sigh) I learned to be outside there, and I learned to play the guitar in <Mexico, ()>.

Where are we now? Then I came back, went to <Hollywood, ()>. In the middle of that <Hollywood, ()> scene -which is where I left off -I was backstage with Lew Ayres one afternoon, waiting for my time to come on. It was a movie he was in, called The Capture, and I think that's one of the few that retained the working title. Most of those movies, I don't even know what they are now, because we worked under working titles, and then the studio would change the name of the thing, and I'd never know what pictures I was in. Anyway, Lew had been a conscientious objector and had worked on -we called it the Prison Road, the road up to <Mt. Lemmon, ()>. He had worked on that road [on the] chain gang, as a member of the guys incarcerated. 

Steiger: Because he was a C.O. in World War II? 

Lee: He was a conscious objector in World War II. I knew about that, and I started to sing there behind the stage one day, and Lew loved folk songs, so I was singing folk songs and finally he looked up at me, he said, "Where you from, Katie?" And I looked him right in the eye and I said, "<Tucson Arizona, ()>." (chuckles) He didn't quite know what to do. He looked down and he said, "Oh? I've been there." I said, "Yeah, I know." 

Steiger: Because you knew that already. 

Lee: Yeah. And I said, "Good for you." And from then on we were great friends. But "great friends," what do you say? You know, you don't see people like that very often. I felt we were friends. And I didn't see him again -maybe whenever I'd see him, it would be out to dinner or someplace like that, he'd be with somebody else, or I'd just run into him in the studio or someplace, or maybe he'd come over to NBC to do a show, and I'd be rehearsing. But he always stopped to speak to me and say, "Hi, hello, how are you?"

It was there I also ran into Burl Ives, who really, really set my career going. But in 1953, in the summer, I came home to do a show at the Temple of Music and Art. First time home for the little-town girl, back from the big city, back from <Hollywood, ()>. I worked on that concert, you just -that was the hardest I've ever worked, 'cause I knew I had to go home to my peers and to people that were going to be highly critical, and they're going to have all kinds of things to say about it, and I wanted to be good -and I was. The reviews were great. After the show, Tad Nichols came over to the house for the party my mom gave me, and he brought a guy named Jim Rigg with him, and he said, "Katie, I've got a movie that you've got to see." And I said, "Great. Can we show it to these other people too?" He said, "Yeah, absolutely. This you have to see." So I sat down there in the living room in my mom's house, sometime in the early -January or February, I think it was -of 1953, and I watched Tad Nichols' first power boat run through the <Grand Canyon, ()>. And I looked at that thing, and I couldn't believe what I was seeing. I thought all those people had to be dead. The bottom of that boat, when it got into <Lava Falls, ()> -which I knew nothing about at the time -just spun around. You couldn't see (chuckling) anything but water, like they were all going down a hole. And then it pops out and slams down and the camera jars up like crazy, and finally focuses back into this incredible washing machine. 

Steiger: This is a movie taken from the boat? 

Lee: From the boat. It's a movie taken from the boat -part of it, yeah. If you've never seen.... 

Steiger: That Tad just shot? 

Lee: Well, I think Bob still has that, Bob Rigg still probably has that movie. I know Tad has it somewhere. Anyway, I saw that thing, and I said, "My God, you're right. I have to do that! But, how can I? I'm just a little twit out there in <Hollywood, ()>, trying to make a buck, and it's $500 for the upper half and $500 for the lower half?! I can't possibly make it." And he said, "Well, just maybe we'll just have to...." I don't remember what he said. I think he said, "Go back to <Hollywood, ()> and make money." So I did. And I will not forget this night, I was sound asleep, I had just gotten sound asleep, and the phone rang, and it's Tad on the phone. He says, "Kay?" (sleepily) "What? Wait, who are you? What's this?" "This is Tad," he said. "You want to run the <Grand Canyon, ()>?" And I said, (sleepily) "Don't be silly, I haven't got any money." He said, "No! Somebody has canceled. Jim says you can come for your food, fifty dollars, and bring a friend -make it a girl, if you can," he said. (laughter) 

Steiger: Some things never change. 

Lee: (laughing) Some things never do. "Make it a girl." No, he said, "Bring some classy-looking broad with you," that's what he said. And I said, "Yeah, okay." But he said, "And bring your guitar, that's the deal. You can sing to the other passengers, and you have to be in <Flagstaff, ()> tomorrow by noon." This is 10:30 at night, the night before! Well, jeepers, I was spinning. I put down the phone and I tried calling people. First of all, you can't even get the people I knew out of high-heeled shoes, much less take 'em (laughs) on a river trip! And I had one last thought. I thought, "Golly, I'll ask Julie." Well, Julie Winslow was my Jungian teacher. I was studying Jung with her, Carl Gustav Jung -psychology. And I was really getting to know pretty much more about myself than I knew when I came there a few years before that. We're talking '53, I'd been there since '48, the summer of. So finally I phoned Julie. I said, "Do you have any other students that might want to.... I've got to leave here within an hour, and they have to pack." She said, "Well, I can go." Well, I nearly fell over. I thought, "That'd be great!" Then I thought of Tad. Well, Julie (laughs) was fifty-five years old. 

Steiger: And not quite what he had in mind. 

Lee: Not quite the good-looking broad (laughing) I think that Tad had in mind. Anyway, we went in her car, and we got there to Flag by noon the next day, and went down <the Canyon, ()>. Well, of course, I was hooked. The night before we got up there at Art Green's (laughs), which was their habit, Jim and Bob, they showed <Danger River, ()>. Have you seen that lovely little thing? And of course that just gives everybody the trembles. You know, you get on that boat, and you're adrenalin starts racing so fast, you don't see anything, you don't know anything, you just think, "Am I going to live, or am I not going to live?" And so my first impression of the river was just, you know, fear. I was just scared to death. 

Steiger: Okay, now, so you didn't hike in at <Phantom, ()>, you went to <Lee's Ferry, ()> and started there. 

Lee: Oh yes, I started at <Lee's Ferry, ()> in the power boats. No, no, I didn't hike in. We did the whole thing in eight days. This is this twenty-one-foot CrisCraft kit boat, built by Jim and Bob and friends, and his other brother, Jack. They built those two boats, and actually, when I got on the second year, the second boat wasn't even finished -you know, and hardly painted, just slapped a piece of paint -Bob's boat, the one that Bob -they're both the same, but. And Jim's boat was called the Lollipop, after that; and Bob's, I don't know whether he ever did name it or not. But that was my first experience, and of course I had to run <Lava Falls, ()>, so I was the third woman, according to Dock Marston's record, which is (chuckles) quite faulty, I understand, but what the hell, he tried. I was 175 to run all the rapids in the <Grand Canyon, ()>, clear from there to <Pearce's Ferry, ()>, which is where we got out. 

Steiger: Well, if you were the third woman.... 

Lee: Julie was the fourth. I was in the lead boat. That's the way we.... 

Steiger: That means Lois Jotter and Elzada Clover were the first? 

Lee: That's right, they were. Definitely, they were. They went the year before. 

Steiger: Well, no, they went in thirty.... They went with Nevills, and that was like.... 

Lee: Oh, that was a long time before that, then. But Nevills didn't run all the rapids, you see. 

Steiger: Right. In fact, they probably did, they probably lined <Lava, ()> or something. You were the third woman to run (

Lee: All the rapids.) all the rapids, because you couldn't do anything else. You're not going to portage a twenty-one-foot cruiser with a sixty-five-horse diesel engine in it! 

Steiger: You were number 175. 

Lee: One seven five, that was me. And my first impressions, of course, are here in this book, but the adrenalin -first of all, it's the adrenalin, and that's supplanted by the fear, and then the relief that you're still alive, and you don't really start to look around and check out what the place is all about, until you get over those first couple of days of this incredible rush of everything coming at you at once. God knows the scenery is enough to knock you back, but you don't have time to think about it, or to study it, or to get in tune with it, or anything. So until you've run it two or three or four times, I don't see how you can have any affinity with that place. You may be terrified, you may remember it all your life, but that's part of what rivers are about to me. See, rivers to me -life is a river to me. And if I'm going to be on that river, by God I have to check out what's going on, with me, and with total observation, finding out who I am, what the river is, what the side canyons are, what's in the rock -all that. I have to know about that, or I don't know about me, and I sure don't know about the river.

Also, another thing about -since I've gotten onto that tack right now -I found out that the <Glen Canyon, ()> was a much, much more... much deeper place to be, because there was time to contemplate there. There's where the river is a totally different personality. It's like he's in a coma, and he just is laid back, and he's got all these beautiful little siblings flowing into him, and sort of keeping him company. And he's not upset, and he's not in a hurry, and he's just getting ready for the big drop, which is coming a little bit later. But he needs that space in there, to contemplate. And the more I went to the Glen, the less I really wanted to go back to the Grand. The Grand was big and powerful and scary and ... wow, just ... and rough, and sort of like a.... (laughs) I don't think I want.... Sort of like a quick physical fuck, is what it was like. Whereas the Glen was a very soft, love-making place. You know, time to roll over and look at each other -make love, not just screw. That's the difference in those two places, to me. And that's why, as a <Hollywood, ()> actress, and somebody who really had to watch it all the time, put up her walls -always have to have your walls up, because if you're not, you know, somebody trips you and beats you to the floor. One of the reasons I went into studying Jung was because I just said, "You know, I'm not everybody's little plaything, I'm me, and I'm not going to be somebody else's idea of me. I'm going to be myself. And in order to do that, I have to know who I am." And those two weeks to three weeks on the river -sometimes I'd take three trips a year. I went back to the <Grand Canyon, ()> twice, because I wanted to see it and feel it in the cat boats, get the real feel of the water and the river and not just go zapping down there in a power boat, like the -what do we call her? The crass? No, not crass. What's her name? Oh, yeah, "crude bitch," Georgie WHite -like the crude bitch when she'd go down there with all her.... 

Steiger: Don't sugar-coat it now, Katie! (laughs) 

Lee: I'm not sugar-coating anything. That woman absolutely destroyed river running, especially the kind we did. Anyhow, when you go through it, you know, on a roller coaster ride like that -I'm trying to say you don't get anything out of it really -you just get a roller coaster ride. And especially if you're with fifty people. And that's another thing. I found out after doing these trips for Frank and Mexican Hat Expeditions and Jim, of which I really tried to promote those things, I did the best I could. I wrote articles in the Arizona Highways about 'em. Every time I was in a different town or someplace, when I started to go on the road after I left <Hollywood, ()> in '54, I wrote for the newspapers, for the Chicago Tribune, for the St. Louis Globe-Democrat.... 

Steiger: Was this to promote Mexican Hat Expeditions? 

Lee: This is to promote Mexican Hat, to get Frank Wright and Jim Rigg some customers, because it was not all that easy in those days. They only had four boats, but they needed two passengers for each boat, with $500 for the upper and $500 for the lower. So in those days, those had to be professional people, not people like you and me who'd really just love to go on a river. People like us didn't have any money. So it would be doctors and lawyers and big businessmen -the kind of guys that go on tours like that, to go out. You know, that guides take out hunting, and stuff like that. This was a brand new thing for them to do. Not many people knew about running down the <Grand Canyon, ()>, for Christ's sake. That was not something everybody thought about. But I worked real hard to get them to pay back for what I was getting for nothing. Because (a) I knew I had to have it from then on, it was like a drug, and (b) I wanted to repay those people, especially Frank. Jim pulled out after a while, but Frank was the one that lived in <Blanding, ()>, had a family. That was his work. He'd been with Norm for ever since Norm started. (tape turned off and on) 

Steiger: Since we've got this little break in the flow.... [time out for spellings] 

Lee: Where were we? 

Steiger: We were just talking about you.... 

Lee: The movie articles. 

Steiger: We were talking about you plugging Mexican Hat Expeditions. But there's a little bit of a gap. 

Lee: How I get.... 

Steiger: Well, we don't really.... 

Lee: I know where. Where I went from <Hollywood, ()>. See, that was in '53 when I started writing all that stuff in articles, because I was.... 

Steiger: And that was after your very first trip, which was <Grand Canyon, ()> power boats? 

Lee: Yeah, '53, <Grand Canyon, ()> power boat, '53, was the first trip. Oh, that's something else. (goes to fetch something, tape turned off and on) 

Steiger: So you did the power boat trip and then there were several trips on the <San Juan, ()> before you went back to the <Grand Canyon, ()>. Maybe we should just talk a little bit about that, because you kind of talked about it, but we didn't really get into how you got from the <Grand Canyon, ()> to the <San Juan, ()>. 

Lee: Well, it was actually Jim Riggs' idea, after we did this power boat run, to talk to Frank and find out if I couldn't come and pay for my way on these trips by singing to the passengers on the trips I was on. And Jim and I at that time -you know, there's one thing that nobody mentions when you take a river trip: you're supposed to fall in love with your boatman. Well, we did. Sometimes they fall back in love with you. So Jim and I had this thing going, and he actually came out -he was studying medicine -and he actually came out to the coast -his father let him come out to the coast, for a pre-med semester at UCLA. And so he was rooming, actually, with a friend of mine, who's an artist, and he stayed there. And that's when we would go back to <Lake Mead, ()> -Res. Mead -because the power boats were in a hangar up there at <Boulder City, ()>, and we'd work on the power boats. And I can remember the fiberglassing and all that stuff we were going through. And that's when we named it the Lollipop. But I never got back in that boat for anything, except to water ski behind it up there on Mead -never ran any rapids in that thing again. But when everybody came off of their Mexican Hat trip, down from -it was a big, long one that Frank did that year -went from <Wyoming, ()>. It was the year they went all the way. 

Steiger: From <Green River, ()> to <Lake Mead, ()>. 

Lee: Yeah. It was just before the dam, up above, the one at <Vernal, ()>. And so they came down, and I was there to sing, 'cause Jim had sort of wormed me into that, to sing. And by that time I'd written a couple of river songs, and I had learned all the other songs that were already there on the river, and Frank Wright was duly impressed. So it just got to be that.... That was what my job was, I thought it was my duty to get as many passengers as I possibly could. Nobody told me to do this, but it's also the way that I found out I had a talent I really didn't know I had, and that was writing well enough to get something published in a newspaper. Somebody else had always been writing that stuff about me, and I figured, "Oh, well, if they can do it, I can do it." So I started trying to advertise their trips. By 1954 I wanted to get the hell out of <Hollywood, ()>, because I wasn't doing a thing there that I really wanted to do, and I'd started to sing a lot more. So Burl set up this deal for me in <Chicago, ()> in the fall of 1954, and by that time Jim Riggs' and my little affair had gone out the window, and I had done a <San Juan, ()> trip with Frank, and two other trips with Jim down the Glen because I had gotten these passengers, I had these kids out of <Hollywood, ()>, a producer, a director, and a script girl that wanted to go on the river with us that year. So those were all passengers that I'd gotten for <Mexican Hat, ()>, and Jim took them down with me, one trip; and then we turned right around and went up again and came back and did another trip. This one was a couple of old river rats and a couple of greenies, and Frank Wright also. So that's two trips on the Glen, plus the one that Frank told me I could come on, on the <San Juan, ()>, which was before any of those. But the minute I hit the confluence of that for the first time.... 

(tape turned off and on)

This is on the <San Juan, ()>, (reading from book) "and I'm just bobbing along in my life jacket, letting the <San Juan, ()> have its way with me, when I feel a change, a kind of nudge in the current. On the surface the color turns a darker red, a boil bubbles under my chin, and I hear a whisper in the water as it swishes between my legs. Then the current dances me in a tight do-si-do, like a square dancer, lifting my legs up and down to its rhythm. It would be useless to argue and foolish to resist this new dancing partner -he is the mighty <Colorado River, ()>. I do not forget that meeting at the confluence of the two big rivers, nor can I explain why it was different from others -more exciting, more enigmatic, both before, then, and after. I can say it was somehow an understanding, an agreement, a handshake -we would know each other, yes, and maybe more."

And that pretty much explains how different it was to me to feel that power and that current, like these two great rivers were on their way to tear out the next -they'd come together and they were -that's why that wall, (laughing) there on that downstream side just after the confluence, is the highest straight fall of all. That wall needs to be there, that river, you know, eventually would have just chewed that away, because they came in there together. 

Steiger: This is the <San Juan, ()> hitting the <Colorado, ()>. 

Lee: This is the <San Juan, ()> hitting the <Colorado, ()>, and it's halfway, actually, just about halfway through the <Glen Canyon, ()> run from <Hite, ()> to <Lee's Ferry, ()> in those days. The <San Juan, ()> comes into the <Colorado, ()> at Mile 87 point something. 

Steiger: If zero is the start at <Hite, ()>? 

Lee: Zero starts at Lee's and goes up -did. Yeah, starts at zero and goes up. <Hite, ()> was 164 or 5. 

Steiger: So this is your very first <San Juan, ()> trip. 

Lee: Where I hit the Glen midway. 

Steiger: They had you out there swimmin' in the river, or you were out there swimmin' in the river. 

Lee: I was out there in my life jacket. I'm always in the river, I couldn't stay out of the water. Some sort of affinity with water. 

Steiger: Don't let me get us too sidetracked, but there's a couple of things: For starters, on this power boat trip, the first one that you did, they actually had passengers. Who were those guys? 

Lee: One was a botanist, the other one was a doctor. That's it, a botanist and a doctor, Julie, myself, Tad, Bob -that's seven. There was one other person on that trip, and I can't remember now who it was. I've got 'em all written down, but I just don't remember. 

Steiger: Essentially we're talking eight people, two boats. 

Lee: Yeah, there's two boats, there were four in each boat. 

Steiger: And that was it. 

Lee: Yeah, including the boatmen. 

Steiger: And you guys had everything stored -those boats had little cabins. 

Lee: Everything stored in the cabins, yeah. And under the boat seat. And when I went down with Tad, and we went through <Lava Falls, ()>, he lost the camera. It flipped straight up in the air, did about four turns, and came down in my lap. And I'm sitting on the back of the power boat, which is in the water -you know, this is a power boat, and the seat's in the water, and I'm hanging on for dear life, and this camera, I'm trying not to get -you know, the camera's got some plastic around it, but we retrieved it and he got it back. 

Steiger: That's wild! 

Lee: And I can remember looking back to see where Bob was, because, you know, we pulled out in an eddy to wait for him, and the same thing sort of happened in Tad's picture, as I remember it, and that may not be, it just may not have been in the original film, but I keep thinking it was the one that I first saw at my mother's home that day. But I see the nose of this power boat.... 

Steiger: A big boat. 

Lee: They're twenty-one feet. And all we can see is this, the nose, just doing like this, until finally (whistles) up it goes, splat. I thought every screw in that boat was going to come loose when we hit. We did the same thing. We didn't go round and round, but we ground in and through and out of that. As far as I'm concerned, there was never a boatman to equal Jim Rigg. The guy was incredible, incredible. He was so fast, that he could get himself into anything and get out of it, whereas Frank Wright, in all the years that he boated, never once ever tipped a boat over, never once got wet -except, you know, yeah, sure, he got wet, but I mean he never got.... He never was anyplace he wasn’t supposed to be. They were sensational boatman -two of 'em -so different: Frank, who was a natural, and Jim, a natural in a totally different way. Frank just knew. He never moved hardly at all. He hardly ever touched the oars. And when he touched the oars, they were looonnng, smooth strokes, he knew where he was going and how he was going to get there. Whereas Jim wanted probably the adrenalin rush, and he'd go just a little bit too far, you know, but (chink) so fast he could get himself out of it. 

Steiger: Yeah, sounds like he was a little more fun-loving than Frank? 

Lee: Oh, Frank is a very sober type of person, very quiet, very gentle, very deep. He's a very, very.... Not many people got to know Frank Wright. He's just a very private person. There are people like that, you know.

So those are the trips, and as soon as I'd finished that summer, and finished my affair with Jim, and picked up all my marbles and left <Hollywood, ()>, and went to <Chicago, ()>, set up by Burl Ives, his publicity people, he gave me a publicity party, he made sure that his press girl was there to take care of all the details. And from then on, I was off and running. I worked steadily for three years, and I had to, in order to quit working I just had to say, "I am leaving, I am going on the river." "You can't do that." I said, "Oh yeah, I can do that. I am doing that. Everything's moving a little too fast here, and I need to do this and I need to do that." And I was out there in front of those people every night, standing up there all duded and dolled up, all makeup and pantyhose and high heels and fancy dresses. You just can't know how good it felt to take off all my clothes and get back to nature, and feel that water running over my body, and feel the sand pickin' away at my skin, and feel a rock, and getting in step with the stone. And if anybody steals that title, I'll shoot 'em, (chuckles), 'cause that's the next book I'm gonna write. 

Steiger: Getting in step with the stone? 

Lee: Getting in step with the stone. It takes about three days before you get your balance in the slickrock. 

Steiger: You know, I haven't heard.... It's funny that you call the <Colorado, ()> "he." So many people refer to it as "she." 

Lee: Well, I know. I can read a little thing here for you that'll kind of explain that, but it's not mine. And I don't know that I ought to do that, because I'm using it in the book, but I don't know whether Dick.... He just mentions. He said, "You call the <Colorado River, ()> 'he.' I call the river 'she.'" Then he goes on, and that's.... To me, it's totally irrelevant. The spirit of the place has no gender. It has no gender. It's just masculine -I would get up on top of the cap, and I would see exactly what Dick meant, that here's the femininity of it, all these bodies, all these humps and boobs and chests and bottoms and legs all stretched out there, lolling into each other and hugging the earth. I can see that. Whereas down on the river, there were these wonderful straight, strong, chesty walls with masculine shoulders and arms up on top. And to me, because I'm a woman, why, to me it's masculine. And since the river turned out to be my real lover anyway, I couldn't hardly have a girl. I like men. Goddam I sure like men. (chuckles) Much more than women, much more. 

Steiger: We had this discussion on the phone, didn't we? (laughter) 

Lee: Yes, we did. Just like you like girls. 

Steiger: I like women, I do. 

Lee: And I don't think they hate me, either. (chuckles) At least it's never been proven so. Only those that are scared shitless of me, and there's a lot of those -which is fine, (laughing) that's the way I want it! Where were we? I'd left for Shit-cago. That's what I called it afterwards. 

Steiger: Well, you did this <Grand Canyon, ()> trip, and then right away, right after the <Grand Canyon, ()> trip, you kind of, that's when Burl Ives.... 

Lee: Right. 

Steiger: So you made this shift from being an actress to being a folk singer. 

Lee: Yup. 

Steiger: And being a folk singer.... 

Lee: Who was an actress, by the way. 

Steiger: Who was an actress by the way, but that's when your career -suddenly you're.... 

Lee: Started to flow. 

Steiger: You got more work than you knew what to do with. 

Lee: I got a lot of work, I worked all the time. I worked <Chicago, ()>, I worked <St. Louis, ()> and <Detroit, ()>, and <Duluth, ()>. Oh, God, I'll never forget <Duluth, ()> in the winter. I said, "Get me out of here! I'm going to kick the window out of this hotel." Just all kinds of.... You know, I was making really good money for a folk singer in those days, but you know, somebody on the road, anybody can tell you who's been in the biz, that you spend everything you make, practically, because you have to get your clothes, you have to buy this, buy that -gasoline, you travel. I travelled everywhere for the first few years in a little Studebaker Hawk. It had the same Lowe design that the '55 T-Bird has. And then in '57, I think it was, I bought a '55 T-Bird, and I had that until I moved up here to <Jerome, ()>. But I travelled all over the country in that T-Bird: <New York, ()>, <Miami, ()>, <Florida, ()>, <Boston, ()>, you name it, <Hollywood, ()>, <San Francisco, ()>. 

Steiger: And you're doing concerts and radio shows? 

Lee: No, I was doing coffee houses and clubs then. See, I opened the Gate of Horn in <Chicago, ()>. I was called back from <New York, ()>, 'cause from <Chicago, ()> I went to <New York, ()>. And that was another great big step. And that was after this first <Glen Canyon, ()> trip with Frank and Tad, where I really got to know the river, and it got to know me. And it was after that, and finding out that the river talks, and sitting down and having a lot of conversations with him, that I finally decided that I'd take the leap and go to <New York, ()>, that I was ready for it. My friends had told me [in spite of] my fears that I was ready, but I didn't have the confidence until I got off of that trip. 

Steiger: This is the.... 

Lee: This is the 1955 <Hite, ()> to <Lee's Ferry, ()> trip. And looming over that was the fact that we were going to have to fight this dam which was coming in at us from all angles at that time. Up until then, we'd just sort of pushed it off and said, "You know, this can't happen, they're not going to do this, they couldn't do this. Nah, no way." 

Steiger: Okay, so looking at your list here: <Grand Canyon, ()> trip in '53, you come back a year later in '54 and you do a <San Juan, ()> trip, and then you do two <Glen Canyon, ()> trips, and you've made this shift to folk singer -that's '54 -and then '55 we got a <San Juan, ()> trip, a lower half of the <Grand Canyon, ()> trip. 

Lee: Yeah, that comes right after my first full <Glen Canyon, ()> trip with the ones -I call those the "we three" trips. "We three" meaning Frank and Tad and I. Frank had never done that before. He had never gone on a trip (

Steiger: Just for fun.) just for fun. And he really didn't dig the river all that much. He was in terror half of the time, trying to take care of his passengers. You know? He's a very responsible human being, and he was always worried about everybody, and he wanted everybody to have a good time, and he had to keep all that inside of him. But we made a deal on that <San Juan, ()> trip. I said, "Frank, if you really want to go, and we can get Tad, and maybe somebody [else], but just maybe just you and me and Tad. (I've known Tad since we were in school, or just after I got out of college, and I've known him for years, and he's just like a big brother to me.) And you've never had a chance to lay back and enjoy the river. Tad and I can do the chores and the cooking and you can bring your camera and you can just photograph until you're purple. And we can go in the fall, when there isn't anybody here. You always do this in the summertime." And Tad had told him about the light. He said, "You know, Frank, this is not the same place as it is in the summertime. It's a totally different bag of tricks. The light changes everything in here in the fall." The low light. So as it turned out, we talked him into it, and he supplied the boat and we split up the food and Tad and I did most of the chores, or tried to. Frank has a habit, he aint used to sitting around, not doing anything. But we hiked him all over hell, and I tell ya', I drug him up through some cold pools that must have shriveled him. He must have thought he had two sets of tonsils. I know Tad thought he did. 

Steiger: Now, I'm looking at your list here, and it says this is the first "we three" trip, which is September 24, 1955. 

Lee: Yeah, that's right, and I had been in <Chicago, ()> then, and been down to <St. Louis, ()>. I'd met Harry Belafonte, who also turned out to be a friend. And his guitarist was teaching me calypso music, and I was doing a lot of shows for Harry up in <Chicago, ()>. He was a Catholic, and I did a lot of benefits for him, Catholic service groups. And we'd just go out and do 'em every once in a while, every other Sunday when we had a chance -when he was in town doing a gig. I was at Mr. Kelly's in ‘55, and as I said, I opened the Gate of Horn in ‘56. I came in there in March and I didn't leave until the end of May when I went on the river, came back to <Arizona, ()> and then to the river. 

Steiger: And the Gate of Horn was.... 

Lee: Was the most popular folk club in the Midwest. 

Steiger: That's in <Chicago, ()>? 

Lee: In <Chicago, ()>. I call it the Mideast, but that's their problem. They don't know where it is on the map, I do. 

Steiger: Okay, so the first <Grand Canyon, ()> trip, you probably didn't see anybody. Did you see anybody else? 

Lee: Oh no. No, we saw Dock Marston -yeah, we saw Dock Marston, down around Diamond Creek, on the first trip. In fact, Jim stopped and talked to him. That's right, we just stopped and yakked at him. And that's the only people we saw, we didn't see anybody else on the first one. On the lower half, this next one after 1955, where we ran into the crude bitch, or she ran into us, again and again and again, she was sticking to Frank like glue because she was afraid she was going to kill everybody on board. 

Steiger: Did she have her big boat then? 

Lee: She had those three little idiot things -oh, here, I'll read you. I'll be glad to read you this. 

Steiger: I can hardly wait! (laughs) 

Lee: What a pig! Oh, God. And these people that think that they got to see the <Grand Canyon, ()> when they went down there on that roller coaster ride with that woman -I swear to God! they don't have a clue. Stop [the tape] until I find this thing here. 

(tape turned off and on) 

Okay. Here it is. "Journal note, July 17, Day Four, CFS 7,620." Low. 

Steiger: Not that much water. 

Lee: No, hardly any water. I mean, the power boats went down on 66,000, and that was great water. 

Steiger: So then there you are on 8,000, 7,000 in the cat boats, and there's Georgie sticking right to you. 

Lee: Yeah. "<Tapeats Creek, ()>, Sweet Mother of Jesus, there they are, all over the beach like ants. So what Frank said might happen, but prayed would not, has. The garbage scows of Georgie WHite and her twenty-seven passengers. These are not boats, understand, but big black neoprene rafts, inflated rings with a soft, squishy bottom. They look so ugly and unrelated to this place, like turds in a punch bowl. We begged Frank to go on, to put them out of sight. Below <Tapeats, ()> I swim the <Granite Narrows, ()>, average sixty feet wide. River quiet as a pond. At 66,000 the power boats got lashed all over here. Lunch at <Deer Creek, ()>, Willard and I walk behind and under the falls [and so on]. Back to the river to take some photos of our pretty little boats from above, and Jee-sus, there they are again! these God-damned blubber rafts, plastered on both sides of us, three bridge pontoons upstream, and three baloneys below us. Our little swans nose together in the middle. Dammit! I spend nine months of the year singing to, laughing with, looking at, entertaining bunches of people, and if there's one place I don't care to meet up with another swarm, it's (emphasizing each word) in the bottom of the <Grand Canyon, ()> on the <Colorado River, ()>, to say nothing of Frank's other passengers, who are on this exclusive vacation for the same reason. Nobody asked her to join us. For three years she's glued her unwanted self to Mexican Hat Expeditions, in case she drowns herself and all her passengers, I suppose -and now has the balls to tell him that we should all get together and celebrate. Celebrate what?! the meeting of the garbage scows? This woman's ego is out of joint. Scow passenger grinning. 'Guess you didn't think you'd have thirty people walkin' across your camp tonight, didja?' Becky, burning, 'I sure as hell did not!' Poor gentle Frank goes to talk with Dan Davis, the park ranger she has in tow, and finally to the garbage woman who condescends to move her pontoons from above us, so all twenty-seven of her passengers won't have to walk back over four cat tow ropes with all their gear, through our camp." 

Steiger: This is at <Deer Creek, ()>? 

Lee: Yep. "I hope Dan gives her a chewing-out, but I'd like a go at it, but Frank won't let me out of his sight, says she'd probably flatten me, and he's probably right. Well, she is the first, and probably not the last of her type to run the river. Up to now, people with some sensitivity -more than a dead pig in the sunshine -have managed to stay out of each other's way. I don't think there's ever been that many people through the Grand in a single party before, and with luck, we won't see her again. Enough! Grrr! Enough for this gorgeous place. I walked to the pool for a night bath to cool me off, inside as well as out. And I dream of carving WHite meat that night."

That's only one time, and then we see her go through this.... "I'd run <Lava, ()>, but at 59,000 more cubes than this. Not a chance in hell we'll do it tomorrow. We're up at Nigger Rock" -Nigger Plug, that's what we used to call it. Sorry. Sorry, fellas, no offense. 

Steiger: That'd be <Vulcan's Anvil, ()>? 

Lee: Yeah, that's <Vulcan's Anvil, ()>, that's right. "Not a chance in hell we'll do it tomorrow at this low stage. Frankly, I just want to stand and look at it, the roaring, thundering power of it. They say it's the only rapid in the Grand that just gets bigger and meaner and more scary, heavier, worse, the higher the runoff. We lined to below the big eater hole, old <Lava Falls, ()> ain't nuthin' but rocks, some of them not even decent enough to be covered at 7,000 CFS. See more of Pat Reilly's [red?] paint from his line job six feet overhead. We portage our gear, stepping around the hippo riders who've come down to watch and take pictures of us. They think we're chicken. We think they're knotheads. Our last boat is lined and ready for the rest of the run, when her barge/garbage scow/whatever you want to call it, comes through. Three bridge pontoons, tied together, with an outboard on the middle one. Now I've seen everything. We laugh until the tears stream from our eyes at this show. They lumber, flop, and slump, bump, ooze, slide, backwards, stop dead, squash, flap, and boiiinnng over every rock and into every hole in <Lava, ()>. Absolutely no way to control them. Norm once said, 'there are rock dodgers and there are river runners.' I wonder what in hell he'd call this. For sure all the skill of the sport is gone. Just point the thing and go, hoping the front -or the rear, it doesn't matter -stays headed downstream, which of course, it doesn't. It wallows sideways, one barge flips on top of the other, making a people sandwich, a Georgie WHite special, with arms, legs, heads and bodies sticking out the side. She calls it -so help me this is true -'thrills with safety.' We call it a freak show. After that we wrote The Hippopotami." 

Steiger: Oh my gosh. 

Lee: Now, here's the crux of that.... (flipping pages) Okay. "When we reached the dead water of Res. Mead and Jimmy came up in the Lollipop to tow us to <Temple Bar, ()>, I knew there was another thing bothering me. I didn't like this nuthin' place to end such a wild and rugged trip. Didn't enjoy being towed across miles of funny-smelling, hot, glassy water. Furthermore, Georgie WHite's gross behavior had done much to tarnish the splendor of the trip. Still more. <Glen Canyon Dam, ()> was becoming a political war, in need of more of us to fight it down. Yet even before it would obliterate 200 miles of the <Colorado, ()> above, and make it a crippled wimp through the <Grand Canyon, ()> below, the old style of river running would be crowded out. With the dam would go seclusion, the untrodden beaches, the wildness of Tavwats [phonetic spelling], the quiet, the peace, and saddest of all, our specially-designed-for-these-rapids little oar-driven, two-passenger cataract boats, which couldn't possibly bring in revenue enough to vie with all the Georgie WHites sure to follow. What was in the wind proved to be a storm moving in on us, tearing away the footings of tradition, and replacing them with a landscape strange and busy, an instant city built on a wilderness waterway. The old, warm, silt road, paved and icy gun-metal blue -big floating condos, leased through a term we'd never even imagined: user days, new rules, restrictions, traffic, clutter, crowds, noise. I remember crying much of the time across that reservoir, though my notes say nothing about it." 

Steiger: This is trip number two through the <Grand Canyon, ()>? 

Lee: This is the lower half that I did first. 

Steiger: In 1955. 

Lee: Yeah. And the upper half I did in 1956. 

Steiger: In the cat boats. So by '55, you guys knew that <Glen Canyon Dam, ()> was a-comin'? 

Lee: No, we knew that.... 

Steiger: They were talkin' about it. 

Lee: Oh yes, but we tried not to talk about it on our "we three" trip, because we wanted to forget that and enjoy this place and get to know it. And it wasn't a sure thing, then, yet at all. We still had hope that we could fight it down. And it wasn't until just the following year, you know, that the shit hit the fan, because then's when Moss, you know, just changed -all you did was just change the language in the law, and I didn't understand stuff like that. You know, I thought a law was a law. Well, I sure learned a lot in a hell of a hurry. 

Steiger: Now, what was this, as far as the law? 

Lee: The law itself? It was that no water was to encroach on a national monument. 

Steiger: And this is referring to <Bridge Canyon, ()>? 

Lee: Yeah, and <Rainbow Bridge, ()> was a national monument. 

Steiger: <Rainbow Bridge, ()>, I mean. 

Lee: Yeah. It was a national monument. And it was in the Upper <Colorado River, ()> Pact, and all those dams that were to be built on there, that no water would encroach on <Rainbow Bridge, ()>. So what I proposed -and I sent all these letters out to Goldwater and Udall -not Udall, he wasn't even in yet -Harold Ickes, other people, guys that were in there, the Secretary of State at the time -asking them to do a simple thing, just lower the dam fifty feet, that would do it. 

Steiger: Nope, not gonna happen. 

Lee: No. Far, far too logical. And besides, that egocentric cocksman (

Steiger: Floyd Dominy.) Floyd Dominy wasn't about to cut fifty feet off of his you-know-what, which is exactly what that dam is, if you pardon my saying so. And every time (laughing) I look at it, I think, "Well, there's your cement prick, you asshole!" 

Steiger: I want to go back to your first three or four trips on the <San Juan, ()>. I mean, like your early experience of river running was kind of untainted by the awareness of these coming dams. 

Lee: It certainly was, but my early trips on the <San Juan, ()> were on a bucking horse. You know, like Frank said, when he went down there with us last year, he said he wanted to know what happened, this was not the <San Juan, ()>. He wanted to know what happened to it. And he's talking about the part, you know, that you can run still. And I looked at him like he had four heads. I said, "Frank, there's a dam up there. Don't you realize a river is dead a hundred miles, at least, above a dam and below it? Don't you realize that's what happens? This place, of course it's not the same." The sand waves were gone, and we had high, high water. 

Steiger: Pretty smooth, yeah. 

Lee: There's nuthin' left of it. And the river was three times as wide. He said, "You know, it was just like riding a wild horse, you never knew what it was going to do. You had to be alert every minute." 

Steiger: This is the <San Juan, ()>? 

Lee: Yeah, the Little <San Juan, ()> -Little <San Juan, ()>. It was a wonderful run. And there's another one, I'll never go back again. I was not going to go back again four years, five years ago, because it was just getting to be.... There was never a minute when we were out of sight of somebody -either kayaks upstream or downstream, or somebody else's boat. He'd kind of expected that, but he sure didn't think that the river itself would be torn to pieces and gone. There was nothing left of Government Rapid -it's gone. 

Steiger: Underwater, smoothed over. 

Lee: Well, there's also been a big storm flow in there that wiped it out. 

Steiger: But flash flood. 

Lee: There was a big flash flood in there several years ago that wiped it out. 

Steiger: Well, that's a pretty natural thing. 

Lee: Yeah, I know. But the rest of it's not natural, the river's twice as wide as it used to be. It used to still be gouging it out, you know, digging down, going someplace. Now it's not going anyplace, except into a sewer. 

Steiger: So <Grand Canyon, ()> was spectacular, but not super intimate, and <Glen Canyon, ()> was a little different. 

Lee: Yes. And that's another thing you find out as you go along into these places. The <Glen Canyon, ()> was truly intimate. And I was becoming more and more an intimate performer. I got so I didn't like performing for 2,000, 3,000 people. I didn't like that at all. I thought, "You know, that many people, they're not going to listen to what I have to say" -especially unless they're in a concert situation. But if I'm in a big club somewhere and there's people talkin', glasses clinking. So I said, "Half of those people aren't listening to me." They were at first, because that's before television just came in and destroyed absolutely everything. But as soon as that got to the point where I could not be -I would have to spend fifteen minutes quieting that audience down, and getting them in a position to listen to me. I thought, "That's not what I'm here for." And I got to be a second Tallulah Bankhead: I could put people down to the point where they'd break up in tears and walk out of the room, unless the managers got upset with me and said, "You can't do that to the customers." And I said, "They can't do that to me. You hired me, they come in here to hear me, then they're gonna shut up." So it got worse and it got worse and it got worse, until finally.... By the time the dam was in, I had pulled out of the business altogether and gone into concert work, and that alone. But I managed to stay with it, and as soon as I found out....

One of the turning points for me, advertising that, is really very funny. I was doing a show in <Chicago, ()> one night, a talk show, but I wasn't talking, I was on there to advertise the fact that I was singing at the Gate of Horn. This is '56. And <Chicago, ()> loved me. All the newspaper guys that Burl had sent out, you know, my press show -never a week went by that two to three articles weren't in the paper about me and where I was. And even if I wasn't in town, they'd say I was in <St. Louis, ()> and I'd be back, or something like that. They were great. And every time anything like that appeared in the paper, I either went to them and thanked them, or wrote them a note or a card and thanked them for what they'd done. And in a way, that reminds me of every time that I had a great day on the river, I went down to the river and told it just how great it was, and what it had done for me. But I was on this show that night, and there were several other people, all different, you know, different people -not just entertainers -people from all walks of life that had something to say, or that the press had found interesting. And I'm stashed on a little stage, you know, ready for the cameras to come in at me, and I do my show -no, no, wrong -we're all sitting, all the people that are on the show are sitting down in chairs, and there's about five of us, and I look down the row here, and here's this woman with a little brown suit on, and a little brown hat with little faux feathers in it, little leaves in it [fall leaves?], and she looks really strange in this outfit, and I'm thinking, "What in the hell? Who's that?" And the man who's the head of the show looks up and he says, "And we have on the show tonight Georgie WHite, who has come here to tell us about this incredible river run down the <Grand Canyon, ()> Rapids of the <Colorado River, ()>," and on and on he goes. And I'm looking like, "Holy fuck bombs! I don't believe this!" Ask Dock Marston. I wrote Dock and I said, "You're not going to believe this, Dock, the bitch (laughing) was on this show with me, and she's advertising this river that I'm trying to protect. It just dawned on me right then and there that I'm doing the wrong thing. Never am I going to write another article about this river -never." And by that time I had found out what Tad and Frank and I.... I really had gotten possessive about the place, and I didn't want anybody else down there anyway -ever. 

Steiger: So you decided to stop publicizing it. 

Lee: I sure did. But you see, you know, we all shit in our own little nests sooner or later, and I was sure doin' in it mine. That's what I call it now, but at the time I was just blind as a bat about that. I was doin' it for Frank and Mexican Hat Expeditions, but that's no excuse, 'cause by that time, I was in. I mean, nobody was payin' my way anymore, and I was payin' my own way. And I thought, "God, look what I'm doing!" 

Steiger: You mean, just publicizing the river was not a good thing to do. 

Lee: Not the thing to do. And I had concerts to do all that year. I was showing Tad's film and singing the river songs, and I was doing a whole mess all over the Midwest. I was doing these women's clubs. And I had six months of those to go. 

Steiger: And you canceled them? 

Lee: No, I didn't, I couldn't. I had to do that. There are compromises you've got to do. But after that, my heart was not in it at all, and I quit doing that kind of thing. Now, I've never quit singing my river songs, and it's too late not to anyway. I mean, after that, I never quit singing the songs in the clubs, but.... I sure sang the Wreck The Nation Bureau song everywhere I went, after I'd written it, but I didn't write it, some of the verses, not until quite late. But the first two or three I wrote in '56 or '7, when I knew for sure that they were gonna build it. 

Steiger: Yeah, in '56 was when they signed off on it, wasn't it? Isn't that when they did the deal? 

Lee: My dates are screwy, I've got it all there in my notes, but I just don't remember exactly. I remember being in <the Canyon, ()> on the '57 trip, the day before President Eisenhower pushed the button and blasted the first blast off of the walls. 

Steiger: In <Glen Canyon, ()>. 

Lee: Yeah. And that was in September or October of 1957. October 30 or 31, toward the end of the month. I was in the canyon, we'd just gotten out the day before. In fact, we were up at Art Green's and I heard the sound, and I remembered. It just brought me to my knees. I couldn't handle it. 

Steiger: Well, it seems like there were so few people.... 

Lee: I had done everything I could do. 

Steiger: Well, as far as who knew <Glen Canyon, ()>, about the time this deal was being made.... 

Lee: Yeah, but you see, it's just a vicious -it's a Catch 22. You've got to get the people in there. This is what the Sierra Club was in there for. You gotta get the people in there to know what it's about in order to get them to stand up and fight. And in so doing that.... 

Steiger: You've already.... 

Lee: You've already fucked up your place. If you want the privacy, if you want the solitude, if you want the mystery and the treasures that a place like this can bring to you, you shut your mouth about it, and you don't tell anybody nuthin'! Because no sooner -we swore that we would not tell anybody about those balanced rocks. Tad discovered 'em one afternoon, and we would tell nobody, because if somebody went up there, sure as hell, even if they didn't mean to.... And we had to take very special care not to kick any of them over while we were trying to get down and photograph 'em. We knew damned well if somebody came up there, or they brought any parties up there, that sure enough, they'd be all gone. Three years later, half of 'em were knocked over. 

Steiger: Now I'm not sure what these.... 

Lee: We found these incredible little -looked like a herd of turtles on their way to eternity. These rocks that had eroded down from the <Kaiparowits Plateau, ()> and had fallen on the softer stone, and everything out from under them, except two or three little pinnacles like this, maybe four to six inches high, were holding them up. And they were sitting there, just like little spaceships or little turtles sitting up there on these little points. And there may be a rock wedged under one, and they were still settin' on it. But here's this big rock, like that, sittin' on three little points or something like that. You've seen those photos. 

Steiger: I saw the ones just now, yeah, that you showed me. 

Lee: But sure enough, we went back about three years later -I did, anyway -and many of them had been knocked over. Now, they'd only been there for centuries. You've got to know how long it takes for the wind and weather to take sandstone, six inches of stone away from a boulder that's sitting on top of it. So we defeat our own purpose. And another reason I found out, after this "we three" trip that I could not do any commercial runs: I did one more for Frank, and then I said, "This is destroying everything I come here for. I want nobody here. I don't want anybody here [unless it's] somebody I know personally. I will not take anybody down this Canyon that I don't know, that knows when to shut up and let everybody have their own thoughts. The only reason we went with three people, because that's the safety number. (moves away from microphone) You're not too smart to go into country like that where at any minute, you know, you can fall over the side, or you can do something stupid and die, or get "potholed" _____ nobody to go and help you. So three was our number, more for safety and for ... just being smart. Now, I've done trips by myself since then. Dick Strang said to me one time, "Go alone, Katie. It's not the same thing, and you'll discover a lot of things you didn't know. Just go by yourself." And so I did. I did the Escalante, four or five days once, by myself. And I really had to use some ingenuity, because the water came up, and I got sick as hell, had a fever one night. But I found out a lot of things about me. 

Steiger: Yeah, you're definitely a lot more kind of there in that kind of circumstances. 

Lee: And nobody, you know, interrupts your train of thought. But that's the way it was with Tad and Frank, we all knew when to communicate with just signs or eyes or anything, and no speech. We didn't talk a lot on the river, at night in camp, sometimes, most times, and I sang every night. Frank loved that music -so did Tad. 

Steiger: So, just to capsulize this: You were kind of entertaining and you did these commercial sort of trips. That was just like the first three or four years that you were into this. 

Lee: That's right. From '53 -that was my first trip I was on. I guess it was a commercial. Anyway, '53 to '55 -is there one that's '56 that says <San Juan, ()>? 

Steiger: No, it's <Grand Canyon, ()> and it's <Glen Canyon, ()> in '56. 

Lee: Okay, '56 is the last trip I did commercially. 

Steiger: Then there's a big gap here, isn't there? 

Lee: No. 

Steiger: Oh, I see, '58, here's a <Glen Canyon, ()>, '59, '61, '62. 

Lee: The only year I missed was '60. That was the year I married a second idiot. No, '58 I married the second idiot. Oh, God! (whew) Anyway, I only stayed married to that idiot three years, and the first idiot three years, and then I got married again, way late, in '68, to a real wonderful human being, who had to go and die on me. Did you ever meet Brandy? 

Steiger: Uh-uh. 

Lee: Oh, you were too young. 

Steiger: Well, I was around, but I just didn't.... 

Lee: No, you were around, and he was at Gail's, he came over to see Gail, because he was there when I was making the movie. He's the one that made me make the movie. I never thought I could do something like that, but Brandy saw to it that we got that movie made. It was his suggestion. I have to say something about you. (chuckles) When I called you up and I said, "Lew, I want you to play harmonica on my album," and you said, "Katie, I'll only do that if you don't call my dad a crook." I said, "Well, what shall we call him, then?" (laughs) And I finally figured out that in the Wreck the Nation Bureau song, after I added the verse about your dad, that we'd just call him.... What is it we ended up saying? "Cocky way." 

Steiger: Instead of "crooked"? 

Lee: Instead of his crooked way, we say cocky way, and that was much better, because he is cocky. 

Steiger: Very cocky. 

Lee: Very cocky. (laughs) Anyway, when I tell people who know anything about the river and know that you are singing on this Wreck the Nation -I mean, you're playing on this Wreck the Nation Bureau song, and this verse about your dad, they don't believe me. And I say, "But that's not all, his brother's doing the talking part on the Riding Down the Canyons." So there, I've got the Steigers all over that album. 

Steiger: Inside and outside. 

Lee: Was that before or after you went into the agricultural business? (laughs) 

Steiger: It was probably after, but we're going pretty far astray here now. 

Lee: I'm being very cool. 

Steiger: Yeah, I think that must have been after. For [those listening] what we're talking about here is, Katie, you've done a whole bunch of albums. There must be five or six of them, at least. 

Lee: Oh at least, I'll say. 

Steiger: If not more, but there is one devoted to the river, and that's called.... 

Lee: Well, the first one I did, River, was actually in 1960, and it was for Folkways. 

Steiger: Folk Songs of the Colorado. 

Lee: Folk Songs of the Colorado River, yeah. 

Steiger: And the one you did for Katydid Records. 

Lee: It's also just Colorado River Songs, but half of the songs that were on the original are on that too, only I redid them. You know, I recut them, and I've got harmonica on them. I did those over in <Austin, ()>, so J.B. Henry could play harp for me. But the albums, I started out with, the first one I actually did was called Spicy Songs for Cool Nights, and that was in '56. It was a bunch of folk songs, all different kinds, basically olde English, a couple of cowboy songs. No river songs on that one that I think of -no, there weren't any. And then the next one, somebody, this guy got ahold of me and wanted me to do Songs of Couch and Consultation. Everybody was being analyzed in those days. (laughs) And this was a hot seller. In fact, I just hauled out that newspaper clipping the other day, and here's Variety for the Albums of the Week or Month, and down at number 10 is Harry Belafonte, and me as number 11. 

Steiger: Couch and Consultation? 

Lee: Couch and Consultation, the only one I ever made, really, any money off of, and I didn't write the lyrics or the music. They got me to sing them because I was an actress, and I sang every song differently: you know, one like Jeanette McDonald, the next one like June Christy -ho, ho! -and another one like a gunslinger, and another one like a mama singing to her child a lullaby -because I was an actress. And then Victor wanted me to do another one just like that. So they got a bunch of people to come in and write a bunch of psycho songs, sick songs. And so I did two of them, and that second one was called Life is Just a Bed of Neuroses. And there again, I was pulled and pushed and tugged around, you know, like, "You're going to make a whole lot of money, Katie." "God, I've got to keep this momentum going?!" And I said, "No, I'm sorry. I'm real sorry, I've got to go to the river. I'm all screwed up, I don't like this, there's something wrong here. I've got a trip...." "Well, you can't go to the river, you've got to make a lot of money." And I said, "No, you're gonna make a lot of money, and I'm gonna lose my mind. I'm going to the river. See ya' when I get back!" And there went the momentum. I couldn't have cared less. 

Steiger: With your career. So there was a conscious.... 

Lee: I still had a career, I still had.... I just knew that there were certain things that I couldn't do. I could never be famous. I got right up there at the top, and then took one look at it, and it was just like looking over a precipice and you either spread your wings and [you're] dyin' or flyin', and I knew I couldn't fly. I just knew it, not in me. I'd insult people. You know, people would get in my hair to the point where.... I didn't want to be another Frank Sinatra or any of those people that turned out to have more hate in them than joy. 

(pause for a battery change)

And you know, I'm going to have to pretty much read what <the Canyon, ()> was like. There's so many things that.... 

Steiger: In terms of just the history and this audience. Well, the thing, what you saw.... I mean, when I look at the river community right now, we're talking about a generation of people -you know, I was born in '56, so <Glen Canyon, ()> is a total mystery to us, and I think as far as passing something along, you have a unique place in history. The picture that I'm getting just from talking to you here, is you were stumbling along when the gettin' was really good, still. You guys went down there, you didn't hardly see anybody. 

Lee: We didn't, after that first trip. We didn't see anybody on the second upper half of the Grand that year. Dock wrote me and said, "You'd better go with such-and-such, because Georgie's.... I don't think you'll be bothered by the woman this year, she's not going to be there. She's already gone" or "she's already left" or whatever. 

Steiger: Looking at your list here, here's twelve <Glen Canyon, ()> trips. 

Lee: And they're all with.... 

Steiger: All with Mexican Hat. 

Lee: Oh, no, they're all with me -me and friends. One of those is that second idiot I married, Gene. I took him on the river one year. I had a lousy time, actually, as far as the river trip was concerned, because I was trying to show him everything. You know, trying to get him to ... feel and understand what's not possible to transmit. 

Steiger: Was he not into it? 

Lee: Oh, he was a very much outdoor person. He was very physical, good build, a good body and all that, you know. No brains, but he tried hard. It's just that, again, how could you know the place or become acquainted with it if.... It's like a person. If you want to know somebody, you have to get to know them, you have to see them a lot, you have to talk to them, you have to get to know their personality and whether you like 'em or whether you don't like 'em. If they're friends, then they stick with you, you know. That's what this river was. It was just a matter of getting to know what it was all about. And its changes, and its crazy little mysteries that nobody's figured out, and I don't want anybody to figure 'em out. I mean, that Canyon ... breathed _______. Laugh at me if you want, but it did. Had a funny little thing it did in its side canyons that somebody else has discovered recently in other parts of this country in the slickrock country -actually, in the same area, in the <Escalante River, ()>, so it would still -it has a pulse. And there's other things that I've got in the book here that I don't want to talk about, because I want people to read about it.

But the way, what it did.... Would you hold on a minute while I get this, 'til I find this place in here? (tape paused) "Light sets the stage for Canyon mood changes, forever ongoing." And I'm telling you this, because I can't tell you about the colors, like Eliot Porter or somebody. I can only tell you what the colors, how they make you feel and what they do to you. "With his tripods, Tad stands in the shadow of the overhang, near the place where I took the photograph that's on my bedroom wall. Looking back at him from upstream before I turn the first bend, I see that he's now a soft shade of green, that he looks like a half-sprung frog, crouched behind his camera where there is no green at all -the green is on the ground, under the water, in the grass, and in the big cottonwood tree far to his left. Leaving Tad and Frank, I walk upstream under the overhang. Rounding another bend, suddenly I step into a stab of sunlight. A dozen feet beyond is a black hole, as far as I can tell. But in the streak that stretches up the sides of the "U"-shaped Canyon bottom, the light cries out like a spotlight in front of a velvet curtain. It beckons me to do my tennie-sticking-to-steep-stone act. I do it to see how things look from higher up, or maybe just to see if I can stick there without falling. The light has changed my mood. If it wasn't here, I'd pass this up altogether. But now <the Canyon, ()> asks if I wouldn't like to check it out, see how twenty feet one way or another will make a difference. Amen! Further along I enter a space of quiet light, where no direct sunlight falls, yet it's lambent, a liquid light, that comes from all around and underfoot. Far out of sight overhead, it has ricocheted down and spread itself in ways that confuse the senses. It gets so weird in here sometimes I think I'm hearing the light, smelling the temperature, and feeling the sound. In this zone there is a presence. Propped on tennies, I sit on the sloping wall, lean back, feel the cool stone, touch the wetness of the seep. Only the sound of trickling water now, yet my ears ring with distant calls and soft footfalls, the hollow chunk of fired pots against the stone, the scrape of mano on metate. I'm being led on a path to antiquity that makes me part of all that came before -a path not only to the Mokis, the Anasazis, but a path to beginnings, sand dunes to sandstone, to the patient inevitable forces that wore these dunes into canyons viable for plants and animals, and finally livable enough for the puny, delicate, and destructive creatures the Mokis were and we are. Back to that grain of sand. I don't just know with my mind what it means -looking up, I see what it means. Once this stone dune was 300-500 feet high. Trickles of water ran their gravitational course, making small egg-shaped hollows up there in the softer parts, which eons later became potholes, which after more millennia became deep convoluted crevices, which in turn sometimes widened to two-arm-length passages, and sandstone is one of the softest strata, so I know what will endure, and I'm pleased to note it won't be me or you or any of us.

"In this all-embracing light, the stream reveals the sky, the sky fills the stream. A pool shows two moving crosses that scream 'ank, ank.' Their sound echoes, rippling the pool's surface. The ravens route me from my dream." There's more, but that'll give you a feeling of what it's like in there. 

Steiger: So you're going through there, you've gone down there with the Rigg brothers and started out a little taste of the commercial scene, a little taste of that with Frank Wright and those guys, did a couple of those dude trips, and then fairly quickly migrated to just going down there to, "No, don't want to do the dude thing -just want to go be there." 

Lee: Just want to go be there. 

Steiger: Just want to go be there. 

Lee: Alone, or with.... I mean, I never went down the Glen alone, until Res. Foul, I got in a boat and went down, because nobody would go with me. They knew what I was going to spend my time doing. Not seeing my way, tears so much I couldn't even drive the boat. But I had to go see it. 

Steiger: But you're going through this place on these later trips, where you already know, but at first you didn't know that its goose was cooked. 

Lee: No. But you see, that's the reason that when you finally know, Lew, then everything becomes indelible, and you see it with a wholly different eye. You see it so that it's so engraved on your memory that you can remember the smells, the colors, the feeling, everything. You know, your eyes are windows to the soul, and your soul is nothing unless you analyze. You know, analyzation fills -that's what makes your soul, that's what makes you who you are. You've got to look at things. 

Steiger: This is according to Jung, huh? 

Lee: No! it's according to me! Not according to Jung. In order to, you have to know, you have to feel, you have to see. Ask Anne Zwinger. She's one of those people who understand that statement. She's very analytical. I'm not trying so much to be that -it's just to understand where I fit in the scheme of all this. 

Steiger: Yeah. Well, I guess that's what I'm trying to work up to too, just trying to get the postcard view of it. 

Lee: Well, there is no postcard view. 

Steiger: But for you, what you just said.... So it all felt differently before you realized.... So you lucked out, you stumbled down there, you're going down there, you're doing this stuff, and you don't see the writing on the wall, you don't see Georgie WHite coming, (

Lee: No.) you don't see the dams, you don't see any of that. (

Lee: I don't.) And then all of a sudden you do -big shift. 

Lee: Yes, yes, yes. And that's when I had to see as much of it as possible, knowing that.... Well, it's just like Brandy: I knew Brandy was going to die. He told me he was going to die before I married him. And he said he only had three years to live, and I said he had more, and he did have more, he had five. But when we knew that dam was going in, we knew exactly how long we had. We just hoped, you know, that a lot of bad things would happen, but nothing bad happened, to the dam -not yet! But once we knew that, then I had to just -I decided to drink until I was drunk with it. And in so doing, you know, because this was going to have to last me the rest of my life -and it has. You see? It has lasted. The fact that it's gone.... Well, it's not gone to me, it's in my head, I can see practically every turn in that river. I can still see the sandbars and feel it all. And when I'm up really tight, I just lie down and shut my eyes, transport myself back to that place. It saved my life, and it has kept on saving it. 

Steiger: How'd it do that? 

Lee: Through the vision. You know, through the fact that I have it engraved in my memory. And I have it also -a lot of things help, you know, like I've got 1,200 photos. And I've also got journals. Don't think I pick up my journals and read 'em -I don't have to, I know what's in 'em. And writing this book is the most agonizing part of it all, 'cause I really have to go back to it. (knock at door) That's Brad. 

Steiger: Okay, we'd better stop this. (tape turned off and on) 

Lee: ... explain that to me, I know all about it. 

Steiger: I always end up not winding it back far enough. Okay, so we're rolling again. 

Lee: Well, wait a minute, where was I? I need to know a few things here. (tape turned off and on) It took two or three years to figure that out, you know. 

Steiger: To figure out that it was going. 

Lee: Oh yes! because I started in '53. In '56, it was three years before we just knew we had a fight that was going to be bigger than one we could handle. I mean, I'd started writing my letters to Goldwater way back in '54. So I don't sit down and write four-page, single-space letters to people. If I'd been smart, I wouldn't have done it to Goldwater in those days. But I was so apolitical that I had no idea what you did, I just did the best I could. (aside about watch alarms) But anyway, I had written him, and within, you know, six, eight days I got an answer back. Barry did read the thing, but it was just, you know, trying to explain, you don't want to do this. 

Steiger: Well, he, of all people, should have known. 

Lee: That's just exactly right, but he, of all people, is nothing but a fucking politician, just like all the rest. And now, he's still one, because now it's the thing to do to be sorrreee. So he's politically correct, right to the end. He's sorry now, along with Udall and the rest of them. "Oh, we shouldn't have done that." Big fuckin' deal! I told you long ago you shouldn't have done it. 

Steiger: I don’t think he really cares about political correctness too much anymore. 

Lee: Well if he doesn’t... if he’s really that sorry and not just a goddamned politician he can put his money where his mouth is and join the <Glen Canyon, ()> Institution. 

Steiger: But what you got from him then was, "Sorry, this is happening." 

Lee: Oh, "<Arizona, ()> needs this water," and "this is for silt control of <Lake Mead, ()>," and all that. As if I gave a damn about silt control in <Lake Mead, ()>! So (sigh) yes, I wrote very logically as well as very emotionally, because that's the way it is, you know. By that time I was involved with that Canyon, and it didn't take long to get involved with it, but it took a long time to understand that it was really going to go, 'cause I have in my notes, you know.... Hold on. Stop that thing again. (tape paused) This is 1954, July 12, 1954, the last day of that first <Glen Canyon, ()> trip. "We stopped at the dam site, Mile 15 above <Lee's Ferry, ()>. I go and look into the beginnings of a diversion tunnel. My God, Arth Chaffin is right! These fuckers are serious. Purblind, we refuse to believe, because downstream in Marble Canyon, they'd been monkeying around, testing, drilling, marking up the walls, running an elevator on cables up and down the walls for several years, and nothing's happened. Jim showed us all that Bureau mess in the power boat run, and Tad had even been up the elevator cage the year before. Now it's all abandoned. Through binoculars we see three lone figures high on the rim opposite <Sentinel Rock, ()> -survey party, tripod and plane table. They called to us and some called back -not me. We note inscriptions on the rock by the dam site from other river rats who are livid about its possible construction. I got some hot things to add, but Frank says no. There's no way anyone on our trip would have answered the Bur-wreckers if we still hadn't been certain by law that nothing could destroy our <Glen Canyon, ()>, nothing as unspeakable as a dam, even with such dumbfounding evidence before our eyes. Interesting word, dumbfounding. Dumber than dumb it found us. But I was starting to panic. I had just found a place on earth that could save my life, and some black-handed bureaucracy was already clawing to take it away from me." 

Steiger: Now, why is it you thought that place would save your life? Or why did it? 

Lee: I've already told you why. I've already explained that before, the fact that I, in the business that I am in, daily in front of people, up there, trying to find out, you know, as an actress -an actress is an actress, an actress is an actress -they act all the time, and half the time they don't know who the hell they are, and they need to get away and be in a spot -preferably nature, as far as I'm concerned, because I had felt that before. I was born and raised, I told you, outdoors, spent all my time out there in the rivers in <Sabino Canyon, ()>. Every weekend I was in Sabino Canyon, playing in the water, running down the streams, swimming up the streams -everything. And that's the kind of place that I knew that I had to have in order to survive. So I found that place, and it was a big Sabino Canyon, let me tell you. It needed to be, my <Sabino Canyon, ()> was long gone -as is everything. 

Steiger: This is near <Tucson, ()>? 

Lee: Yeah, that's just in the <Catalina Mountains, ()>, outside of <Tucson, ()>. 

Steiger: So they were already monkeying around in there. 

Lee: They were already monkeying around. Then the following year -not the following year, but we stopped at the dam site again.... Hold it again 'til I find it, because there's no point in wasting tape. 

Steiger: Actually, you know what we ought to talk about -I want to get this on tape -I don't think, it may not be clear to somebody that's just reading this interview, that you're quoting from a book that you're working on that's about all this. So just for the sake of history, that's what's going on. And the title of this book is? 

Lee: All My Rivers Are Gone. 

Steiger: And there was the other title that we mentioned. 

Lee: Well, that's a subtitle, more or less. It's something I'm going to use inside the book, probably, in the chapter headings, "Getting in Step with the Stone." But, okay, you've got that. Let me find this other second time. (tape paused) This little part here is on the first "we three" trip, and I'm reading, again, from All My Rivers....

"Way in the distance, in the southeast distance where the mountain snuggles into its foothills, there's a Navajo hogan. Down in the stream, snaky narrows are rocks like those I saw in <Twilight Canyon, ()> across the way. Huge baked-potato-looking ankle-breakers, and I wonder why on earth that these boulders, acting as crushers in a mad flash flood haven't rammed through this thin buttress to the river. The answer's right in front of me -time -in time, it will. Here come the tears again. Fuck these animals who want to inundate everything! All this purity put to rest under putrid, still water. Don't they realize spots like this are disappearing from the earth at an alarming rate?! Sure they do! They just got shit for brains. What's a few hundred miles of sandstone to a politician? I've tried not to let these thoughts rain on my parade, tried to soak up every sight, sound, smell, and emotion, like a blotter, and keep them forever in my vision and my heart as protection against the drought of spirit, against the storms that batter my soul. But each day, as the threshold of earth's awesome beauty and power move higher in my sight, more frightening is the knowledge that my own species, and only mine, has in the past, can and will in the future, eradicate whatever it chooses, for whatever reasons it dreams up, followed by the most bitter, bottom-of-the-barrel thought of all, What if this Canyon really is victimized and I can never come to this blessed shelter again?" That explains it pretty much, doesn't it? 

Steiger: Yeah, pretty much. This is right out of your journal? 

Lee: That's right. 

Steiger: Written on the spot. 

Lee: Here's another wonderful thing. "Under the slap of my bare feet...." No, wait, let's go back. "I remove my tennies, the sandstone is warm. On the surface are thin ridges of orange and buff, rose and mauve, layered close together, tilted so they butt into each other at odd angles -cross-bedding, it's called -something the wind and water did eons ago, leaving the story here to be told in stone. Yes, I have been preceded -here's a chip, flaked from an arrowhead or knife, and another, and a large piece of chert from which the artifact emerged, perhaps. They were everywhere here, the Old Ones, who were young ones then. I can hope, but seriously doubt, that the Great Mother Earth will be wiped as clean of us as she has been of them. For now, I will put my feet where they put theirs, minus the few millimeters blown or washed away.

"Under the slap of my bare feet the tone in the stone changes. A set of drums lies concealed beneath a bulge or bubble in the thin layer, not yet broken through by wind or weather. Fascinated, I stoop and tap these places with my hands. Each sends back a different note. Completely entranced, I sit for a long time, laugh aloud, and play a melodic rhythm on my earth stone drums. Who would believe there is music in sandstone?" That's just another one of the little magic things that place had -just another, one of the 5,000. 

Steiger: So this "we three" trip, the first one, you didn't even see anybody else? 

Lee: No, not another soul, the whole time we were on the river. That was from September something 'til October 4 or 5. I think it says there. 

Steiger: Yeah, September 24-October 4, 1955. 

Lee: Yeah, that's when. 

Steiger: Well, we gotta cover some ground here. I guess we are gonna have to do another session, I'm sure. We didn't talk about Ed Abbey [phonetic spelling], we haven't talked about.... 

Lee: Oh, that's right, we haven't talked about Ed, but he hasn't done the river. 

Steiger: He didn't have that much to do with it? 

Lee: He only went once, as far as I know, according to what I just read. I took some notes while I was reading Confessions of a Barbarian, and he first looked at it, he first saw it in '50.... 

Steiger: This is <Glen Canyon, ()> we're talking about. 

Lee: Yeah, he first saw <Glen Canyon, ()> or crossed over there at the Ferry, I think it was '57 or '8. No, '56? I don't know. Anyway, he didn't run it 'til '59. 

Steiger: Okay, another gap. You guys are down here, the Bureau is messing around. Okay, they got a diversion tunnel that they're screwin' around with, but you didn't believe that it would be possible that they could be that stupid. 

Lee: No. 

Steiger: What happened, then, along the way? 

Lee: Big fights along the way. The second reason we didn't think it could happen, because of the law, that they couldn't. 

Steiger: The national monument. 

Lee: National monument. They were going to inundate a national monument -they couldn't do that. So we were, you know, we didn't know it, but we were just grabbin' at straws. We were all people [who were] not politically-minded. Hell, I never even joined the Sierra Club until after David Brower saved <Grand Canyon, ()>. And I never blamed David for Glen -he blames himself. When I talked to him two weeks ago I said, "I was not one of those that blame you for inundating Glen. There's just so much one man can do, David, and the Wreck the Nation Bureau was going to build a dam, whether you liked it or anybody liked it or not. It was just a matter of where it was going to be." 

Steiger: I tell ya', that's the sense that I get. 

Lee: And that is for sure, they were gonna do it. Nobody would have stopped 'em. 

Steiger: That's the sense I get. And I don't know, but my sense is that it was 'cause of the politics of water. 

Lee: That's exactly right. 

Steiger: And no other reason. 

Lee: No other reason. It was politics of that damned upper and lower basin storage project. That's what it was about. 

Steiger: They were going to have their faucet. 

Lee: They wanted their water faucet, and boy, have they got it. It evaporates, billions of gallons a day. Goody, goody. And the rest of it sinks into God knows where. 

Steiger: And they can't exactly suck <Lake Powell, ()> back upstream to use it, either. (chuckles) 

Lee: Nope, that's what I said. Life magazine came out with this stupid article about how they were going to irrigate, you know, with all this water. And I'm lookin' at fifty miles of sandstone on both sides of the river, and I'm about to tear that magazine in 14,000 pieces and stuff it up 'em, because I've never heard of anything quite as stupid as that. They were gonna irrigate on.... Well, I wrote a silly little poem about it. In fact, I was into writing bad poetry at the time, because that was the only way I could express myself. I couldn't even sing it! 

Steiger: You're doin' a pretty good job in your journal there. 

Lee: Well, the poems are lousy, but they say it from the heart. You know, that's all I can tell ya'. I know bad poetry when I read it, but it was published, some of it. 

Steiger: But to go back to <Glen Canyon, ()>.... Well, I don't know, maybe we should.... Do you want to (chuckles) read one of those poems? 

Lee: You don't want me to read one. 

Steiger: Only if you want to. 

Lee: I don't mind reading bad poetry, as long as everybody knows I know it's bad. Here it is, I can read you one. 

Steiger: As long as it's ________________. 

Lee: Oh, God, no, no, no, no. This poem was written in 1955, in November after I got off of this trip. "The River to the Dam Builders. You silenced me, you've cut my chattering string. Are you glad that I no longer sing? Are you proud now in my millionth year, proud to see my journey's end so near? And when you've covered o'er my secret carvings back beyond, will you feel might at having laid my restless waters still? I'm sure you will. You never knew, nor took the time to find what strange and wondrous scenes I left behind, nor felt the blanket pressure of the stars hold you against the warmth of my sandbars. My deep and winding crevices you've never climbed with pounding heart, to turn and down the fluted sides in wonder, let a tear fall through. Oh no, not you. You have no tears, you've dollar signs for eyes. Not one of nature's wonders made you wise. Your only thought was how to cloak the facts, 'Which man can we buy? Who'll get the fat contracts?' I like to flip my stream that day I saw my face in Life. You showed me growing corn on rocks where even God had never tried. Again, you lied. Only a few who stood with me alone in the twilight bottom of a bowl of stone, only those who followed me in wild elation will feel each drowning inch of suffocation. To them I leave a gift you dam-builders can't comprehend. The music of my river's soul, that can be heard by them alone, my songs in stone."

So that's it. I was pissed, and that's what I said. 

Steiger: Well, there's a lot of water under the bridge since then, huh? 

Lee: A whole lot. But, my conscience is clear. I have never, ever backed up. 

Steiger: You never backed up. And there's another thing that we didn't cover here.... 

Lee: True to the river, all the way. 

Steiger: Okay, you did the trip with the Rigg brothers in the power boat, and then you decided you didn't want to go on another motor. 

Lee: That's right. 

Steiger: Did you decide right then and there, or was it after you went on a rowing trip? 

Lee: No, after. I knew that as soon as I got in the rowing.... I knew as soon as I was finished with the power boat run, that I wanted to really go in the cat boats, because actually, Jim had said that. He said, "You're going to like the cat boats a lot better. We don't have this noise, and we don't have this smell. We're doing this just to see if we can't make a little bit more, you know, make it a little bit more commercial in order to make a few bucks." And he said, "You know, we want to try it, see if it works anyway." And it didn't, really. And Frank knew that. I mean, he was much more practical-minded than Jim, even though they were partners in the business. 

Steiger: Why didn't it work? Just because the numbers still didn't pencil out? 

Lee: Yeah, the numbers still didn't pan out. You can only get four people in that boat comfortably, with all their gear and stuff, and the food for eight days. And it was a fast trip like that. So Jim said -and I couldn't wait. You know, I really wanted to get in those cat boats, because down there, you know, you're fish-eyein', man, you are six inches from the surface of the water, and you really get to feel what that water's all about. It doesn't slop around! You rowed it, but you didn't know how to row it, so you didn't think it was all that.... 

Steiger: I didn't think it was as cool as a dory. 

Lee: (chuckles) I rode in that dory, and thank you a lot, I can get seasick in those suckers! (sings queasily) Rock-a-bye baby. 

Steiger: But the light didn't go on for the Rigg brothers: here's Georgie right next to 'em there with these inflatables and everything, and they never considered using inflatables? 

Lee: I don't know if they did. I don't think so. They hated the look and the smell and everything about 'em. They just didn't fit in <the Canyon, ()>. I mean (loudly) they're ugly, man! Hideous -especially if they're painted silver and got "WHite" written across 'em. 

Steiger: Or whatever else. 

Lee: (laughing) Oh gees, awful!

I have something to say before we get out of here. You know, that thing I was saying to you about talk covers up what Nature has to say, and that's why it's so nice to go with just a few people or three people that know when to shut up, than people that don't. But as I told you -these are just notes that I wrote down -but I've already said this.... [a few seconds blank tape about 21 min. into this side of tape (Tr.)] 

Steiger: Okay, this is Tape 2, River Runners Oral History Project. This is an interview with Katie Lee, in <Jerome Arizona, ()>, December 1, 1996. This is Lew Steiger here, and this is #2, DAT tape #2. We're goin' into the second two-hour tape here. Okay, we're back in business. 

Lee: Okay. "Down below about a mile is the horrible scar on the wall." This is 1955, and the date is October 13, on a Saturday. "The machinery and the crap that it takes to stop the water flow of centuries. At <Sentinel Rock, ()> the bloody business of the beginning of the dam is evident. They have WHite lead paint marks all over the walls." I'm sorry, this is 1956, October. "They have WHite lead paint marks all over the walls, have had for several miles upstream and below the site itself. This is Saturday afternoon, so even if they are working on it, which they are, the men will all be in <Kanab, ()>, stoned to the gills, lapping up beer and bourbon. Pardon me -whiskey. A big gaudy sign, which is an infringement on the constitutional rights of American citizens, since this is a navigable river, blasts, 'Warning! No travel beyond this point to <Lee's Ferry, ()>. Blasting on canyon walls is dangerous to boat travel.' It'll be a hot day in mid-December before I can read. 'They,' speaking of the dear Wreck the Nation Bureau, have provided no exit road, and that is the constitutional right: we either go through whether they like it or not, or they provide the road. Too bad more people don't know this, but the Bureau chooses to keep them ignorant. The people are stupid enough to believe what they read in the papers, especially when it says, 'Today the Department of the Interior curtailed boat travel on the <Colorado River, ()> between...' and so forth and so forth on far into the night. If I had had the time, and if it would have done any good, I'd have covered the whole sign over with mud. Frank went up <Wahweap Creek, ()> for a few hundred yards to see if they had brought the road down to the river. He said there was a road there, and a power wagon, but that it wasn't very good as roads go. We went on down a mile below. Little men were crawling all over the walls, from the top via little rope chairs -all alien, and all silent and busy, marking the walls for blasts. Tomorrow -no, Monday -President Eisenhower presses a button in <Washington, ()> and the first blast falls off the wall to begin construction officially. Must have it official, by all means! A cable crosses <the Canyon, ()> at the top, bold WHite numbers splattered all over the desert varnish, a fly-speck trail of them down both walls where the abutments will eventually go. Oh, how I wish I had a million tons of dynamite! Boats dot the shore, flags, survey equipment, tools, and hieroglyphics [pronounced hydro-glyphics] peculiar to those who know about drilling diversion tunnels into walls, to fool rivers into escape tunnels, while they silently and [slyly?] build up a wall in front of his path to hold him back for the power they think he'll produce for them, at a cost ridiculous, and a reason nameless, except to those few who will line their purses with the money from the mighty contracts.

"Back to the boat and down our river. I cannot hold back the tears of anger and resentment, of the wrongdoing, when there is a right way. I know what they are destroying, they don't care! I cannot fight harder, I haven't the money to buy the dynamite, and that would be the wrong way anyway. Even though it would be the only way to fight rotten politics, I haven't the strength alone to shout the truth, nor the means for it to be heard. I would be named a queer type of eccentric. At this point I can only hate those who set it in motion, write my songs of protest to let a few see and hear, and pity the man to whom the almighty buck means more than great Nature's beauty, wonder, and spiritual elevation. Our language will never intertwine, our semantics will remain a barrier forever, and for that I am glad." 

Steiger: And that's dated when? 

Lee: October 13, Saturday. And they blasted it October 15, on a Monday. They tore the first piece of wall down. And that's 1956, not '55. 

Steiger: Looking back on that, if you'd have known then what you know now, do you think there was any stopping that thing? I guess we just talked about that. It seems like you guys were battling overwhelming odds. 

Lee: Oh! The odds were so ridiculous that.... Well, there were no odds. You know, 1 in 2,000. There were no odds, we had no way to publicize any of this. Sierra Club was the only one that could get any message out at all, and the Sierra Club had no membership then. What, 50,000 people, maybe, or less. 

Steiger: My understanding is that they signed off on <Glen Canyon, ()> in order to stop the damming that was going to be in <Lodore, ()>. 

Lee: To be up in <Dinosaur National Monument, ()>. That is true, that's what happened. But then, again, if they hadn't done that, then there'd been the dam in <Dinosaur, ()>. I wish to God there had been, but then what they were trying to keep from happening was breaking this precedent no flooding of National Monuments, because that meant they would come along -knowing the Wreck the Nation Bureau and that asshole Dominy. I mean, he'd have gone to every place in the world where there was a national monument, just to see it covered up, just to show 'em he could do it. He's an arrogant asshole -truly arrogant. He actually said to our friend, the fellow that's starting this Glen Canyon Institute, the meeting I went to.... 

Steiger: Is that _____________? Or not Brower? 

Lee: No, his name is Richard Ingebretsen. And after he'd done that interview, Dominy and.... 

Steiger: The debate? 

Lee: The debate, Dominy and Brower.... 

Steiger: Boy, I'd like to see a transcript of that! 

Lee: Oh, God! After they'd done that -I saw a little piece of it, they showed it -and he said, "You know, I asked him if he'd ever made the statement -'cause I'd heard Dominy say that he was glad, he was happy, and he couldn't wait to get <Glen Canyon, ()> drowned. He said, 'Did you actually say that?!' And Dominy answered him and said, 'I couldn't wait. It made me so happy I used to fly over it and imagine the water, just covering up everything.'" That's the kind of prick we were dealing with, he was the big knob then. The Bureau, you know, was scared to death of him. If they'd known what they know now, you know.... Well, they knew about it, but they just ... kept their mouths shut, and let him hoe the row, which he did. 

Steiger: It's kind of funny that a character like that would flourish at a time like that when everything was supposed to have been so prim and proper. 

Lee: Well, they didn't really go out and publicize his actions, his bedroom escapades. You know, they were trying to keep it as quiet as they could, because they bloody well knew.... Here this guy's the head of the thing. You know, they don't want to publicize that fact. We're not really in the Victorian age, but we're not very far from it. We're back to it now, I notice. 

Steiger: Just for the historical sense, what we're talking about is Dominy was a notorious womanizer. 

Lee: Yes, he sure was. 

Steiger: To an extreme, apparently, during the time that he was the head of the Bureau. 

Lee: Well, yes, he was very, to extreme. 

Steiger: Way over the top. 

Lee: Way over the top. Had to have women stationed for him, wherever he went, so I hear. 

Steiger: But in terms of the population.... 

Lee: God, if I'd known that, I'd have gotten him off and cut it off for him! Jesus, if I'd known about that, I could have done something. I was cute then. 

Steiger: You're still cute. 

Lee: (laughing) I'm not cute! There's lots of people think I'm just a wicked old hag. I certainly want them to think so, I'm going to go down with that reputation. 

Steiger: I don't know. 

Lee: It's causing me lots of trouble trying to keep it up. 

Steiger: But in terms of the population at large out there, what was going on there? People didn't know, didn't care? 

Lee: No! Did not know. The Bureau didn't publicize this stuff, and what they did publish is their typical scam, the stuff that they.... "Oh, you're going to have all this water, you're going to have all this water, you're going to have all these recreation areas. Look, the population is going to increase, and everybody's going to want these things, and we're going to get them right there and it's going to be ready for you! Yipee! And for you kids!" [And so on and so on.] Shit! 

Steiger: Well, there it all is. 

Lee: There it all is. Sure. But we did not have any numbers to battle this. And another reason I wrote these articles was to try to get people involved, to let them know. Go down that canyon and see -you won't want it dammed. Because the minute we got people on the river, we talked their ears off. 

Steiger: Well, now you who have seen all these changes, ever since 1919, where the hell do you see us goin' at this point in the game? (Lee laughs) Where do we go from here? 

Lee: Lew, forget it, you're doomed. There's no way. I'm just glad I'm going to be checking out. Way back, way, way back, long before I even left <Hollywood, ()>, I said, "You know, what's wrong with this country is there are too fuckin' many of us." And that's the bottom line, there are too many of us. And every day it gets more like rats in a cage. And you know what rats in a cage do: (emphasizing each word) they eat each other. And that's what's happening all over the world, and it's only gonna get worse, because there are too many people too stupid to do anything about it. And our gene level of intelligence -there's more people playing around in the shallow end of the gene pool (laughter) than any other end! Smart people aren't getting it, and we don't cultivate it, we don't. We don't cultivate intelligence. If you're smart, you'd better go hide, because somebody's going to have your ass, one way or another. Some crooked, lame-brained, crafty human being will get you in the end. So I'm an ostrich: I go hike, do my hikes, don't go near the <Grand Canyon, ()>. Don't go near the <Grand Canyon, ()>, don't go near any national parks -go find my little secret canyons to hike in still. 

Steiger: Now let's see here. When the dam closed.... 

Lee: It closed on January 21, 1963. _____, I'm sorry. I ran it in October or September of '62. 

Steiger: And never went again. 

Lee: Well, no, never went on the river again -there was no river to go on. I went back on Res. Foul, on Cess- Foul, <Utah, ()>'s Urinal, <Arizona, ()>'s Piss Pot. Yes, I went back, in a boat called Screwdriver, but it had a space between the "d" and the "r." (chuckles) 

Steiger: Let's see, I wonder who named that boat? 

Lee: My boat. It was a little runabout ski boat, had a little 75 [horsepower] Johnson motor on the back of it, and I went back and tortured myself four or five times, maybe more -'til it reached <Hite, ()> [or <Hite, ()>?] -the <Hite, ()>, not that thing they call <Hite, ()> now. <Hite, ()> is eleven, thirteen miles downstream, the real <Hite, ()>, underwater. Yeah, I went back. But Frank and Tad wouldn't go with me. I had to get other people. Leo went with me. He went with us on the last <Glen Canyon, ()> run: Bruce, myself, Leo Water, and me, and Natalie, a friend of mine from <Aspen, ()>. 

Steiger: Frank and Tad didn't want to -they just didn't want to go see it. 

Lee: They didn't want to go with me and watch me fall apart. 

Steiger: And have to put up with it, yeah. 

Lee: They were smarter than I thought. Frank finally did, because he took over the marina at Hall's Crossing, and that did something to him too, it really did. But he had a family to support, and he had a wife and six kids. He had to make a living, and that was it. He had had one of the best trips on the river -certainly one of the finest, most elite, and one that people got the most out of. His people never quit writing to him, until they died -his runners, the people that ran with him. 

Steiger: Now, you just went to <Salt Lake, ()>. Tell us a little bit about what that was all about. 

Lee: Well, there is this young man up there who has a little river company. He runs on the <Green River, ()>, down from <Green River, ()> and then back up through <Moab, ()>. He takes disabled and disturbed children on trips like that, and gives them some little taste of the canyon. That's how he got involved in it, and he just.... He's a doctor, he's a professor, he teaches a couple of courses at the University of Utah. His name is Richard Ingebretsen, I N G E B R E T S E N I think is the way -or Ingbretsen, without the "E." I'll tell you later. Anyway, he formed this group called the <Glen Canyon, ()> Institute, which is interested in legally getting rid of <Glen Canyon, ()> Dam. And every day he gets a few more followers. There were 2,000 students in that auditorium, and I never thought I was going to- at seventy-seven years old, get up and bridge the generation gap. Those kids almost went crazy when they heard the Wreck the Nation Bureau song, and the other one, Poor Colly Raddy, that I sang for them. They were ready to just get up there. They screamed and yelled and stomped -the whole thing! They were really into it. And they listened to David Brower talk, and David's idea is that they just open those bloody tunnels, and let the river do it's job -again. That's what the tunnels were there for, the river was running through them before they put the dam in. And all they need to do is open them. Drain the bloody reservoir, and let the canyon heal. There are 125, maybe more, canyons from <Hite, ()> to <Lee's Ferry, ()>. All of 'em had grottos, water, running streams, fascinating, beautiful, heavenly, incredible places. Some of 'em were tiny little fluted canyons. And that's another thing: If I get the guy that started calling those things "slots".... Slots, you know, you got those in <Las Vegas, ()> -lots of 'em, they're machines. Those canyons had far too much character to ever be called slots. What I call 'em -and I call 'em a lot of names -I call 'em fluted canyons, I call 'em crevices, I call 'em.... Mostly, they're just erotic sinuosities. They are fantastic. You can go along each wall and touch, and each wall is curves. You can feel the next curve and the next curve. Slots they are not. 

Steiger: If they did open up the dam.... 

Lee: Then the reservoir.... The canyon itself would be a total disaster -for a while. But look what Nature does. In about a hundred years, that place would be all washed out again, be right back where it belonged. They'd even get rid of the batteries that have been dumped overboard, all the other crap that everybody in their houseboats and stuff throws into the river. You know, 66,000 second feet really takes care of a lot of garbage. And then it would start eating away at the dam too. That dam is so weak on its right side, and they came so close to losing it. I was down on my knees praying. I don't pray -but I prayed that day. 

Steiger: In '83? 

Lee: In '83. I don't pray to any -I pray to the river god, and I was asking the river god, "Please get it on, man, and dump that son of a bitch, get rid of it." 

Steiger: Well, what I don't understand is, okay, if sediment control is a big issue -which it was, for <Lake Mead, ()>. I mean, if you build a dam in <Glen Canyon, ()>, do they think that that's not going to silt up as fast as <Lake Mead, ()> or something? Is there more area? Or what was the theory on that? 

Lee: Much more area. Did you notice anything wrong with the silt control? <Grand Canyon, ()> didn't need any silt control -that's what builds beaches, that's why you guys don't have any, all your beaches are behind the dam, and that's where they're gonna stay until you let the silt go again. It may be a mess for a few days or a few weeks, or maybe a year or ten years, who knows or cares?! In the end, it will take care of it. And the other dam, hundreds and hundreds of miles upstream, didn't dump that much sediment in the first place. Most of the sediment comes out of Glen. 

Steiger: Oh really? 

Lee: Well, it's all sandstone! 

Steiger: Just run off through those canyons and on down the tubes. 

Lee: Yeah, right. Down to, you know, Res. Mead -let it silt up. Who cares? It's gonna do it anyway, after a while. 

Steiger: I don't know, you know I'm one of these conservative ones. 

Lee: I know, you're just a redneck conservative, like your dad. Damned Republicans! You drive me nuts. 

Steiger: No, I'm just trying to get my mind around... (laughter) You know, I mean, I'm trying to get my mind around it where I can say with a straight face, "Alright, you guys take <Glen Canyon Dam, ()> down." 

Lee: And you can't do that? Doesn't it make sense to you? 

Steiger: It's not that it doesn't make sense, it's that you look at all the stuff that's in motion: I look at the town of <Page, ()>, I look at <Lake Powell, ()>, I look at all that stuff. 

Lee: I looked at that rock before that goddamn town was there, and let me tell you something, they covered up 500 temples, churches, music temples, places that were so much -you know, not man-constructed goddamn church row.... Every time I see that, I think of what they covered up, and put these stinkin' little churches all in a row down there at <Page, ()>, when there it was, 165 miles of God's creations in forms of churches, alcoves, more alcoves, bridges, you name it, it was all there. But no, they had to build their puny little pissy little churches, the Baptists and [on and on]. What a bunch of shit. What a bunch of shit. So you can take <Page, ()> and you can throw it right into the dam as far as I'm concerned. Big deal! Look at <Boulder City, ()>. It's been sittin' there for years and years and years. I doubt if it's grown an inch, but people still use <Lake Mead, ()>, Res. Mead. And that's where all the people on the houseboats on Res. Foul should go, the sooner they go, the better. Let 'em walk, get out and take a hike. Now, I'm seventy-seven years old, and I am never gonna say to anybody, (whining) "Well, I want you to put a bridge there so that I can go in my wheelchair across it," because I got off of my ass and did what I was supposed to do, when I was supposed to do it, and I'll do it until I can't do it anymore, and then I ain't gonna bitch about it. And I only had one kid, so I didn't overpopulate the world, and I ain't no Mormon. But the bottom line is, there's too many of us. 

Steiger: Yeah, I'm right with you on that one. I wonder what to do about it though. 

Lee: Well, you're doin' a great job about it -nothin'! (laughs) I mean, at least you're not adding ten or fifteen more kids to it. 

Steiger: I swear to God, I try to work this in: here's this vision of you tryin' to say to everybody, "Wait, wait, we gotta slow this down, we've got too many people here." And it's like, you know, are you gonna spend your life doin' that? It's almost like it's so.... It's something that- it's like, out of any one person's hands. 

Lee: Not anybody's hands. Nature, she's gonna wipe it out. She's gonna give us all these great diseases -you guys can have 'em, I don't need 'em. But it'll come to that, yeah. It'll come to epidemic proportions, because we ain't got the balls to get it together -no way. 

Steiger: Balls or whatever. I mean, how do you stop this big old freight train? How do you stop 'em? I look at the numbers.... 

Lee: Well, you get a few politicians in there that lay down some laws that say -you know, like the Chinese did. (with anxiety) "But oh, that's not a democracy!" It's not? Well, you ain't gonna have a democracy in about another fifty years -not when there's that many more people here. We're all gonna be chewin' each other up. 

Steiger: That's about how much time there is. 

Lee: That's about how much time you got. 

Steiger: Well, in 1919, when they made <Grand Canyon National Park, ()>, they started counting, 44,000 people visited them on the rim. I think before this century's out, they're lookin' at 5 million. 

Lee: At least, and they're now startin' to pay, five dollars a day, everybody who sets foot in it. Good. 

Steiger: And you guys didn't have to pay before. 

Lee: Oh, no. I don't go anywhere I have to pay anybody anything. If I got on the <San Juan, ()> River tomorrow, decided I wanted to run it, I would look at everybody there and tell 'em to go fuck themselves, that I was here before they were, and that I'm goin' down the river. (emphasizing each word) Kiss my ass. And I'll bet you something -they would not stop me. 

Steiger: If they were smart, they wouldn't even try! (laughter) 

Lee: But I ain't gonna do it, because I don't want to run the river again. Poor old <San Juan, ()>. 

Steiger: I hate to think of you sittin' around with no place to go now, and I wouldn't suppose you'd say where they were, even if you had some secret spots left. 

Lee: No, I sure won't. No, I've got some nice little places, and I do not tell nobody where they are. They do fine.

Another thing I object to, I want to tell you about when Kent and I did WHite Canyon, the Narrows. A couple of months ago Joey and I took a little trip up, and we stopped at Frye Canyon, and they've got that place open again, and they've got a motel now and they've got some kids there taking care of it. Actually, they live in <Monticello, ()>, but he's got a manager there, somebody taking care of the place. And they sell gas again, and groceries, and make meals. I was talking to one of the kids there, and they said, "Where you goin'?" I said, "I'm just going over there somewhere, maybe. I don't know where I'm going." And he said, "Have you ever been to the <Black Hole, ()>?" And I said, "<Black Hole, ()>? I've been in this country, let me see, since 1954, and I was down this highway when it was nothing but a trail into Farley Canyon, and I never heard of the <Black Hole, ()>." He said, "It's down there in WHite Canyon." And I said, "Are you talking about WHite Canyon Narrows? About like ten miles from here, where it starts, down to the bridge? Is that what you're talking about?" "Yeah, that's the <Black Hole, ()>." I said, "Son of a bitch." That's one of the most incredibly beautiful, mysterious, gorgeous, life-sucking places that ever existed. I said, "I nearly died in there, but I don't call it no black hole, sonny." 

Steiger: He said, (meekly) "oh." 

Lee: "When did you do it?" I told him, "1955, '56." "What?!" I said, "Yes, and it was running full of water when I did it. "It was?!" I said, "Oh, you kids are such dummies. You just really don't know where it's at, do you?" 

Steiger: Well, you never do, that's the thing. You know, you get what you.... I look at my nephew.... 

Lee: The <Black Hole, ()>! 

Steiger: Well, you look at what these kids start out with, you know, accepting, and all these people that are coming out here from <California, ()> or wherever they're coming from.... (

Lee: Wherever.) You know, I mean, this looks good to them. 

Lee: Now that part, you see, I'm with you, redneck as you are. Well, I'm protective about my places. I tried that with <Glen Canyon, ()>, but you can see what happened to it. 

Steiger: I wonder what a good river guide ought to do. It's interesting. I mean, you said you did a few commercial trips and you were out there publicizing all this stuff and then one day you decided to just quit. 

Lee: I woke up real quick, compared to a lot of people. 

Steiger: Yeah, I wonder what we're to make of that. 

Lee: I don't know what you're gonna do with it, because everything is now, you know, just totally and completely commercial. I don't know. I do not know. I'm supposing that there's people out there, like Frank Wright, who have families to support, and have nothing else to do, and don't know what else to do, and can't do anything else maybe. Frank could have done anything he wanted. Frank's a mechanic, he was a music teacher, he taught music in school, he was a mechanic -a good mechanic, one of the best, still has his shop. He and his brother, they fixed everything: automobiles, anything, make angle irons, do anything. He had a shop. So he could have, but he wasn't making a whole lot of money. Not that he had to, living in bland <Blanding, ()>, little ingrown town, which hasn't changed, really -maybe have a few more buildings, but that's about it. Nobody there has altered in the last 200 years. 

Steiger: Well, maybe there's something to be said for that. 

Lee: Well, he likes it. It keeps him from having to, you know, make any decisions or anything. He doesn't have to deal with the real world at all. And I've sort of set it up for myself that I don't have to either, but I worked 'til just a few years ago. 

Steiger: You're pretty well set here, this is a pretty good little old hidey-hole right here. 

Lee: Yes, but you know, the older we get, the more pissed we get with stuff like traffic increases and motorcycles and stuff like that: noise makers. You know, when you're really into loving silence, why, go to <Baja, ()> for a couple of months, because at least I can go down there and think clearly. It's not, in any sense of the word, it's no <Glen Canyon, ()>, but it is a nice, quiet, beautiful beach and we can watch the ocean, and it's water. Water and I have a thing -not particularly salt water, I'm scared to death of the ocean. 

Steiger: You get out there very far, you can't quite swim to shore, can you? 

Lee: Well, no, you can't. And the river will take you, man, take you someplace always. 

Steiger: Well, I guess we're.... Hell, we're gonna have to do another session. 

Lee: Well, if you need any more, you'd probably better. 

Steiger: Well, I think we got.... 

Lee: You may have all you need. 

Steiger: We certainly have.... I don't know, you tell me. What are we forgettin'? 

Lee: I don't know. I think that the part of the river is about the river -not me and my experiences with ... you know, with <New York, ()> and stuff like that, and then coming back and doing ten years on the road and all that. I don't think that's important. But what's important, as far as I can see, is having that place, always, in the back of my mind. I can get there, and when I really needed it, I could be where I had to be, in order to get cleaned out.

And of course you know we've become slaves to places like that, and you fall in love and you're at the mercy of. And I was certainly at the mercy of that river, after the first two trips. Couldn't do a thing about it. I just knew that I had to have that to keep in balance, because there couldn't be two more opposite things. You know, an actress, all duded up, all a-glitter, knowing all the smart phrases, doin' the whole protective act, keepin' the men off her back -except the ones she wanted to screw -and then the opposite side, pure nature, stripped down. The most necessary thing, you just can't be with nature unless you just go there empty. And that was always my feeling. I did that when I was way back in <Arizona, ()> when I was living in <Tucson, ()>, going to <Sabino Canyon, ()> on the weekends. First time I got to my hidey-hole pool, off came everything, and there I was. I like to feel the wind and the rain and the earth and the sand on my bod -I don't want clothes on. (battery change) Okay, this is a page for people who are up so bloody damn tight about their bodies, about nudity. I feel so sorry for them. Jesus. This is a page out of All My Rivers Are Gone. "My parents never made me feel shame about my naked body. They were not nudists in any sense of the word, but neither did they make something rare, unusual, or unhealthy of my brother or me seeing them nude, or they us. Up through my teens, most of the time we lived in the country, where I could go about uncovered during the heat of the desert summer, without offending anyone, or creating a spectacle. I spent my free time in the canyons of the <Catalina Mountains, ()> outside <Tucson, ()>, in private nooks, far from hiking trails and the eyes of the curious, where I swam free, bare, naked, tout ensemble, buck ass nude, birthday suited in the altogether. There I learned, as I suspected long before, that if I cared to feel nature's pulse, be heir to her gracious gifts, I needed to go unencumbered to her living streams and rivers. When propriety forced me to be clothed in those waters, I actually felt unnatural, or shamed, as they say Eve felt when what's-his-name pointed to her pudenda, making the poor thing self conscious, along with her boyfriend. As for me, I didn't always grab for a leaf when a boyfriend -mine or someone else's -entered those waters. Because of this holistic attitude, I've been a magnet for many names, from obscure, as well as familiar sources. They'll say I'm a nudist, a show-off, or an exhibitionist. I'm immodest, a heathen, a pagan -I like that one -indecent, risqué, and host of others. All of the above are in the eyes of the beholder, and have nothing whatever to do with me -except pagan, that's true." 

Steiger: Thank you for that. That was worth getting. 

Lee: Now you know why there's nude pictures in.... 



