Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

Don Neff Interview

Interview number: 53.36



[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A] 

This is the River Runners Oral History Project. This is Lew Steiger. I'm in <Salt Lake City, ()> at the home of Don Neff. It's October 13, 1998, and we're watchin' an old movie of a Mexican Hat Expeditions trip that Don did, and I'm just rollin' this because he keeps talkin' and sayin' great stuff that I want to record. So that's what's happenin' right now. 



Neff: You'd be crucified if you did that today. There's no wood, the wood's already gone. 

Steiger: You were sayin' there was a pile of driftwood that blocked the mouth of <Shinumo Creek, ()>? 

Neff: Yeah, it blocked the mouth of <Shinumo Creek, ()> right up near the waterfall, the one we know now. And we burned that out. I didn't, actually -the old guys did. 

Steiger: But they burned driftwood as a matter of course, all the time. 

Neff: Yeah, it was a nuisance -especially at <Unkar, ()> and -well, all over the place, really. Tons of it! Tons of it! And you can still see remnants of those at Tanner today, on the left-hand side. Up there, you know? 

(Steiger: Uh-huh.) 

Neff: This is a record they used to leave. Mexican Hat Expeditions used to leave their inscriptions at <Nankoweap, ()>. That's at <Nankoweap, ()>. 

Steiger: Carved on a piece of wood there. 

Neff: Yeah. And it stayed there for about ten years, and then I think Gay [Staveley] took it down when he quit runnin', or whatever. 

Steiger: Now, this trip that we're lookin' at, this is.... 

Neff: In 1960. 

Steiger: This is a Mexican Hat Expeditions trip, 1960, and the boatmen are Gaylord Staveley, you.... 

Neff: And a guy named John Oakes, and John Harper from <Grand Junction Colorado, ()>. He's a friend of Joe and Bob Riggs, I think. It was a long time ago. And some of the people that were with us -in those days, the same people came back over and over again. You know, you had a lot of repeat people. 

Steiger: Is that the <Little Colorado, ()>? 

Neff: This is <Nankoweap, ()>. See 'em goin' up? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Neff: Not much of a trail in those days. You'll see the granaries. There, that's a classic shot 

(Steiger: Wow!) 

Neff: lookin' down toward <Little Colorado, ()>. 

Steiger: Look at the sand! 

Neff: Look at the sand. You don't see any sandbars, do you? I mean, in the middle of the river. (chuckles) That's high water, and it's still sandbars. 

Steiger: That is a lot of sand. Wow! 

Neff: We did a lot of things. We took eighteen days. I think the longest trip we took was twenty-two days, to Pearce Ferry. No! not Pearce, we always got out at <Temple Bar, ()> [phonetic spelling]. One time we went all the way to <Las Vegas Wash, ()>, or somewhere -a powerboat picked us up. I don't recognize this rapid. Oh, you know what? this could be <Kwagunt, ()> -it could be <Kwagunt, ()>. 

Steiger: Yeah, it looks pretty possible. 

Neff: You'll know in a moment, if it runs into a conglomerate wall down here. Yeah, that could have been the hole in <Kwagunt, ()>, 'cause we're runnin' right in real high water. 

Steiger: Man, it looks big. 

Neff: We'll know in just a second. That's me and two other guys. That's <Kwagunt, ()>! You'll see the hole. See it down there? It's almost covered over. See it? There it is. We're runnin' right of it. That's a lot of water. (pause) Nope, we're on the left of it. 

(Steiger: Yeah.) 

Neff: That's <Kwagunt, ()> for sure. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: You could have run right of it, though. You actually could have about run that hole. 

Neff: You could run that hole. Oh, we didn't run anything, you shittin' me?! 

Steiger: No way, José! 

Neff: If I ran a hole, I'd get my ass chewed out like nuthin' you'd ever believe! In those days, you missed everything. You were a shitty boatman if you ever went through a hole -and I went through a lot of 'em. (chuckles) 

Steiger: Just for fun! 

Neff: By mistake. 

Steiger: Well, those boats, they didn't track too good. I mean, it was all upstream ferry, wasn't it? 

Neff: They didn't track at all, it was upstream, yeah. 

Steiger: That was the only thing those would do. 

Neff: And you don't realize -well, you ran one of 'em. See how low in the water it is? 

Steiger: What I realized is that was.... I mean, I got so used to a boat trackin', and you just push downstream, and point it where you want to go. And then that thing wouldn't track at all. 

(Neff: No.) 

Steiger: And the least little boil or breaking wave or anything that would stop you would send the water -you'd get this upstream hull speed, and then you'd be surfin' it wherever your stern was pointing 

(Neff: Exactly, it'd stop you.) 

Steiger: or your bow, or whatever you call it. 

Neff: It'd stop you dead in your tracks. 

Steiger: That pointy end, it was gonna be pointin', it was gonna take you that way anyway. 

Neff: I found out.... This is at <Salt Mine, ()>. They call this the <Hopi Salt Mine, ()>. Now, it's just, I don't know what the hell. That's just the <Little Colorado, ()> on the left-hand side -you've seen 'em. 

Steiger: Actually, I've never been over there. 

Neff: Really? 

Steiger: Yeah. So you guys would go over? 

(Neff: Yeah.) 

Steiger: It wasn't like, "Oh, this is off limits," or any of that then. 

Neff: Not then. Nothing was off limits. I don't know, the Park Service wasn't even around. But up in those holes there were eagle feathers on a little string. And up in <Sipapu, ()>, up the canyon, we used to go up there, and there were eagle feathers. You've seen it up there. 

Steiger: I've been to <Sipapu, ()>, but I never went to the salt mines. 

Neff: Did you peek inside of it? 

Steiger: Yeah. You're not supposed to. I did. (laughs) 

Neff: I knew you'd been around long enough to, yeah. 

Steiger: Yeah, I did. I mean, I wouldn't now, 'cause I know how important it is to the Hopis, but we had no clue. 

Neff: I think it was routine, we used to go up there. 

Steiger: Wow, that's big water. 

Neff: It's great water! Great sand. Look at the sand up <Little Colorado, ()>. 

Steiger: Wow! 

Neff: Now that is completely gone. 

Steiger: We're looking at a huge sandy beach right up there, right up the <Little Colorado, ()>. Basically, in this film, we're seein' sand everywhere, like you never see today at all. 

Neff: Ben Beamer's cabin is right across. You can't see it, but it's.... 

(Steiger: Uh-huh.) 

Neff:See how far the boats, we got 'em up there quite a ways. 

Steiger: And there's sand on both sides. (

Neff: Both sides.) That must have been dumped by the <Colorado, ()> in high water. 

Neff: Yeah, exactly. 

Steiger: God, there's another huge beach. 

Neff: That's Desert Watchtower. We're camped at Hance, when you see this. That's a typical camp right there -that was it! (laughs) 

Steiger: We're looking at a little fire pit in the sand and a little bitty four-square set of irons. A square set of steel with four legs. 

Neff: Just a piece of steel and legs, and that was it: two of 'em, and then put 'em side-by-side so the pots could sit on 'em, you know. This is breakfast he's cookin'. 

Steiger: And you can see a coffee pot and a little cookin' pot and a frying pan, and that's in, and this little bitty old fire. Those irons are pretty nice, actually. 

Neff: Oh, they were great. But you didn't have a lot of room to carry stuff, so you kept it to a minimum, you know. 

Steiger: Here's one guy, sittin' on a rock, smokin' a cigarette, cookin' four pancakes in a fryin' pan, with two little pots right next to it. And everybody else is kinda sittin' around, waitin'. (laughs) 

Neff: Yeah. You did not eat until the passengers had their fill, and if they ate everything, you didn't eat. 

Steiger: Did they eat everything occasionally? 

Neff: Sometimes. But most of the time everybody was in it together. 

Steiger: They were aware of that. 

Neff: Yeah, you were a group, really. He's signalling to Desert Watchtower for Joan, and she'll come out to the edge, but you could never see any.... You know. 

Steiger: She didn't see the flag? (laughs) 

Neff: Oh, no, no. Naw, it was all done for the movie here, you know. 

Steiger: Oh yeah, there she is. 

Neff: This was hard work. 

Steiger: Here we are, this is a picture, these guys are linin' <Hance, ()>. Boy, it looks like really hard work. 

Neff: It is not any fun -super-hard work, dangerous as hell. 

Steiger: ________ boats. 

Neff: Oh, God! No fun. No fun at all. Now, this is.... 

Steiger: Well, no, there goes somebody. 

Neff: Well, yeah, but we lined it down to a point there, and then Gay took all the boats through himself, and then we camped below. And you'll see the huge sandbar just below Hance that's not there anymore. 

Steiger: He's right down there in the rocks, isn't he? Or is it? 

Neff: Well, sort of. There was a lot of water there. There Gay's bringin' it over. 

Steiger: When I talked to McCallum, he said there he was workin' for Georgie and he said he remembers bein' a little kid, goin' down on his first trip, and you guys were linin' -you might have been on the trip. 

Neff: I was on all of 'em in those days. 

Steiger: And he said, "There was Mexican Hat linin' at <Hance, ()>, and Georgie just bombed through." 

Neff: Bombed through, not even stoppin'. Down the right side. And then the firemen would come through with the triple-rig and just get hammered -people in the water -oh! -hammered! And they loved it! Nobody ever got killed, I don't think. 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Neff: This is Inner Gorge here, and you can see how high it is. And this Inner Gorge is dangerous. This is calm here, but it was really.... Okay, we're lookin' at <Sockdolager, ()> here. We always stopped and looked at <Sockdolager, ()>. 

Steiger: Wow! I've never scouted that for anything. 

Neff: That was a hell of a climb. Oh, we did [scout it] all the time. And it's kind of an easy run. 

Steiger: Yeah, but look at what?! I mean.... 

Neff: Well, you were so far away you couldn't see anything. But the deal on Sock was to ferry downstream left -they called it "powelling." When you put the nose down, you "powelled" -pull and then snap it around and go, and it's kind of an easy run. 

Steiger: I go there now, but I don't even powell it -I mean, I just push it. 

Neff: You can't push those boats. 

Steiger: Yeah, you can't push 'em anywhere. <Phantom Ranch, ()>. 

Neff: We stayed at <Phantom, ()> for a day or two nights, and some passengers -very seldom did people come in and go out of there. But I actually ran to the top just to get a shake one time, on one of these trips. I ran the <Bright Angel Trail, ()> just to get a chocolate shake up there at El Tovar or somewhere. 

Steiger: You guys were there for the day? 

Neff: Yeah, we were there for two days. And this is the old rock pool. 

Steiger: So you ran up there kinda for somethin' to do? 

Neff: Yeah. I ran up the <Bright Angel, ()> and down the <Kaibab, ()>. 

Steiger: Do you remember how long it took you? 

Neff: No, I don't. 

Steiger: There's some powerboats. 

Neff: This is a jet up-run. Marston is here -you'll see him in a minute. 

Steiger: Holy moly! 

Neff: And I got to ride in those jet boats. 

Steiger: So they just happened to pass you on this trip? 

Neff: They met us and passed us at <Phantom, ()>, and they left. You'll see here.... 

Steiger: Wow! what a historic trip! 

Neff: Yeah, we get in there, and I get in that boat, and I ran jets on Glen after this. We loved the jets, so we bought a couple of Bieler [phonetic spelling] jets and ran 'em. And we actually sunk one at <Crossing of the Fathers, ()>, 'cause we changed impellers and didn't block the intake. But they're playin' around here. 

Steiger: You mean as soon as you turned it on, it just sucked the water right in? 

Neff: We didn't know. We left it overnight and water seeped in through the rags and sunk the boat and a map I had, too. I had a great map. Now Buzz Belknap was there. He was on the right. Bill Belknap's in here. A guy from <New Zealand, ()> named.... 

Steiger: Hamilton? 

Neff: Yeah, John Hamilton. And then Marston's in here, you'll see him. And I got to ride in Wee Red, and right after these were taken, they took off and went upstream and they sunk Wee Red in <Grapevine, ()>. You'll see 'em playin' here. You'll see 'em do that snap turn, you know. That was fun! 

Steiger: This is wild! What a trip to be on! Unbelievable! Yeah, they were pretty proud, _______ right there. (laughs) 

Neff: They were proud of themselves, they were done. 

Steiger: They had it made, they thought. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: But how did they sink.... Is that it? 

Neff: That's Wee Red. 

Steiger: That one with the red deck? 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: How'd they sink it? 

Neff: They went through <Sock, ()>, and they were goin' full speed up the rapid, and the hull cracked. 

Steiger: There, that's it. 

Neff: That's it, and it went right to the bottom. 

Steiger: Right now. 

Neff: Yeah. Okay, now they're gonna do these snap turns. Now watch this, this is interesting. What you do is, you get it at full speed, as much as you can -about thirty-five miles an hour is all, but it seems like sixty. And then you pull the throttle back, crank the wheel over, and hit the throttle, and it goes "snap!" -turns around in its own length. And boy, if you're not holdin' on, you go flyin'! Look at that. 

Steiger: That's incredible. So they were just showin' off there. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, they were cocky. 

Steiger: What did you do with that? That wasn't a move that you ever used? 

Neff: Not on the river. They're playin' around in the <Bright Angel Rapid, ()>, which wasn't much of a rapid then. This was a long time before it flooded. <Bright Angel, ()> flooded, and now you have a kind of a rapid there. 

Steiger: It doesn't look like they're havin' any trouble at all goin' upstream, though, are they? 

Neff: Not at all, not at all. Ford Interceptor engines, I don't know, 400 horsepower or somethin'. It's impressive. (chuckles) 

Steiger: So whoever was makin' your movie got to ride around with 'em? 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: And that's how he got all these. What we're seein' here is these jet boats.... 

Neff: That's a [sixty-inch frame?]. That's why I know this is 1960, 'cause that's when this up-run took place. (

Steiger: Yeah.) Now we're back on the river, headed downstream, and now we head for the one rapid that.... 

Steiger: Whoa! (laughs) 

Neff: That is <Horn Creek, ()>. 

Steiger: And he's runnin' far left! 

Neff: Yup, far left. <Horn Creek, ()> is a killer. 

Steiger: Why would you be runnin' far left?! 

Neff: Well, because of that big hole, right there. (laughs) 

Steiger: Well, yeah. That was a pretty big hole, wasn't it? 

Neff: It was huge. 

Steiger: Has that changed? But how'd you get off the left wall then? 

Neff: You went around the left Horn. 

Steiger: I know, but now he's got the left wall comin' up here. 

Neff: No, no, he's fine. Now watch this. John Harper takes a boat through, and they'll do it in slow motion, and the horns are up here. Here's Harper, I think. Now watch, he slips off of the horns, goes down here, and he's gonna hit either this thing or somethin' like it. Let's see.... Oh, yeah, he's out of control right now. Now watch -bang! boom! 

Steiger: Ooo! Ow! 

Neff: See that? He put a hole in the boat there. 

Steiger: I guess he did! 

Neff: Ooo, that's bad! (laughs) 

Steiger: Oh, man! We're watchin' a guy runnin' left in <Horn Creek, ()>, but he got a little too far left. 

Neff: (laughs) Yeah. 

Steiger: Oh, man! That was one of the biggest.... 

Neff: Harper's about six-four, 200 and some pounds, and he wasn't.... I'd better not make any comments about skill level here. 

Steiger: Well, you know, that hole in <Horn Creek, ()>.... So this is like thirty.... 

Neff: Not as big. 

Steiger: It isn't that way. 

Neff: No, it's gone. 

Steiger: It washes out now. Wow. 

Neff: Yeah. But in those days, it was huge. We were scared to death of <Horn Creek, ()>. That was the worst rapid in the river for me. 

Steiger: Well, it's funny, 'cause I was talkin' to O. C. [Dale O'Connor] yesterday, and he was talkin' about when Regan [Dale], his cousin, first went to work for the Dories, and he said, "Those fools, they didn't know anything. There they were, tryin' to run <Horn Creek, ()> on the left." They must have heard -I mean, that must have just been the tradition, that that's where you went with a wooden boat. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: But those guys, what they knew was just, you know, go down, split the horns, go in the [middle]. 

Neff: Split the horns is the best, if you have enough water. 

Steiger: It is now. I mean, yeah, if you've got enough water. I mean, it's you either go between 'em or.... 

Neff: In low water, go right, don't you? 

Steiger: In super-low you go far right, which is terrifying. But usually you go either between the horns or right-to-left. 

Neff: Yeah, right-to-left would be the best. 

Steiger: Yeah, that's pretty clean. 

Neff: I hated that rapid. 

Steiger: I guess so! God! So what do we got goin' on here? 

Neff: What we got goin' here is it's dark and they're probably some sheep in here or somethin' we're lookin' at, and the light is so low that the camera couldn't pick it up. This is an old sixteen millimeter [16mm] camera. It should -I don't know, I can't see a damned thing right now. If it's sheep, it's at Royal Arches, which is.... I can't imagine why we'd be down that far already, but it'd be Elves Chasm, you know. 

(Steiger: Yeah.) 

Neff: But I can't tell. Like I say, this thing's __________. 

Steiger: Now, this wasn't you shootin' this? 

Neff: No, I never touched the camera. 

Steiger: This is the trip photographer, or some guy that was on there. 

Neff: Gay usually did it, or somebody else. This is a camp at Elves Chasm, and that's all the sand that used to be at Elves Chasm. 

Steiger: Whoa! That's right there at.... 

Neff: At the mouth of Elves Chasm -that's it. Look at that, isn't that great?! 

Steiger: Yeah! 

Neff: Great camp at Elves Chasm. Now there's nothin'. 

Steiger: Yeah. That's a lot. Wow. Boy, that's a mind-boggler. That's a lot of sand. 

Neff: It is! And now you're tellin' me that you're gonna let 45,000 second-feet go through there and build sand, huh? I don't think so! 

Steiger: Well.... No, 45,000 wasn't even nothin' to you guys, huh? 

Neff: Forty-five thousand?! We thought 45,000 was low water. We wanted sixty to ninety. In 1957 it peaked at 120-plus, 127,000. 

Steiger: Did you run in that? 

Neff: No, I didn't. But I ran Glen. And Georgie came through and said -she told me a story that the only time she really thought she'd endo her triple-rig was in <Big Drop, ()> at 127,000, 120,000. 

Steiger: Now, did you not run because Gaylord just said, "We're not goin'," that year? 

Neff: I started in 1957, running. And in 1958 they didn't think I had enough experience. Plus, heck, I was fifteen years old, and I was little. You know, I was 110 pounds soakin' wet. So I had to finesse it, I had to learn how to row. This is <Thunder River, ()>, up <Tapeats Creek, ()>. We'd go up there. We always went up to <Tapeats, ()>, and we always hiked up into the mouth of <Tapeats Creek, ()> -<Thunder River, ()>, really, not <Tapeats, ()>, 'cause it... you know. And that's a hell of a climb up there. I couldn't do it today. That's <Thunder River, ()> comin' out of the wall up there. This guy's a <Chicago, ()> lawyer. 

Steiger: Oh, that's the climb you're talkin' about, up in there. We're lookin' at a movie shot from inside <Thunder River, ()>. You guys went up there regularly? 

Neff: Yeah. It was a hell of a climb. 

Steiger: I've been right to there, but yeah.... 

Neff: It was sketchy. It scared the hell out of me. 

Steiger: That one corner that you go around, and then when you're up in there, that, I thought, was pretty scary, too. 

Steiger: Oh, God, we went back in there, I don't know.... 

Steiger: Did you take your people back in there? 

Neff: Oh, no, we tried to discourage 'em, but there was always a few guys that wanted to go, so, you know.... We were pretty careful. I mean, we didn't.... 

Steiger: Who do you suppose was runnin' that camera in there? 

Neff: Gay was up in there. 

Steiger: So this is mostly him, shootin'? 

Neff: Yeah. And this looks down over, and you can see how steep it is. That's me up on top, right by the mouth of it. Right in back of me is the hole. It was beautiful. We loved <Thunder River, ()>. Now goin' back down. 

Steiger: You know, since we're gettin' all this commentary on this movie, there wouldn't be any way.... I wonder if we could get a copy of it for the archives? I wonder how we could do.... 

Neff: I'll tell you what I'll do. You can take -I know how to get ahold of you, you can.... 

Steiger: I don't want to.... 

Neff: Why? Do you think you can't come through and give it back to me? 

Steiger: Well, I'd come through, but I'd feel real nervous carryin' this stuff around. 

Neff: We're drinkin' out of <Tapeats Creek, ()> there -<Thunder River, ()>. Actually, <Tapeats Creek, ()> and <Thunder River, ()> are two different streams, you know. 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Neff: You know that. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah. 

Neff: A lot of sediment -love that sediment. 

Steiger: Do you think Gaylord would have a copy of this movie? He gave you this? 

Neff: He gave it to me, I've got the only copy. 

Steiger: The only copy. 

Neff: I looked for it the other night when I talked to you, and I haven't found it yet, but I'll find it. And you're welcome to use it, 'cause what am I gonna do with all this, Lew?! 

Steiger: Well, you could give it to your grandkids. 

Neff: I don't know. Well, one of these shots in here is at <Doris Rapids, ()>. Now, Doris is a little rapid. You don't even know where it is, I'll bet. 

Steiger: Sure, I know right where Doris is, and I know Doris fell out of the boat there. 

Neff: Yeah, then you do know where it is. Okay. 

Steiger: Yeah, I know right where it's at. It's a little rapid, but it does have a little bit of kick every now and then. 

Neff: It's got a little kick to it, and it did give our boats.... Now, this is me and that kid from <Chicago, ()>, and he puts his hand up on there to show he's not scared and stuff, but he was petrified all the way. (laughter) 

Steiger: I would be too! Holy moly! 

Neff: Now, what do you think this is? 

Steiger: It's gotta be the hole in <Upset, ()>. 

Neff: Right! You got it! 

Steiger: God, but you know what I don't get is.... 

Neff: We lined half of it, and then ran by the hole. 

Steiger: No, but I mean this water looks high. 

Neff: Oh, it's huge. 

Steiger: How come that hole is so big? I mean, nowadays, if the water.... That looks like easy 20,000 or 30,000, something like that. 

Neff: I don't know, it's all changed. 

Steiger: That hole is huge. But if the water was that high.... Nowadays, it would wash out. 

Neff: It just didn't fill up. It didn't do it. I don't know why. I'm telling you, these rapids change. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah! No, they do. 

Neff: It's hard for somebody that runs for five or six years to realize how much these change. Now, this is 205. 

(Steiger: Oh, yeah!) 

Neff: And I'll tell you something about this rapid. In super-high water, this rapid did funny things. 

Steiger: Right down to the wall! 

Neff: Right down into the wall, into that hole down there. 

Steiger: Yeah, and tough to get out of there! 

Neff: Oh, shit! 

Steiger: Wow, this guy's not worried about his camera now. What we're seein' is in the boat, runnin' of 205. Two-oh-five changed -speaking of changes. It just changed. 

Neff: Well, on the right side, that boulder fell in. What else changed? 

Steiger: There was a major flash [flood] like last month, and totally rearranged the left side. 

Neff: Well, we always thought -we always would look at these rapids and say, "Now, what if we had a big flood?" And 205 was always one of those that we said, "This could be a major _________." 

Steiger: Well, I don't think it got any harder, but it just reamed the left side, and it put a bunch more stuff down on the left, downstream on the left. 

Neff: Okay, this is <Granite Park, ()>. 

Steiger: Oh, man! Would you look at that tree! Would you look at that sand! 

Neff: Yeah. Look at the tree. That tree is probably dead by now. 

Steiger: No, it's still going, but it's.... 

Neff: Is it? But it's bent over, the limbs have come down, hasn't it? 

Steiger: Yeah, it's wimpy. It's pounded. And the river's right up to the edge of the roots. 

Neff: That's a major shade stop. We used to have lunch there. Neat area. 

Steiger: Oh, man. 

Neff: See, that tree's young and healthy. (laughs) 

Steiger: Well, you know, it's not that young. 

Neff: No, unt-uh. 

Steiger: I talked to this guy, Art Philips [phonetic spelling].... There's some burros. Now we're seein' wild burros. I did a trip with this botanist who said that that tree, that's a Gooding's willow, and he says that's the oldest plant in the <Grand Canyon, ()>, and he says they matched photos from the Stanton expedition, and that's a mature tree on the Stanton expedition. 

Neff: That's an old son-of-a-gun then. 

Steiger: Yeah. So he figures it's at least 200 years old. 

Neff: And now we're down at Lake Mead and we meet these guys at <Temple Bar, ()>, and they had this powerboat come and pick us up. 

Steiger: That's quite a powerboat! 

Neff: Well, that's Cris-Craft [phonetic spelling], it's a nice old boat. All wooden boat. 

Steiger: Is that Joan there [at Peak?]. 

Neff: It is. She'll be playing cards here pretty soon in the boat. (chuckles) 

Steiger: Unbelievable. 

Neff: And this is interesting. We used to haul the boats in back and tie 'em up and stuff. I even hand-over-handed down on the line, got in a boat just to get away from the adults, you know. I considered myself a nonadult in those days. 

Steiger: You'd hand-over-hand back to the boat? (laughs) 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: So that's how come you were so nice to all of us other young fifteen-year-olds. 

Neff: I was, because I decided after havin' to stay up all night and do all the dishes every day for eighteen days, and everything was "the young guy does it," and that's me. And I was happy as heck to be there, but I vowed.... 

Steiger: So you did all the clean-up. 

Neff: Uh-huh, all of it. All of it. And I vowed that when I taught boatmen, if I ever did, that I would be nice to 'em, and I always was, I thought, you know. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah, you're renowned for that. I was talking to Brian [Dierker] the other day.... 

Neff: I love Brian. 

Steiger: Yeah, well, he loves you, too. I mean, it's the same. I mean, everybody remembers you -all those guys. Okay, so that's.... (tape turned off and on) If you don't mind, I guess what I'd like to do for starters is just get a kind of a thumbnail biography of you. And I just do this with all these things. Where you were born, and what your circumstances were before you got to the river. 

Neff: Before I was born, huh? 

Steiger: Well, you know, just your family situation and like that. 

Neff: Okay, I was born in <Chanute Kansas, ()>, actually. That's a little hospital next to the small town of <Yates Center Kansas, ()>. I grew up there, and my dad had a propane business and appliance business in Yates Center, and everything went well until the early 1950s, about 1952, 1953. They had some floods in <Kansas, ()>, and we basically got wiped out. And so we had to move to Lamar, <Colorado, ()>, and we moved there. In 1955-56, I was in <Lamar Colorado, ()>. [I] went to junior high school there. I was a freshman at Lamar High School, and that's where I started wrestling, was in Lamar. 

Steiger: Pretty young age, then. 

Neff: Yeah, in junior high. And I'm good at it. 

Steiger: So like twelve or...? 

Neff: Yeah. And then we didn't do well there. (chuckles) We went broke there, and an opportunity for my dad to go to <Mexican Hat Utah, ()>, opened up, 'cause it was uranium boom time down there. And they needed a trading post, they needed to sell to the uranium miners. 

Steiger: Did he only deal with the miners? or were there Indians, too? 

Neff: Oh, Indians, too, of course. 

Steiger: That's where you get the trading post. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, definitely. Navajos and the miners. But the big money was actually with the Indians and the miners, 'cause the Indians were miners, too. They hired 'em on the reservation. Texas Zinc Minerals was in Mexican Hat. Vanadium Corporation of America was down there. So in 1957, I think it was May or June when we moved down there. No, it wasn't June, but it was early spring, and we moved down to <Mexican Hat Utah, ()>. The road stopped at Mexican Hat in those days. It was dirt road from <Monticello, ()> all the way to <Mexican Hat, ()>, and it was rough road. And so we went down there and started this trading post. 

Steiger: And you were how old? 

Neff: Oh, in 1957.... I was born in 1942, so fourteen years old, 'cause I was born in November. So I was about fourteen, fifteen when I moved down there. We ran a trading post, and I went to school in <Blanding Utah, ()>. I was working at a service station there in Mexican Hat -the only one -and then that's where I met Gay Staveley. He pulled up to buy gas, and they needed somebody to be a helper for 'em, and I wanted to do it. Running the river, you know, was a big deal down there. Those boats were real interesting to everybody around there. 

Steiger: So this was to be a helper on a <San Juan, ()> trip? 

Neff: Yeah. Well, no. The first trip I went [on] was actually <Glen Canyon, ()>. We went out to Hite. But to preface this.... Well, heck.... Gay had bought the company and he lived down the street from us. We actually owned Nevills' Lodge, and that's where I lived, at Nevills' Lodge, in <Mexican Hat, ()>. 

Steiger: Which Gay's father-in-law, Norman Nevills, had owned? 

Neff: Yes. 

Steiger: And had his dad owned it, too? 

Neff: Norman Nevills built it. 

(Steiger: Okay.) 

Neff: And from Norman Nevills, after he died, for some reason we bought it or got into it on a lease -not bought it, because we didn't own the land down there. It was called the Goodrich Estate. Good, Rich, Estate. So I actually lived at Nevills' Lodge, Mexican Hat Lodge, 1957, 1958, 1959, and 1960. 

Steiger: Now, 1957 was when they.... They about started <Glen Canyon, ()> Dam right about then, too, didn't they? 

Neff: Yeah, they were startin' it. They hadn't blocked it off yet, but they were startin' the dam -surveys and stuff. I don't know a lot of it. You probably know more about that than I do. 

Steiger: Well, I know a little bit about it. 

Neff: And so how'd I get started runnin' rivers? I was a young kid, and Gay came out and said, "I need some[one] to be a helper." And then I went out to Hite with him one day on a trip, and the boatman didn't show up, and I became a boatman. 

Steiger: You went out there for a <Glen Canyon, ()> trip? 

Neff: Yeah, to be a helper. 

Steiger: Thinkin' that you were gonna be a helper. 

Neff: Helper, not a boatman, yeah. 

Steiger: But the boatman just didn't show up? 

Neff: No. In those days.... 

Steiger: (laughs) Whoops! 

Neff: In those days it was very sketchy. It was real sketchy -that's the only way I can put it. You know, he'd ask somebody to be a boatman from <Grand Junction, ()>. Most everything came out of <Grand Junction, ()>; [or] Jim and Bob Riggs out of <Blanding, ()> with Frank Wright. For some reason, somebody didn't show up, so they turned to me and said, "You row this boat." 

Steiger: You're fifteen years old. "Okay, yes sir." 

Neff: Yeah. And of course, it's <Glen Canyon, ()>, there's no rapids, except <Ticaboo, ()> 1 and 2 and <Bullfrog, ()> and that. And so (chuckles) I got my boat. But the other thing funny about that trip is that it was a one-boat trip with two people. So not only was I a boatman, I was a lead boatman, I was the boatman. 

Steiger: You mean you were the whole.... And you'd never even been down there. 

Neff: I'd never been in a boat before. 

Steiger: You're shittin' me! You mean, he was just takin' you down.... He wasn't goin', they were just puttin' the trip on. 

Neff: That's right. And they dropped me off there, and when he didn't show up, I took the boat, and I took two people, and I'll tell you what, I can remember the names of the two people: It was Ted and Ellen Pope, from Bowman, <North Dakota, ()>. I'll never forget it, 'cause I took 'em on a ten-day <Glen Canyon, ()> trip, and those people were so nice to me. 

Steiger: Unbelievable! And you had no clue where you were. 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: Did you have a map? 

Neff: No, we didn't have any map. 

Steiger: Did he tell you anywhere to stop, anything to do? 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: (laughs) You're kiddin' me! 

Neff: You just go, and I knew that we'd get down to <Crossing of the Fathers, ()>, and that you'd not pass that point, you know. 

Steiger: Did you know how to recognize that or anything? 

Neff: Not really, but I knew I was gonna stay to the right when I got a certain ways down. Hey, by the way, when you [asked] if I had a map, I don't think I had a map. I did get a map after my first trip. In fact, I went up to, I don't know, <Monticello, ()> or somewhere, and I bought a bunch of topos and then glued 'em together in a big, long, ten-foot map, and glued 'em so the river would be on the map, you know. 

Steiger: But you're fifteen years old, and you're just runnin' this trip, and you've never been down there. 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: And these guys know you haven't been down there. 

Neff: Oh, yes. Well, when Ted and Ellen got on the boat and we took off (laughs) we were about an hour downriver, not even to <Ticaboo, ()>, and Ted -he's an old rancher, he owned Pope Ranch in <North Dakota, ()>. The guy had money. I mean, he knew what he was doin'. The guy's been around the block, and there's this fifteen-year-old kid, and I'm 110 pounds, and he says, "Son, how many trips have you run down here?" "Ah, well, I've been on the river before." And I had, I'd been on the <San Juan, ()>. I took a fold-boat kayak down the <San Juan, ()> when I first got down there. And I'd run the <San Juan, ()> in a tube and stuff like that, you know, from <Bluff, ()> to <Mexican Hat, ()>, and from <Hat Rock, ()> to <Mexican Hat, ()>. So I tried to bluff him. 

Steiger: How far is <Hat Rock, ()> to <Mexican Hat, ()>? 

Neff: About four miles. (laughter) And so I tried to bluff him, said, "Oh, yeah, I've been on the river. Heck, yeah." And he said, "Son, this is your first trip, isn't it?" And I said, "Yes, sir, it is." And he said, "That's okay, we're just out here for an adventure." They were real nice to me. Those trips were funny, 'cause we always ran out of food, and it was real sketchy, you know. 

Steiger: Well, so did you even.... Okay, now on that movie, we saw the little camp routine, there was a little iron, just a little square piece of -is it angle iron? 

Neff: No, it wasn't even angle iron -just flatiron with rivets and the stakes about that long. 

Steiger: Four steel stake legs. 

Neff: But it was just a piece of steel, flat, rivets here, a little arm [would] go down. They could swing up for storing. 

Steiger: The legs. Oh, so they were actually attached to it? 

Neff: Yeah. And you'd put that in the sand and get the other one, and put it close enough to where you can put a bucket on it, you know. 

Steiger: And probably a little pot for hot water, a little coffee pot? 

(Neff: Yeah.) 

Steiger:And a frying pan, and that's it! 

Neff: Yeah. And actually, on my trips in Glen, I didn't have the luxury of that deal there. 

Steiger: Of the iron? 

Neff: No, I didn't have that. All I had was a fire and a little grate, and put rocks around, and go that way. 

Steiger: Didn't need to take the steel thing. 

(Neff: No.) 

Steiger: You had to go find four rocks every time. 

Neff: Yeah, find half a dozen rocks and use it, yeah. 

Steiger: And so what was the routine of that trip? Did you cook for these people? 

Neff: Yeah, I did, but it was sketchy. The first couple of days on the trip, Lew, we'd have what we called fresh food, which was lettuce and stuff like that, and tomatoes and stuff. And then, about two or three days downriver, all you'd have is canned goods. 

Steiger: 'Cause there's no cooler. 

Neff: No, no cooler. No cooler, no ice. 

Steiger: Did coolers even exist then? 

Neff: I didn't see one! (laughter) And ice was very expensive. 

Steiger: That was what it was, was ice wasn't there. 

Neff: There was no ice. In <Mexican Hat, ()> we got ice for our coolers when we worked down there. It was eighty cents a scoop for a little teeny scoop of ice during the uranium boom. 

Steiger: And eighty cents was a lot of money then. 

Neff: A lot of money in those days. And you fill a cooler up, you're gonna put six, eight bucks into a cooler of ice and water -you couldn't take ice on a river trip, nobody did. No way. 

Steiger: So you started explorin', huh? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. What I did, after that first ten-day trip with Ted and Ellen Pope, of course I was real excited about it, and I said, "God, this is great!" 

Steiger: Did you guys hike up side canyons? 

Neff: Oh, we went up every damned canyon we came to. 

Steiger: You and the Popes? 

Neff: Yeah. And then on subsequent trips after that. In fact, I made a vow that I would go up every canyon in <Glen Canyon, ()>. So I had my little map. In high school I made a little map, and that next summer, in 1958-59, I tried to go up a different canyon every time, and I had 'em marked. I went up every canyon I could go to. And you gotta realize, in those days, the canyons weren't marked or named. So I'd name 'em. "Okay, that's Three Deer Canyon." Why? 'Cause we'd walk up it, and there were three deer there. Stuff like that. 

Steiger: Oh, my God. 

Neff: [White?] Canyon was marked. And Dungeon. 

Steiger: I talked to Katie Lee, and she said they had named a lot of 'em. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, you name everything. 

Steiger: Everybody named whatever. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. So we'd do that, and mark it on our little map -topos, you know. Of course it never took (chuckles) but that's what we'd do. 

Steiger: I guess those canyons were pretty cool, huh? 

Neff: The thing about <Glen Canyon, ()> was.... Two things about it: Number one, it was Navajo sandstone, and it was beautiful. And the canyons were cut, and they were neat, and you could walk up 'em. And another thing about it.... Well, three things. The second thing about 'em bein' neat and beautiful and sandstone stuff. The second thing was that there were pictographs and ruins all over the damned place, everywhere. We went into ruins where there were pots sittin' there. 

Steiger: Did they have like intact roofs? 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: So real, full-on, almost entire structure was left. 

Neff: Oh yeah, beams and stuff. We took it for granted -we wouldn't take pots, we'd just leave 'em there. I never did take pots. And I didn't take pictures, didn't have my camera. And the other thing was, <Glen Canyon, ()> was what I call a wet canyon. There was water all over the place. Now, not every mile, but there was some springs that were just great: you know, <Dead Man's Spring, ()> was a great spring. There was water in <Lake Canyon, ()>, there was water in <Cathedral, ()>, there was water in <Driftwood, ()>, there was water in <Forbidden Canyon, ()>. I mean, there was water. So we only took a five-gallon can of water with us, and then we got water wherever we could. 

Steiger: 'Cause the river was pretty muddy still. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. By the way, we drank the river water, too, and we used it for coffee. We'd settle a bucket out at night, and there'd be about an inch or two of sand in the bottom. Then we'd pour it off. 

Steiger: Did you even have dishwater? Or did you just wash the dishes in the river? 

Neff: We'd wash 'em in the river -or heat water. 

Steiger: But you actually would heat water. 

Neff: Well, you know what we'd do most of the time, was take the plates down, 'cause I did all the plates 'cause I was the youngest kid. I'd take 'em down there and just do 'em in the sand, you know -get that off and then if they were really bad, we'd heat water and had some soap with us, and do it that way. Not real sanitary, but nobody got sick -nobody. We never got sick. 

Steiger: Yeah. What else stands out about that first trip? What's memorable about the very first one? 

Neff: Well, the fact that it was a new experience for me, and I was scared to death. Ted and Ellen were really good to me, and we spent ten days and made it down. It was a great trip, they had a great time. Everything was fun. We did run out of food a little bit. You always ran out of food. We always ran out. But we did okay, you know. And we always had envelopes of what we called "econo-derm soup." It was dried soup in envelopes, you know, and we'd just get river water -or fresh water if we could -and pour this stuff in and boil it, and we'd have soup. We had soup every day. (chuckles) I remember about that, was just that they were good people and it was a good trip for me, and I got reinforced by that, and got picked up and went back. Gay and Joan liked the job I did, so they put me on full-time and I started runnin' trips. I'd come back-to-back and run trips on <Glen Canyon, ()>. 

Steiger: So your career was launched right there. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Did they pay you for that first one? 

Neff: Yeah, they did. They paid me eight dollars a day, and that was good money. 

Steiger: Which was pretty good. 

Neff: Oh, heck, yeah! Oh, yeah! Eight bucks a day, for river days. So ten days on, I'd make eighty bucks, you know. 

Steiger: Which was a lot of money. 

Neff: That was a ton of money. I was in hog heaven, you know. And you gotta realize somethin' else about those days. Those river trips weren't cheap for the people. 

Steiger: They made a little money themselves. 

Neff: Oh, in those days, this was an adventure. Today people will pay, I don't know, 150 bucks a day for a trip. In those days, we would charge $300 for a <Glen Canyon, ()> trip, or somethin'. That's a lot of money. 

Steiger: And you got eighty, and those guys got $120, and they probably spent $30 on the food. 

Neff: Probably, yeah. 

Steiger: Or no, they got $220. 

Neff: Yeah. And then when we were in Grand, our passengers in Grand paid like 1,200-1,400 bucks apiece. And in those days, that was a ton of money, because Georgie was only chargin' $300 for her people. But Georgie would take twenty, thirty people down the river, and we only took ten on those trips. So she had it down, she knew how to make money. 

Steiger: The economy of scale. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Now, the boats.... Okay, up there, upstream, I guess those boats, were they the boats that Nevillses built themselves? 

Neff: Yeah, but they were too.... 

Steiger: They were kind of these little squared-off deals. 

Neff: Yeah, they were called <San Juan, ()> punts, and they were flat on both ends. 

Steiger: Squared on both ends, and pretty flat-bottomed. 

Neff: Flat bottom, yeah. 

Steiger: And a little bit of a deck, but not much? 

Neff: Deck on each end, you stowed stuff in there. 

Steiger: But open, you could sink 'em. 

Neff: Oh, yeah! definitely. You could definitely sink those things. 

Steiger: Was that an issue? Did you even worry about it? 

Neff: No, not in Glen, ________ water. 

Steiger: But sand waves and all that -no big deal? 

Neff: Sand waves were on the <San Juan, ()>, mostly, and they were big, and you had to watch out for that, you didn't get sideways in that. Sand waves were a big deal. And by the way, there are no sand waves on the <San Juan, ()> now. 

Steiger: Like there were. 

Neff: They ain't any. 

Steiger: There just aren't any. 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: I've never run the <San Juan, ()>, I'm ashamed to admit. 

Neff: It's a great river. 

Steiger: I know it is. 

Neff: Yeah, on Glen there were sand waves, but they weren't nearly like the ones on the <San Juan, ()>. <San Juan, ()> was narrower, and had more flow to it; and Glen was just quiet. But there were some sand waves on Glen, but nothin' like <San Juan, ()>. 

Steiger: Okay, so that's 1957? 

Neff: [That was] 1958, when I started runnin' full-time for.... 

Steiger: Gaylord. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: But your first trip was in 1958? 

Neff: My first trip, actually, was in 1957 on the <San Juan, ()>, and I did that, not with Gay, (

Steiger: In a fold-boat.) in a fold-boat with a friend of mine. In fact, John Oakes, one of the guys you saw in that 1960 film. He was my history teacher in <Blanding, ()>. He and I took a fold-boat down the <San Juan, ()> a couple of times. There was another thing, too: At that time they had this guy named Bill Daggett [phonetic spelling] and another guy that floated through <Grand Canyon, ()>. 

Steiger: Dan Daggett and Bill Beer. 

Neff: Okay, that's right. 

Steiger: I talked to Bill Beer. 

Neff: I actually built two wooden box forms, and we were gonna fiberglass 'em, and we were gonna copy their thing, about takin' these little things down the <San Juan, ()> first, and then Glen. We even talked about goin' through Grand. It never came, but.... 

Steiger: 'Cause you had heard about these guys. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: They made a pretty big splash. 

Neff: Well, yeah, we heard about it, I don't know where -he did, John Oakes heard about it. So yeah, we heard about it -I don't know where, but we did. 

Steiger: Okay, so you did that trip, and then you did this first trip for Gaylord, and then you did like five or six more that year? Or more than that, even? Then you suddenly got busy. 

Neff: I just kept runnin' <Glen Canyon, ()> trips. I ran from 1958 to 1964 -six years, I think -on Glen. He used to think I did sixty trips. I always say, "Hey, I did sixty trips in Glen." Then I got to addin' it up and thought, "Eh, that's not right." I probably did forty to fifty trips on Glen. But you gotta realize that some of 'em, a lot of 'em, were motor trips. I actually put a Scott Atwater motor on the back of a <San Juan, ()> punt and ran that downriver. And then you could make a lot of time goin' downriver in Glen. 

Steiger: What's a Scott Atwater motor? 

Neff: It's an old motor, like an outboard motor. 

Steiger: One of those things where the [motor has] no cowling? The motor's kind of exposed? 

Neff: No, no. 

Steiger: There was a cowling? Looks like a Mercury or somethin'? 

Neff: It has a cowling, yeah. The thing about a Scott Atwater that Gay liked was it had a feature where it had a tube that went into the bottom of the boat, and it would actually, while it was running, bail the boat. So he thought, "God, this is great! You put this in there, and you can bail the boat if it takes on water." Well, we came to find out that was not a factor. Shit, we didn't take that much on. 

Steiger: Too slow, yeah. And you weren't takin' on water anyway. 

Neff: Yeah. Plus, the motor, believe it or not, was a forty-horse, which is huge. 

Steiger: Heavy. 

Neff: I couldn't run it above an idle. And then I ran jet boats for a while, you know, after 1960. And then I ran inboard/outboards, and then I ran Jim and Bob Riggs' Cris-Craft for a couple of trips only. 

Steiger: 'Cause Gaylord had gotten that. So the way this company shaped up was 

[END OF TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Norman Nevills started the company, and he and Doris got killed in the plane crash, and then the Rigg brothers took it over? 

Neff: Frank Wright took it over -or Riggs. 

Steiger: I think they were partners. 

Neff: They could have been, I don't know, that's sketchy with me. 

Steiger: Well, I don't know. Anyway, there was those guys, Frank Wright and/or the Rigg brothers. And then Gaylord got it back -Gaylord, who was married to Joanie Nevills, Norman's daughter, bought Frank Wright out. 

Neff: That's right. 

Steiger: And was that like just when he was just startin' out? 

Neff: In 1957, 1956, somewhere in there. 

Steiger: So right about just before you came on the scene. 

Neff: Actually, it was probably 1956, 1957. He'd probably been runnin' two or three years before that -he could tell ya', I don't know the facts on it. Gay actually went on a Nevills trip. He was from <Iowa, ()>. He went on a Nevills trip and met Joan and they fell in love, I guess, and got married. Then they moved to <Mexican Hat, ()>. 

Steiger: What were your impressions of him early on? 

Neff: Gay? 

(Steiger: Yeah.) 

Neff: Gay was a great guy. He was a little corny when he told his jokes and stuff -a little corny, a little off-balance, you know, in a lot of ways. But Gay was a student of the game. He wanted to learn to run the river, and he studied.... He's got some old things of Nevills'. Nevills sketched every rapid in Grand, you know. Gay might have that stuff today, I don't know, but it'd be a novelty.... 

Steiger: And just diagrammed how you'd run 'em and all this? 

Neff: Yeah -at different water levels and stuff, you know. And Gay was pretty strong, a big guy, good-lookin' guy, strong, good boatman, but he wasn't adventurous at all, and he wanted to go by the book and stuff. Me and Fred Eiseman [phonetic spelling] were a little off the wall, and I was young, so.... 

Steiger: Now, did Fred Eiseman.... 

Neff: Yeah, he ran with us. 

Steiger: So he was one of the boatmen, one of the crew? 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: I'll be damned. Interesting. So you would run in the summers and then go to school. You were still goin' to high school. (

Neff: That's right.) And you were probably the richest kid in your class, on account of runnin' the river, huh? 

Neff: Well, I don't know about rich. (chuckles) Eight bucks a day was pretty good money, though. I mean, it was good. 

Steiger: Shit, when I started in 1972, I was only gettin' ten! (laughs) 

Neff: Well, you gotta realize that I would have run it for nuthin'. In fact, the first trip I ran, I ran for nuthin'. You know, when I led a trip, they paid me. If I was just goin' along, they didn't pay me. But we didn't care about money, money was not a problem then. We didn't talk about it. If he paid ya', fine; if he didn't, fine. 

Steiger: You mean that first trip you led you didn't get paid for? 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: It was then, after that, eight bucks a day. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Wow. So they really did good on that one. This is an aside, but everybody who remembers you, you were like a champion wrestler, huh? (Neff laughs) You seem to be famous in this state as a wrestler. 

Neff: I hate to put this on tape, because I don't like to talk about that. Okay, I'll tell you. I won three state championships in high school, I went 60-0-0. I went to college, I won three conference championships, two Mountain Intercollegiate championships, and I placed twice in the NCAA tournament. I had a great career. As a coach I won multiple championships at Blanton High School. 

Steiger: That's here in <Salt Lake, ()>? 

Neff: Yeah. And so, yeah, I had a good career. But I don't like to talk about that, because I don't like to sound like I'm a jock or anything. It just happened, and rowing helped me get stronger, and I did have a good career -I did. But I don't like people that talk about their accomplishments or anything, you know. 

Steiger: Well, I think it's important to mention, just because it characterizes you a little bit better. That's the way everybody talks about you. 

Neff: Yeah, I was strong for a small kid -I was. 

Steiger: You weighed 110? 

Neff: I weighed 110, and then I went to 122 as a junior, and a senior about 122. In college I wrestled 123 and 130. But I had to cut weight from that 152, my "fat weight" my summer weight, in college. 

Steiger: Your fat weight? 

Neff: Yeah, cuttin' weight. I was little. 

Steiger: Did you do gymnastics or somethin'? 

Neff: Yeah, I did. How'd you know that? 

Steiger: 'Cause Brian Dierker said that you could stand flat-footed and do a back flip. 

Neff: That's right. I lettered in two sports in college. I lettered in gymnastics and wrestling. Gymnastics I was proud of, and here's why: I had no background in it, and I was cuttin' weight one day at Colorado State College, and I went down, and I used to like the gymnasts, 'cause I used to admire 'em, you know. They were real hard workers, you know, and disciplined and stuff. 

Steiger: Strong, too. 

Neff: Yeah, real strong. And I used to go down there, and they taught me how to do tumbling. So I actually started doing gymnastics. Tony Rossi was the coach at Colorado State College -a great guy. So he said, "C'mon and work out with us." So during one season, my junior year, I lettered in both gymnastics and wrestling, and I actually competed against <Nebraska, ()> and <Colorado, ()> on a couple of teams. I actually [competed] in tumbling and free exercise. I didn't win the free exercise, I won tumbling one time. And the only reason I won, was everybody else fell down and I didn't. But I could do, for some reason, back somersaults and that kind of stuff. In fact, on the river, in the sand -you know, you saw the sand -I used to show off by doing back handsprings, back flips on [Grand?]. 

Steiger: Yeah. Well, Dierker remembered that. He was pretty blown away. I wonder, I guess the gymnastics might have helped your wrestling? 

Neff: It did, a lot. Oh, yeah. Any of that kind of stuff helps you, especially in college. College is real competitive. And yeah, it did help me, a lot. (tape turned off and on) 

Steiger: Now, let's see, what else do we need to talk about as far as <Glen Canyon, ()>, that's historically significant? You did beaucoup trips in there. It was unbelievably beautiful. 

Neff: It was. And it was user friendly. The other thing I remember about it is that a lot of people ran it. There was an outfit called SOCOTWA, <South Cottonwood Wash, ()>. It's a church group here in town. They ran a lot. In fact, they ran a group of people down to Hole-in-the-Rock and hiked 'em out of there, and they had a truck that lost its brakes and backed off and killed some Boy Scouts. That was a big deal back in those days. You don't realize it, but quite a few people died in <Glen Canyon, ()> during that time when they were runnin'. I'll tell you why: they didn't wear life jackets, we didn't either. They'd lay on the boat and sleep and float down a long time, and then they'd hit somethin' and fall in the river and for some reason.... 

Steiger: Didn't know how to swim or.... 

Neff: Yeah. There was a rock below Music Temple, on the left, about, I'd say -my recollection is it's only 220-300 yards below Music Temple on the left. The current went to the right near <Hidden Passage, ()>, and then crossed over to the left at Music Temple. There was a rock there that was nothin', Lew. I mean, it was just a pillow-over. You've seen 'em. And I swear to God that thing killed two people while I was down there. 

Steiger: It's like one of the only rocks down there. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Unbelievable. 

Neff: And people would fall in and drown. While I was down there, a ranger came up-canyon with a motor, and I actually -in all my years of river running, I've only picked up two dead bodies on rivers. One of 'em was in <Glen Canyon, ()> -that one with the ranger, we found a body. And the other one was with Bledsoe in Grand, that we found the body of a guy that hiked down Bright Angel and swam, and we found his body.... We saw him float through <Crystal, ()>. 

Steiger: You were on a trip with Bledsoe? 

Neff: No, he was with Hatch. 

Steiger: And you were with.... 

Neff: I was with GCYE. I was with McCallum. In fact, Brian Dierker was on that trip. 

Steiger: Now, there was another thing I remembered from lookin' at this transcript of the interview you did with Roy Webb. One thing of note on <Glen Canyon, ()> was you said Abbey [phonetic spelling] came with you, down through <Glen Canyon, ()>. And you were sayin' you guys were kinda carryin' on like the Monkey Wrench Gang then. 

Neff: We talked a lot. I'll tell you what we talked about at night. And you gotta realize, I was young, so I didn't involve myself a lot. I kept my mouth shut, which is hard for me to do. (chuckles) But our focus in those days was that, dammit, they're buildin' too many roads, they're buildin' this dam, it's shitty, we don't need this, and we oughta screw it up. We used to pick those stakes up by Comb [phonetic spelling] Wash and throw 'em out. We did that all the time on the river trips. And if Ed Abbey was alive today, he might dispute me on this, but I don't think so. He listened. The guy was a listener. He went on the river trip, he listened. He heard us talkin' about, "Well, we need to blow <Glen Canyon, ()> up. We need to go do this, do that," you know. "How do you stop a cat? Put sand in the gas tank, or sugar, or somethin', and do that." So we all talked about that. That was a big topic. (aside about baseball game on TV) So anyway, my theory is -and it's just theory -but after the Monkey Wrench Gang came out, when I read that book, there were too many similarities between what we did on the river, and the way we acted, and the way the people did down there. So I knew that Ed Abbey was a writer, and he came down, went on these trips, and he listened to the people down there. He listened to the boatmen talkin' about these things. Too many similarities came up in his book, to make it by coincidence. 

Steiger: You guys would talk about how you might tweak with a bulldozer? 

Neff: Well, for one thing, what about <Comb Wash, ()>? What about pickin' the redhead stakes up and throwin' 'em out? 

Steiger: That's right there in the book. 

Neff: What about drivin' a truck with Ken Sleight or somethin'. You know, Ken ________, you know. But what about drivin' a truck and throwin' beer cans out the side, and stuff like that? 

Steiger: Did you guys do that?! (laughs) 

Neff: Well, of course we did! 

Steiger: You threw beer cans out in the desert? 

Neff: Well, of course we did! Of course we did. 

Steiger: Who were some of the other crew members there, that Abbey saw? 

Neff: I can't remember. I just remember.... Well, Gay was the main man, and that was it. 

Steiger: But was Gay carryin' on like that? 

Neff: No, no. No, Gay was a very proper, disciplined guy. Gay was Gay. 

Steiger: I can't picture him rantin' and ravin' about the dam. 

Neff: No, no. Gay was super-duper. He was a class act with me and with the company. I mean, Gay was not ornery at all -I was, and my brother was. 

Steiger: So it was you! (laughs) 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: And your brother. 

Neff: But we did those things, me and my brother Rich. My brother Richard ran for <Mexican Hat, ()>, too, in <Glen Canyon, ()>. I have a picture of him somewhere. He ran, too. But Rich was a rebel. Man, he was.... 

Steiger: So you guys were seein' the uranium mining, you were seein' the dam. 

Neff: We saw a lot of things. 

Steiger: You knew <Glen Canyon, ()> was doomed. And all that stuff. 

Neff: Yeah. And too many similarities came up in Abbey's book to be an accident. He didn't make those things up, he heard 'em from the boatmen he listened to, and from the people in Mexican Hat he listened to. The guy's a great writer. 

Steiger: That's what it is. If he was alive, I bet ya' he would admit that he didn't make 'em up. I mean you just make soup. 

Neff: You don't make up much of anything -you copy. 

Steiger: Well, and you're allowed to, like, change things, but you take whatever you've seen, and you kinda mix it up in order to tell a good story. But yeah, the good things are the things that are true. 

Neff: I also remember in that book, the deal about they had a Jeep in the book where he went over the cliff and they let it down by a cable. 

Steiger: A winch, yeah. 

Neff: Remember that? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Neff: Well, hell, we.... (laughs) Not "we," not me, but that actually happened down there at <Mexican Hat, ()>. In those days, it was Wild West. 

Steiger: You mean somebody did that?! 

Neff: Oh, hell, yes! 

Steiger: Winched their Jeep down into a canyon? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. Everybody was drinkin' and stuff, you know. Those miners were just crazy. They were hard workers, and hard drinkin' sons of bitches, you know, and they would do anything. I saw 'em one time, Lew, on the top of Mexican Hat Cliff, above Jim Hunt's place, they took a Caterpillar tractor and teetered it, and tried to bet each other who could go the farthest and teeter that D-9 Cat or something like that -a cat -and see who would chicken out and back it off. I saw that! me and my brother. 

Steiger: You mean if you go too far, you're goin' how far down? 

Neff: The son-of-a-bitch is goin' down 400 feet -I ain't shittin' ya'! 

Steiger: And these guys are drinkin' and just playin' around with this thing. 

Neff: Oh, fuck yeah. I mean, yes. 

Steiger: Wow! 

Neff: And we saw a lot of things. We saw a lot of things. Frye Canyon Store was a neat place. Frye Canyon Store in Mexican Hat and our trading post were tied together. We didn't own it, but it was part of the same company, you know. Frye Canyon -this isn't river, but it's Frye Canyon. They'd have a rattlesnake in the beer cooler in a bottle, and if a guy that came in that wasn't a miner -and you could tell, you know, somebody comin' through -the guy would order a drink or a beer and he'd set up there. The guy would say, "Gee, look at that over there!" and turn the guy's back, and then they'd set a rattlesnake right on the bar. I saw this. The guy would turn around and just go ape, you know, and they'd laugh him out the door, you know. I mean, it was crazy, it was goofy. The helicopter pilots there were just goofy. 

Steiger: Even back in the fifties! I thought that was all the <Vietnam, ()> syndrome. 

Neff: The helicopter pilots there would pick miners up from Frye Canyon or somewhere around there, and take 'em up to the <Hideout Mine, ()>. They had this one story they told about a guy that would put a skid on the side of the canyon and then dump the helicopter off and go, and scare the livin' shit out of everybody in the helicopter. I heard that story. I heard a lot of stories, but I believed 'em. Those guys were hard drinkers, they were pioneers, they were heroes. They worked hard and they drank hard and they fought hard, and they were somethin' else. And I was a young kid, so I was impressionable. Probably the impression I give, that story probably wasn't nearly as exciting as I saw it through my eyes, but damn, it made an impression on me. 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Neff: So those were things we saw in Mexican Hat at that time. Once in a while, VCA and Texas Zinc Minerals would have the same payday, about every six months or so -their paydays would coincide. 

Steiger: Wait. Now, that was Texas Zinc? 

Neff: Texas Zinc. 

Steiger: And VCA? 

Neff: Vanadium Corporation of America, VCA. When their payrolls would coincide, we knew we were in for it. We'd have to get more money to cash checks and stuff, and we'd have a big day. You know, we'd make $2,500 in one day. For a little trading post, that's a lot of money. 

Steiger: That was okay. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. And boy, you talk about the bar at Jim Hunt's place down at <Mexican Hat, ()>! Those miners would go in there and party and get drunk, and they'd fight. Oh, my God! They'd break every window in that place. My brother and I'd sit up on a cliff and watch 'em down there, and we'd throw rocks down there and hit some guy on the head. God, it was just nuts! It was really an eye-opener to a young kid. 

Steiger: A pretty unique childhood, I tell ya'. Oh, man! 

Neff: Oh, yeah. We worked hard, but it was different. Those miners used to work their ass off. But you know what, the code of the day was everybody was good to everybody, and you didn't pass a guy on the road, you helped him out, everybody helped everybody out. It was a different code. But when it was time to get drunk, oh man! 

Steiger: They knew how to do it. 

Neff: "Katie bar the door!" (laughs) Absolutely! It was an eye-opener for my brother and me, that's for sure. 

Steiger: Okay, so <Grand Canyon, ()>. You had run a couple of years on the <San Juan, ()>. I mean, obviously that's different than <Glen Canyon, ()> -different routine. 

Neff: Yeah. We ran <San Juan, ()> trips, too. And we would run <San Juan, ()> down to the confluence with the <Colorado, ()>, and run down to the <Crossing of the Fathers, ()>. On the <San Juan, ()> we ran the punts, and then we would change boats and go into the cat boats. They'd bring 'em down, you know, and do the <Grand Canyon, ()>. 

Steiger: Oh, you'd do the <Grand Canyon, ()>, you'd start at the <San Juan, ()> and go all the way through? 

Neff: Sort of. There was a time.... We'd have a <San Juan, ()> trip and we'd go down to the <Crossing of the Fathers, ()>. Then we'd go back to <Mexican Hat, ()>, get new boats, come down, go down to <Lee's Ferry, ()>, and go. 

Steiger: Easier to do that than to do the drive, probably. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. And after -I don't know when they shut off <Glen Canyon, ()>, but I mean, <Glen Canyon, ()> all the way to <Lee's Ferry, ()>. They used to go all the way to <Lee's Ferry, ()>. And I never did go all the way on the <San Juan, ()> or the <Glen Canyon, ()>, all the way to <Lee's Ferry, ()>. I never did. I always got out at <Crossing of the Fathers, ()>, Wauweap. 

Steiger: 'Cause you'd have to go.... 

Neff: 'Cause the dam was being built. 

Steiger: 'Cause that was it. By then they had it closed off, and that was it. 

Neff: Coffer dam, yeah. 

Steiger: So <Grand Canyon, ()>, your first trip was -that wasn't your first one, where this movie was? 

Neff: You know what? I'm not sure about that. I'm not sure. 

Steiger: It was somewhere right in there? 

Neff: It had to be either my first or second trip. 

Steiger: Like 1959 or 1960. 

Neff: Yeah, and I looked pretty young there. Fifty-nine [1959] was a huge water year. Sixty [1960] was a big water year. Fifty-seven [1957] was huge. 

Steiger: Yeah, that looked like pretty big water we were seein' in there. 

Neff: Yeah, it was. 

Steiger: So we had that running commentary in the beginning of this tape. I wonder, what else do we need to cover on that trip? I don't know if you said it -you were the young guy, you were like sixteen then? 

Neff: I was seventeen in 1960, yeah. 

Steiger: And you're runnin' a boat, and you're doin' all the dirty work. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Which involved cleanin' up everything. 

Neff: But I didn't think it was dirty -it was just you paid your dues. 

Steiger: At the time. 

Neff: Yeah. And also you had to -they gave you an initiation, too -they did me, anyway -down at <Diamond Creek, ()>. We camped at <Diamond Creek, ()> and they had an initiation for me. In those days, they called us canyoneers, if you could go all the way through <Grand Canyon, ()>, you're a canyoneer. 

Steiger: That was somethin' Gaylord made up? 

Neff: Yeah. He had little pins. They blindfolded me, took me up a few hundred yards, up <Diamond Creek, ()>. They made a little pool there and gave me a bucket, and I was blindfolded, and I had to toss water out of there, and then they hit me on the ass as hard as they could with a couple of branches or somethin', you know. Then I was a real boatman. 

Steiger: That was somethin' the crew did to you? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. There was a lot of hazing. Oh, yeah. 

Steiger: Oh, boy. Do you remember who the <Grand Canyon, ()> crew was? Was that the same guys that would run <San Juan, ()>? Was it about the same crew throughout? 

Neff: Just about -they came and went. 

Steiger: You named all those guys on that trip. 

Neff: I remember that Jim and Bob Riggs ran with us in Glen -or came in and out. I know that Maggie and Fred Eiseman ran with me. I know that Johnny Yorks [phonetic spelling] ran, Johnny Harper. The guy you saw cookin' the breakfast on that tape, I don't remember his name. He was a great guy. I just don't remember. I was in awe of all those guys. Those guys to me were just gods, you know. 

Steiger: Sounds familiar! 

Neff: And yet, I had a good knack for runnin' a boat, from an early age. 

Steiger: So it wasn't like whatever those guys did, you did. 

Neff: Well, yeah, you kinda had to. You didn't break the rules. 

Steiger: There was a proscribed run? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. 

Steiger: And that's where you were supposed to go. 

Neff: Not only supposed to, it was mandatory. 

Steiger: You'd better go there. 

Neff: Yeah. I remember one time, when I first broke from this where <Granite Falls, ()> -we used to line <Granite, ()> all the time, but we looked at it, and realize that we used to stop at rapids and be there for two hours at a time. 

Steiger: Scoutin'. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. 

Steiger: If you guys were scoutin' <Sockdolager, ()>.... 

Neff: Oh, yeah, we scouted it. 

Steiger: I've never scouted that in my life. 

Neff: We scouted everything. 

Steiger: Yeah -which makes sense. That doesn't seem _________. 

Neff: Well, in those days, Lew, you gotta remember.... 

Steiger: You're the only ones down there. 

Neff: We didn't see anybody for eighteen days or twenty days, you know. And we're down at <Granite, ()>, and it looked good, an easy run, so Gay got in his boat and he ran it. And he did great. He ran everything great, good run, we knew exactly what to do. But in the tailwaves he didn't pull out, and tailwaves are shitty on that little cat boat, you know. And he flipped and went downstream. Fred Eiseman was with me. I said, "Fred, we can run this damned thing. Let's run it!" By that time I'd had three or four years' experience in Grand -two or three, anyway. 

Steiger: Run it and just pull out at the bottom. 

Neff: I said, "God, let's run it and pull out there. We can do this. And Fred freaked, you know. "Nah, we ain't doin' it." He flipped, we ain't doin' it. So Fred and I had to line the last two boats through <Granite, ()> by ourselves, two of us. What a bitch! And I was so pissed. 

Steiger: There was other guys downstream? Did they get Gaylord and everything? 

Neff: Yeah, Gay pulled over, he was fine. I was so pissed. I told Fred, "Goddang it, I can run this thing, I know I can." "Ah, you little snot-nosed kid, you [don't] know shit." So we lined it. We got down. All we needed to do was run it. And I told him after that, "You know, lining the rapids is a lot harder than what Gay did. He went through, turned over, went to shore, righted the boat, went on. And we're up there bustin' our ass for an hour, linin' these boats. I would rather turn over. I'd rather flip than go through that shit, you know. "Fuck you, Don," you know? 

Steiger: (laughs) "You don't know, kid." 

Neff: Yeah. (chuckles) Fred wasn't very good at finessin'. You know, he was strong and all that shit, but he couldn't figure it out. Good guy, great guy, I love him. 

Steiger: Well, havin' rowed one -I mean, I only rowed for like one day in this thing. I rowed in the Jewels. I thought it was a hard boat to run. 

Neff: It takes a lot of time to learn that damned thing. 

Steiger: I think that it was one of the harder boats. I thought it was. I actually kind of hated it (laughs) to run it. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. When you first get in a cataract boat, you hate it. You say, "God, this thing is a shit!" 

Steiger: If you learn to go with the water. I mean, goin' with the water, you want a boat that tracks, that'll go where you point it. 

Neff: They don't track. 

Steiger: And they don't track at all. 

Neff: But you know what? You can turn one of 'em around and go bow-first, with the pointed end, and you can get that thing movin' after about four strokes, and it will (slaps hands together) go! 

Steiger: It's goin' where that bow's pointin'. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, it will go. And the other thing about it is, it's so low in the water. 

Steiger: So the powell move was good, and you could make a cut. 

Neff: I did more powellin' than anybody, and I even cheated. I went through a metamorphosis of bein' scared to death -do the right thing, do what he does, you know. And then I thought, "Oh, I'm gonna do my own thing." And then I used to do really well. I went six trips in <Grand Canyon, ()> on cat boats and never turned over. I was the only boatman that didn't. Gay did, Fred did, Johnny did. And so they always called me Lucky. And yeah, I was lucky, that's for sure, but I learned that "I ain't gonna go through this forward -I'm turning around, and I'm cuttin' through there, and then I'm bailin' down." Sure, I fill up with water, but when you fill up with water, what are you?, you're a log, and you don't flip. And so I did that, and then Maggie always said, "You know, Don, he's a real finesser, a great boatman." Well, shit, not a great boatman! -I just didn't want to flip! (laughs) 

Steiger: Yeah. We should mention on this tape -I think we got it on the movie -you were talkin' about linin' through Hance, and then Georgie would come along, which is interestin'. It's kinda the writin' on the wall. Interesting to see the direction that Gaylord went. 

(Neff: Yeah.) 

Steiger: I mean, McCallum told me that he remembers bein' on the boat, and they would laugh at you guys. (chuckles) 

Neff: Well, we would laugh at them, because we called them baloney boats. "You guys aren't really running [the] river -you're in those inflatables. We're doin' the real thing, we are the real adventurers. And you guys are dog shit." But.... 

Steiger: Yeah it had to grate on 'em, while you guys were gruntin' and groanin' and doin' all that work. 

Neff: Kinda the same thing like runnin' dories and us runnin' the inflatables. "What are those guys doin'?" Ah, we'd say, "Hey, the dory's a beautiful boat, and it takes a great picture, but (phfftt!)." 

Steiger: It's a lot of work and stress, compared to a raft, I gotta tell ya'. 

Neff: (laughs) It sure as hell is! Takes a lot more skill, too. 

Steiger: I just rowed a raft my last trip through, which was like last week. I couldn't believe how easy it was. 

Neff: I know. Well, nothin's easy for me anymore. 

Steiger: Ach! 

Neff: I've gotten to the point in my life where I don't want to run any more rapids. I do, but I don't, you know? (chuckles) So that's real funny. But the lure of those rapids, you know, we used to just, God, get high on it, you know. Then after a while you think, "Oh, it's just an obstacle to get through," you know, like <Horn Creek, ()>. God, that Horn was a bitch. 

Steiger: Boy, the Horn in that movie is horrendous! I never thought it was that bad at twenty. 

Neff: Hell, it's unrunnable. Grand or Glen or <San Juan, ()> in those days, you know.... We haven't talked about <San Juan, ()>. 

Steiger: Yeah, what do we need to say about that? I don't even -having never run it, I don't know what to ask you about it. 

Neff: I'll tell you [about] <San Juan, ()>. <San Juan, ()> was a wonderful river. And I'll tell you why. It was easy, friendly up above, and then it got worse down toward the confluence. There were some good rapids in that thing. 

Steiger: Are they covered up by the lake now? 

Neff: Yes, they are. First of all, you go by Grand Gulch, you know -well, you haven't run it, but.... You gotta run it with me. You gotta. 

Steiger: I will. You say the word. 

Neff: I can get you on next year with me. 

Steiger: I'll go. 

Neff: You go by <Grand Gulch, ()>, and there was a rapid called Freight Train. It was called Freight Train because there were these huge boulders. Have you ever run the <Dolores River, ()>? 

Steiger: Uh-huh. 

Neff: Okay, a lot of rocks in there, big rocks. 

Steiger: Big rocks. 

Neff: Freight Train was a mile long, with rocks, and you had to go in and out of 'em, you know, and it was kinda fast, you know, and it was a good rapid. But then you came on Paiute Farms, the water was only that deep, you know, six inches deep. And we walked the boats through there. And then you came to a rapid called <Paiute Rapid, ()>, and it was a danged good rapid. And then you go down, there's a rapid called Sincline [phonetic spelling]. Sincline was a good rapid. Then you come to the main event, called Thirteen Foot. Thirteen Foot was a danged good rapid. It was a classic rapid where you come down, and this alluvial fan comes in, takes a right-hand turn, banks around a big danged rock down there. You gotta realize, the boats we were runnin' were punts. 

Steiger: The little square boats? 

Neff: Square boats and wooden. 

Steiger: And open, and you could sink 'em. 

Neff: Yeah. If you run that today in inflatables, piece of cake. 

Steiger: No problemo. 

Neff: Easy. But runnin' in these little boats that'll sink, whew! You're just goin', "Oh, my God!" 

Steiger: Make you good. 

Neff: And it's too long to line, so you can't line around it. So, oh, God, we did it. And you just bounce through there and bang around. You get through it, and then you're happy. Now, you're on <Glen Canyon, ()>, cause Thirteen Foot was about, I don't know how far. I'm guessing Thirteen Foot Rapid was probably a few miles from the confluence of the <San Juan, ()> and the <Colorado, ()> -you know, <Glen Canyon, ()>. And as soon as you got out of the <San Juan, ()> arm there and got into Glen, then you hit the neat part of the canyon -<Hidden Passage, ()> and <Music Temple, ()>, then all those really neat canyons down below, like <Forbidden Canyon, ()>, <Rainbow Bridge, ()>, <Dungeon Canyon, ()>, (Dangling Rope, ()> -all those, you know. 

Steiger: Well, there again, I don't know that either. 

Neff: But I'll tell you, the <San Juan, ()> is neat! It was neat, and it was a challenge, a real challenge. Everything is a challenge when you first do it, because if you go in <Grand Canyon, ()>, and you don't see anybody for eighteen days, you are not going to be a hero and run rapids. You're gonna line around and do the best you can to get through it, and go to lunch or go to dinner, you know. And that was our attitude then. You talk about those old-timers that say they ran through the <Green River, ()> from <Flaming Gorge, ()> on, and they went through Ashley Falls and all that stuff? I remember talkin' to a Holiday boatman one time, and he said, "Oh, yeah, this guy ran all the way down, ran every rapid." I said, "Bullshit! He didn't run every rapid." In those days, you didn't run every rapid -all you did was, well, okay, you lined it a little ways, and then you ran. You got through it. There was no hero deal. There was no deal about, "Hey, I'm gonna run some rapids today!" It was, "God, I gotta get through here." That's all that was. It wasn't, "Let's do a first descent, let's do this, let's do that." You haven't got any help. What are you gonna do if you screw up? Where are you then? So that's why my attitude about boatmen in <Grand Canyon, ()>, I guess Brian would tell you, and you know me, and you think you're gonna be a hero? (phfftt!) Give me a break! 

Steiger: Well, I mean, Nevills started the tradition of kind of workin' up the rapids. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: You know, I think there are things that we're doin' now -I think we're less scared, for sure. 

Neff: Oh, yeah! 

Steiger: You know, "we're goin' with it" more. Like for example, I mean, I always run left in <Upset, ()> -always. 

Neff: That's an easier run. We didn't know that. 

Steiger: It's way easier. Why fight it? I mean, you run right, it's way hard. It's really hard, and there's no ride. You know, you can run the left, and there's this big old ride, and that's pretty fun, and you don't have to work. 

Neff: But you gotta go over against the wall there. 

Steiger: You gotta go over against the wall. You're gonna run some big waves, and you're damned sure, when it's down, if that hole's out, you really want to be left. You don't want to be in the middle, you don't want to hit that hole. But you can get over there. But boy, you know, that hole, that's wild. In that movie, that's high water, and that hole's an eater. And now, up over 20,000, it's not even there. 

Neff: It's gone, yeah. 

Steiger: It's wild. I guess the rocks _________. 

Neff: Look at <Horn Creek, ()>. 

Steiger: Yeah, that hole -same thing. 

Neff: I'm tellin' you right now, Lew, that hole in <Horn Creek, ()> was devastating to us, you know. 

Steiger: Was huge, yeah. I guess that's like a conglomeration of rocks that's just gotten worn down or somethin', huh? 

Neff: I'm tellin' ya', the rapids change. And if you're down there for twenty years, you'll see them change, but you have to run it every year in all types of water, all water levels, to learn that it does change. When I first started runnin', I said, "Hey, this isn't gonna change, rock doesn't change." You know what? It does. They change. 

Steiger: I gotta get you to <Crystal, ()>. Now, you ran in the Grand for how many years with Mexican Hat with Gaylord? 

Neff: Six years in cat boats. 

Steiger: Six years, and you just said you never turned one over. 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: So would that have just been six trips? 

Neff: Six trips. 

Steiger: So it was a trip a year? 

Neff: One trip a year. 

Steiger: That was it. 

Neff: That was it. 

Steiger: Do you remember what you got paid for those? 

Neff: I got paid three pay scales. I had $8.00 a day, then I got $12.50 a day, and then I was up to $25.00 a day, and that was it. Gay could probably tell ya', "Naw, I paid him $50." I don't know. But it was $8.00, $12.50, and $25.00 _____. 

Steiger: Were you gettin' $25.00 in Grand? 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Okay, big bucks. 

Neff: Actually, I think I ran my first trip for nothin'. 

Steiger: In Grand? 

(Neff: Yeah.) 

Steiger: Oh, yeah, "You don't know, we can't be payin' you for this, Don." 

Neff: No, "You're first _____. You're a young guy. You're not on the payroll yet, you haven't earned your spurs." 

Steiger: Well, now, after you were the young guy, was there ever a young guy underneath you? 

Neff: No. 

Steiger: You were the young guy for six years? (laughs) 

Neff: That's right. 

Steiger: So there never got to be another young guy until you got to Brian, and me and all them other guys. (laughs) 

Neff: That's right. Yeah, that's right. And that's why I vowed, boy, I'm never gonna treat Brian bad -never. Of course I did sometimes. 

Steiger: Not to hear him tell it. 

Neff: I love Brian, and Dan. 

Steiger: He loves you, too, I tell you what. 

Neff: I'll tell you what, there's never -there aren't any better persons on the earth than those guys. 

Steiger: Yeah. Well, they sure think the world of you, too. 

Neff: They're "A" number one, you know. 

Steiger: We were talkin' about you a couple of weeks ago. You're ears shoulda been burnin'. So then what happened after six years with Gaylord, after Mexican Hat? And I don't know, I'm sure we're leaving out something about Mexican Hat. 

Neff: Then I went back to school and I got married. Actually, I got married in 1964. And one day (chuckles) I was in <Salt Lake City, ()> and I was on Highland Drive, and I went by this place down there, and I saw these boats out there, and I stopped, and it was Ron Smith, startin' his company; Bill Belknap, and Dick McCallum. They weren't all there the same day, but I'm sayin' I just stopped in and said, "Listen, I'm a river runner, I'd like to run rivers with you." And so in 1966, I think, I started runnin' with Ron Smith and Dick McCallum. Dick and I ran a lot together. Pete Gibbs came in -a lot of guys went through there. 

Steiger: Kent Vigas? 

Neff: Yeah, Kent Vigas. Yeah, definitely Kent Vigas. 

Steiger: O. C. said he was wild. 

Neff: Yeah. I can tell you some stories about him. 

Steiger: Well? 

Neff: Kent Vigas was Sheila's brother -Ron's wife. 

Steiger: Ah-ha! 

Neff: And we went down on a trip in 1966. We took a thirty-three-footer through the canyon, with a guy named.... Oh, shoot! He's a poet. Oh, hell -I've been drinkin' beer now. Rick Petrillo [phonetic spelling]. You know Rick? 

Steiger: Sure, yeah, absolutely. 

Neff: Now, Rick was supposed to run with me in this thirty-three-footer. It's a Hatch rig, is what it is. And I'm on the back with two sets of oars in a thirty-three-footer, and Rick is supposed to take the front oars. I do the back oars 'cause I can tell him what to do and stuff. 

Steiger: You tell him what to do. 

Neff: Yeah. So we get down to <House Rock, ()>, and Rick thinks we're gonna turn over, cause Rick's terrified. And I know a thirty-three-footer is hard to turn over, unless you get it sideways. So I keep it straight, Rick bails out. He jumps into the water! at <House Rock, ()>. 

Steiger: 'Cause you're not, like, gonna try to make a cut or anything. You're just gonna line it up.... 

Neff: Yeah. Oh, you ain't gonna cut a thirty-three-footer! You just line it up and go. 

Steiger: You're gonna line it up and keep it straight. No big deal. 

Neff: Yeah. Rick jumps in the water, we get down there, we pick him up. "I thought we were gonna turn over." "Okay, Rick, fine." We go on down, we get to President Harding, and we're kinda screwin' around. We know we're gonna go right and go down there. Yeah, no big deal. Well, we didn't quite make it. We hit the rock in President Harding -not bad, but enough to jar us. Rick bails out again, he jumps overboard. (laughter) So Ron's really pissed now -Ron Smith. And Vigas is on the trip as a passenger. 

Steiger: And you guys are rowing this thirty-three. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: Two guys, rowin'. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: I talked to Dave McKay today, and he talked about that, too, about doin' that. 

Neff: And Ron Smith's in a motor rig. Ron always put himself on the good equipment, you know.

[Steiger indicates a tape change, but my tape copy keeps on goin'. We're at about Min. 44 on Tape 1, Side B. (Tr.)] 

Steiger: Okay, Rick Petrillo has now jumped out of the boat twice. Was he a boatman before? I never heard of jumpin' out of your boat. 

Neff: No, he wasn't. He never was. Kent Vigas was never a boatman. He went down with us.... 

Steiger: No, I mean Rick Petrillo. 

Neff: Petrillo? No, he didn't have much background in it. But they wanted him on the trip for some reason. They wanted him to learn how to run. 

Steiger: I guess he did learn real good. Later on, he got it together. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, he did okay -never very good. (laughter) So he bails out on President Harding. Okay. And we finally get the boat down past <Little Colorado, ()>, and down at <Furnace Flats, ()>, down at <Copper Blossom, ()> -you know where <Copper Blossom, ()> is? That's a mine on the left-hand side, below.... 

Steiger: <Lava Canyon, ()>? 

Neff: Yeah, <Lava Canyon, ()>. 

Steiger: I never knew that that's what it was called. 

Neff: <Copper Blossom, ()>, yeah. 

Steiger: Was that one of Tanner's mines? 

Neff: I think it was, yeah, a copper mine. Anyway, so Ron's down there, camped, and we come in late. Of course you gotta realize that we're rowing a thirty-three-footer, Ron's in a motor rig, so he goes down and drinks a lot of beer and wows the passengers, while the two of us are rowing this friggin' boat down-canyon. 

Steiger: You're carrying passengers? 

Neff: No, no. 

Steiger: You're just trainin'. 

Neff: Two of us, in a thirty-three-footer. 

Steiger: Now, did this boat have a floor in it? 

Neff: Yeah, it did. 

Steiger: So you guys had to bail the damned thing. 

Neff: Suspended by chains. Yeah, we had to bail it. 

Steiger: Oh, no, it wasn't a rubber floor, you did have to bail it. 

Neff: Yeah, I had to bail it. Oh, yeah. And so we get off early in the day and spend hours goin' downstream, and these guys pass us up, sayin', "Ha, ha, ya-hoo," you know. And so we're on the river for six, eight hours a day, and they're on the river three or four hours. Well, anyway, we get down to <Copper Blossom, ()> and Ron says, "This ain't workin'," and it's not, with Rick and I. He says, "We're gonna fold the thirty-three-footer up, put it on my boat, and we're all goin' down in the thirty-three-footer" -his thirty-three-footer with the side pontoons. You know, a typical Ron Smith rig. Okay. I'm not happy about that, so I get Ron and I said, "Ron, I can row the boat down there by myself. Just get somebody on the boat with me. And Kent Vigas is there, and [he] says, "I'll do it." "Okay, I'll take Kent." 

Steiger: "We'll give you one more chance, __________." 

Neff: Yeah, he says, "If you guys screw up again, we're puttin' it on the boat." So Kent and I get together, and Kent's great, and natural. He gets on there, he listens to me all the time. When I say "row left," he rows left. When I say "two right," he rows two right. Outstanding. That's all I wanted, is somebody just to listen. If we screw up, fine, we screw up, but we go. We rowed great! We're just acin' this thing. We're havin' fun. We sneak a little beer on the boat and get away from everybody, and we're drinkin' beers and havin' fun, you know. And we get down to Lava, we're doin' great. We get down to <Lava, ()>, we pull up, and Ron's gonna run through first. And this was one of the older rigs that didn't have anything on top, had a lot of beer stashed. Ron goes down through there, it's pretty high water. He goes down through there on the right side, comes up, and he damned near flips the thirty-three (

Steiger: Oh, my God!) and dumps cans and beer and everything in the water. Whamo! Goes on down through there, and we're just goin', "Holy shit!" And then I said, "God, we gotta go." We're up there, we see Ron, runnin' up the shore about a mile away. 

Steiger: Comin' to you guys? 

Neff: Yeah. We're out in the middle, ready to run Lava. Ron's going, "Come over here, come over here!" 

Steiger: You're in the current. (

Neff: Yeah.) You're goin'. 

Neff: So we backpeddal and we pull over to the right side. We looked at it from the left, while Ron was goin' through there. We pulled over to the right side, make it in, Ron says, "Don't do it! Don't do it!" 

Steiger: Were you guys gonna run left? 

Neff: We're gonna run right. Ron says, "Don't do it! You'll get killed. You'll flip. I almost flipped there." 

Steiger: You go, "Duh!" (laughs) 

Neff: He says, "I don't care what you do, but you're not goin' down the right. Go down the left." Okay. We row across the river again. We walked downshore and we see the Hatch run, and we'd seen it before. And so we pile through the Hatch run and [so on and so forth], easy run, we make it easy, get down there (laughs) and everything's fine, you know. Ron was just scared to death. So we make it fine, and Vigas makes it fine, and after that Vigas starts runnin'. 

Steiger: He's a boatman. 

Neff: Yeah. Oh, hey.... 

Steiger: I guess Petrillo made it too, though, huh? 

Neff: Petrillo made it too, but he was on the sidelines after that. He didn't row with us again -it was just me and Vigas. We took that thirty-three-footer through there. (laughs) It was hilarious. 

Steiger: Now, I'm just curious. You had started coachin'. You got married and you're gonna be a coach, and you're doin' river runnin' in the summer, is what happened to you. 

(Neff: Yeah.)



Steiger:You see Ron Smith doin' it, and you decide you want to come back. But you weren't interested in comin' back with Gaylord? Or what was the deal on that? If you don't mind my asking. 

Neff: No. At that time, Mexican Hat Expeditions turned from Mexican Hat Expeditions to Canyoneers Incorporated, and they started runnin' those huge big rafts. I was out of touch with Gay, and he had things goin'. Not to say we had any split, because we didn't. (

Steiger: It just wasn't one of those things.) I have the highest respect for him, and he does for me. It was just something that happened, and I started running with Ron Smith and Bill Belknap, and that's what happened. No big deal. So that's the way it went. 

Steiger: So you rowed the thirty-threes, and then what? 

Neff: Well, after we rowed that thirty-three through there, he thought it would be a good idea to take a thirty-three through there rowing with a motor rig, and then we could put passengers on ________ fun. After that trip, we scoffed that idea -screw that, we'll just run motor rigs! 

Steiger: (laughs) That was it! 

Neff: Oh yeah, 'cause you can make money on motor rigs -fourteen people on board and you go. 

Steiger: Right, why pay the extra guys. 

Neff: Yeah. So then we got into that, runnin' the motor rig trips, and then I did with.... I ran with.... Who's the welder down there at <Kanab, ()>? 

Steiger: Dean Waterman. 

Neff: Dean Waterman. I ran with Dean a lot of trips. 

Steiger: What was he like to run with? 

Neff: He was real good. He (laughs) was good, he was a good boatman and all that stuff, real good -kind of sketchy with the people. 

Steiger: Didn't say much. 

Neff: Didn't say much at all. You know Dean. 

Steiger: I don't, but that was what O. C. said. 

Neff: And actually, Dean.... Actually, I hiked out at <Lava Falls, ()> one time, up that terrible, terrible trail. And Dean came in and took my boat. That's the last time I ran with him. First thing he said to me comin' down, "Got any pussy on this trip?" "God, Dean! What are you talkin' about?!" And the first thing he said to me, I'll never forget it, (gruffly) "Where's the good ones, Don?" 

Steiger: Those were the days, though, huh? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. 

Steiger: Who knew? 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

Neff: Yeah, we had a lot of good times there, bad times. 

Steiger: Were there other guys that stand out in that crew that you were runnin' with in those days that come immediately to mind? 

Neff: Well, after I ran with Ron for a while, and Bill Belknap -and I actually ran with Bill up on <Green River, ()>. 

Steiger: Doing the sport-yak trips? 

Neff: Yup, I did those. 

Steiger: Those were cool, huh? 

Neff: Yeah. Yeah, we had people from <Red Oak, ()>, <Iowa, ()>, on that trip. Bill and I ran together. Bill was never a very good boatman, he was a great guy, and he did a good job, no question. And Bill and I ran triple-rigs through Desolation, and we ran through Cat together. Dick McCallum was there, ran a motor rig with us. Pete Gibbs was there. I guess Pete Mills was in there at that time. A lot of guys. I mean, hell, naming names, you know. Then you and I ran with Arizona River Runners together. 

Steiger: Well, then you ran for Dick and started Brian on that triple-rig. 

Neff: Uh-huh, Brian was excellent. 

Steiger: I bet. 

Neff: He was excellent. 

Steiger: Strong. 

Neff: Oh, shoot! Not only strong, but the guy was real loyal to me and would listen to me and stuff, and you gotta have that with a triple-rig. Have you ever run a triple-rig? 

Steiger: No. 

Neff: I'll tell you what, it's a different deal. And you've got to be in tune together. 

Steiger: You'd be downstream, you'd put him upstream? (chuckles) 

Neff: Yeah. Or vice versa. You've really gotta communicate, 'cause it's not easy to do. But once you learn it, God, you love it -if there's no wind you love it. 

Steiger: You mean, 'cause you could actually make 'em work? You're the only one I've ever heard say that. Everybody else has said, "Oh, my God, they're hell!" 

Neff: You could do wonders with a triple-rig -we did it. Pete Gibbs and I did it; Brian and I did it; Dan was a good boatman, Dan did great things with me. I'll tell you one thing I was real proud of, I actually out-rowed Brian Dierker one time in a race, when we broke the triple-rigs apart and we raced from above President Harding -you know, it's real calm there. (

Steiger: Yeah.) We had a race one time, and Brian was a hunk.... 

Steiger: Buck Farm! 

Neff: Buck Farm, you betcha. 

Steiger: Or Dam Site, or somewhere in there. 

Neff: Yeah. And we rowed, we had a race one time. The only way I beat Brian was I got the current on a curve and beat him. I was so proud of beatin' Brian, because, God, that guy was a stud. 

Steiger: Yeah, six-foot-four.... 

Neff: I'll tell you somethin' else about that guy. We used to hike. Brian and I used to run-hike. We ran up the <Little Colorado, ()> one time, and we figured out finally we went fourteen miles up, fourteen miles back. 

Steiger: You got him started doin' stuff like that, huh? 

(Neff: Yeah.) 

Steiger:"Let's go for a run-hike"? 

Neff: That guy can run like you can't believe. 

Steiger: Oh, I believe it. 

Neff: And I was in good shape in those days, and I could keep up with him. I couldn't beat him, though, he was a stud. We got back about 10:30 at night, and the people had cooked their own food and everything. We were tryin' to find <Sipapu, ()> and we ran right by it, 'cause you're lookin' at your feet when you're runnin', you know. And we started out, and people wanted to come with us. "Well, we're gonna go fast." "Aw, we can keep up with you." (imitates, I don't know, the sound of a jet taking off?) We go, you know. 

Steiger: You're gone, "adios people" right away. 

Neff: Yeah. I was real proud of stickin' with Brian for a while, because he was a stud, man. 

Steiger: He kinda needed a dad, too, I think. 

Neff: He loved me, and I loved him, and I'll tell you another thing about Brian that I really like. R. J. went on these trips. You'll see some pictures in my garage with R. J. He was so good to my son, R. J. R. J. just loves Brian, to this day. Brian was so good with kids, you know. I don't know if he has any kids now, but I'll tell you one thing, that guy would be a hell of a father. 

Steiger: He doesn't, no. 

Neff: He was so good with R. J. They just bonded, you know. Boy, we had some times down there. We were in rainstorms, we were in stuff. We'd pack R. J. in there and get him set up. We'd hold a tarp over our head all night long with the rain comin' down and build the fire up. 

Steiger: You took R. J. on some of those trips, some of the Mac trips? 

Neff: Oh, yeah, R. J. went with me from the time he was seven years old. 

Steiger: That was it, he was goin'. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, he was a good kid. 

Steiger: Yeah, he was a good kid, I remember him. I guess I'd better get you to tell me that <Crystal, ()> story. 

Neff: (chuckles) About the first trip there? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Neff: That was in 1966, I think. Anyway, we started the trip. Smith and Belknap told us that <Crystal, ()> came in, big flood and stuff. 

Steiger: So up until then, <Crystal, ()> was.... 

Neff: It was nuthin'! 

Steiger: What was it? There was just a 

(Neff: Calm water.) 

Steiger: little bend in the road? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. So we go down there, and Pete Gibbs is with me on a triple-rig, and so we're followin' Ron Smith in a motor rig, and of course you get off early in the morning with the triple-rig and go, and then they follow you and they pass you and they camp, and then you finally end up there at dark and get 'em. We came to <Crystal, ()> and we pulled over on the right side and parked, and there were logs like you couldn't believe on the right side. It was horrendous! 

Steiger: Well, I was readin' this Roy Webb transcript, and you said you knew somethin' was up at <Hermit, ()>. 

Neff: Oh, yeah! I'll tell you why. We went through <Hermit, ()>, and <Hermit, ()>'s the boatman's friend. <Hermit, ()> is the greatest rapid in the world. You can go right down the center of that sucker and have fun. 

Steiger: Not anymore. It's turnin' over guys right and left. 

Neff: Really?! 

Steiger: It got gnarlier, yeah. We still run down the gut.... 

Neff: That proves my theory. Everything changes, right? 

Steiger: Well now, if you have a trip and everybody lines up and everybody goes down the middle, one of ya's gonna flip. And that's no shit. 

Neff: In the old days, <Hermit, ()> had these twelve- or thirteen-foot waves that you'd go up and down. You've been through there. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah. 

Neff: And it was just exciting! You'd just go full throttle on it, or row like shit, and get set up, and three-quarters of the triple-rig, and go whompin' up, and everybody'd go, "My God! How are we survivin' this?!" 

Steiger: But it was easy? 

Neff: Oh, it was great. It was easy. The boatman's friend. <Horn Creek, ()> was shit, and <Hermit, ()> was wonderful. Anyway, <Crystal, ()>. 

Steiger: Well, you get to <Hermit, ()>.... 

Neff: Get to <Hermit, ()> and we see on the sides -we're goin' through <Hermit, ()>, and I notice this scum line on the side of the wall on the right side of <Hermit, ()>. There's a wall there down below, when you get through the tailwaves. The scum line there, and I go, "My God, what the hell's goin' on here?!" And there was some wood, too, up that far. I'm goin', "Shit! This is weird! I've never seen anything like it. What the hell's the deal?" We pull over at <Crystal, ()>. Oh, my God.... 

Steiger: Trees, logs, on the right side. 

Neff: This thing is so bad I can't believe it. What are we gonna do? 

Steiger: So these trees, this is like the remnant of the dam, from the flood. 

(Neff: Yeah.) 

Steiger: So this flood dammed up the whole river. 

Neff: Yeah, big logs -big logs. We called 'em <Crystal, ()> logs, and they lasted for years. 

Steiger: On that rapid? No kidding? 

Neff: You could always tell a <Crystal, ()> log, even downstream forty miles. You could tell a <Crystal, ()> log, it was chewed up and beat up and had these splinters stickin' out of it, you know. You could always tell it. It was rounded, you know. You could always tell. I could show you a <Crystal, ()> log. I'd say, "That's a <Crystal, ()> log, it came out of <Crystal, ()>." And I'd be right. 

Steiger: And these are like pine trees? Or whatever was up there? 

Neff: Probably pine or whatever came down there. 

Steiger: Tammies, cottonwoods, yeah. 

Neff: Yeah. I don't think cottonwoods -I think they were pine, most of 'em. 

Steiger: So it had actually dammed the river and backed water up ten or twelve feet high at the foot of <Hermit, ()>? 

Neff: Exactly. I wouldn't call it dammin' the river, but there was 3,000 second-feet comin' down <Crystal, ()> or so, give or take. When it goes down there, all of it can't go downstream.... 

Steiger: So it actually went that far upstream? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. (Steiger whistles appreciatively) By Boucher right up to <Hermit, ()>. That's a long ways. 

Steiger: That's a lot of water. 

Neff: So we get down there, and I heard that John Cross, Jr., was ahead of us in a motor rig, and he went through <Crystal, ()>. All of us ran down the left side. 

Steiger: 'Cause there wasn't any right. 

Neff: Nah, there was no right -no right at all. 

Steiger: What did it look like over there? 

Neff: A lot of logs, you couldn't get through. 

Steiger: Stuck together, or floatin'? 

Neff: No, not floatin', just logs piled up on the right side. 

Steiger: Just jammed in there. 

Neff: And remember, there's an island there, and there's a red rock. Remember the red rock there? 

Steiger: Oh, yeah, that's still there. 

Neff: Yeah. Well, you couldn't go right of that red rock and those logs and shit -just junk. And a lot of rocks and stuff that has since been gone. So Ron decided to run it, and he ran down the left side. We were a long ways away, we couldn't tell how good he did or anything -it looked good. Pete and I said, "God, gotta go. Let's go!" So we did, we got out in the current and pulled over to the left side as far as we could, and went down that left side, and I'll tell you what, it was a son of a bitch. There's a hole down that left side that we went through that was bigger than the <Upset, ()> hole. It was just huge, it was just ridiculous. All we did was get down there, and then we buried down on it and leaned over the side, and everybody was down flat. Pete was in the back, and Pete's strong, he's a climber, he's real strong. And Pete, after we got through that hole, and went down that left side, I looked back and the back of the triple-rig was folded under, and Pete was hangin' on. I saw him crawlin' up there, and it took us minutes to get that back boat kicked up. 

Steiger: So that last hole, the bottom hole folded him. 

Neff: Yeah. And you know what, that hole ain't there anymore -it's not there. 

(Steiger: Yeah.) 

Neff: It's bigger than the one that you all see the.... 

Steiger: Well, I remember, too, the year.... Like, I did this trip as a passenger in 1971, and in 1972 I was swampin', and I distinctly remember two holes, (

Neff: Definitely.) 'cause I remember Fred farmed me out to Don Harris, and I remember we went down there, and he had this guy, Dave Kent, that it was his -he had never seen the canyon. He had run somewhere else, but it was his first trip in the canyon. I remember distinctly we went down there, and Don just said, "Go down there and hit these things straight." And I remember there were two of 'em, and they were huge. (laughs) Huge! 

Neff: The one on the left was bigger than the one on the right that stayed. That one on the left disappeared after a few years. 

Steiger: Far left? 

Neff: Far left. It was huge, I couldn't believe it. 

Steiger: It was the second one down. 

Neff: Oh, my God! We went through that thing and surfed and kicked the back end up and went over. And finally, oh God, we were so happy to get through there. You talk to Pete Gibbs today, and he'll tell you that was just shit! That was stupid! 

Steiger: Now, was there anybody in his boat that folded under? Or were the people all in the middle? 

Neff: They were all in the middle. 

Steiger: You were on one side, and he was on the other side. 

Neff: You bet. I was here, he was here, and in the middle we had everybody down tight. 

Steiger: Was that what they always did? 

Neff: Oh, yeah. And they still do that in Big Drop _____________. 

Steiger: Like when you ran the youth trips with Brian and all that. 

(Neff: Oh, yeah.) 

Steiger:People are in the middle. 

(Neff: Down.) 

Steiger:And the boatmen are on the outside. 

(Neff: That's right.) 

Steiger:And that's it. 

Neff: Once in a while we'll have a person on each end. (

Steiger: To bail the boats.) Yeah. But when you get out of a rapid like that, yeah, you're full of water anyway. You're so full when you get out of there, rowing a triple-rig is not even.... You just take your chances. You bump into the wall, do whatever you can. 

Steiger: You're not gonna turn over, but you're.... 

Neff: Oh, shit, you're not gonna turn over, but you can't control.... 

Steiger: You're goin' wherever you're goin'. 

Neff: You're goin' anywhere the river wants to take you. That's it. That's a fact. 

Steiger: These are like three Green Rivers? 

Neff: Uh-huh. I think they were Green Rivers. They could have been even old enough to be 

(Steiger: Ten-men?) 

Steiger: Ten-men. But I can't remember now. I think they were ten-men, but I can't remember now. 

Steiger: Yeah, I guess the Green Rivers didn't come along until the early seventies, huh? Wow. So what did these people think about all this? So you guys just ran it because there wasn't anywhere else to go. You didn't have an option, really, of lining, portaging. 

Neff: No option. 

Steiger: You just had to run it. 

Neff: If we had it to do over again, knowing what we did, goin' down that left side, and it was so scary, we probably would have tried to dismantle the boats and line it down the right. But even if you do that in <Crystal, ()> in those days, you had all those logs to go over. There was no option, Lew -there was no option. And we're just goin', "God, Ron's gone! Shit!" 

Steiger: Was he waitin' for you down below? 

Neff: Well, sort of, yeah. (laughter) 

Steiger: Was he before <Tuna, ()> Creek? Did he pull over? 

Neff: No, no, he was below <Tuna, ()>. It was high water, too. I don't remember what the water level was. 

Steiger: That's pretty interesting. You'd think that he would have eddied out. 

Neff: Well, he had his own problems gettin' through there, too. 

Steiger: He had a pretty wild ride, too? 

Neff: I'm sure he did, it was a long ways away. 

Steiger: He was on a separate trip? 

Neff: No, no, we were on the same trip. 

Steiger: You and Ron were on the same trip. 

Neff: Yeah. Don't get me wrong, he did eddy out when he could have, and it could have been <Tuna, ()>. I just don't remember, cause we were busy. We were tryin' to get that back boat upright, and we did. 

Steiger: How do you get.... Once it's folded under there.... 

Neff: Well, you just kinda go over there and pull on lines and kick a little while, and then bring it up, and then "pop!" it goes. That's only happened to me one time, so.... 

Steiger: That time, and that was it? 

Neff: That was it. 

Steiger: Man! I was there in 1983, this day when a bunch of big boats turned over there, when the water went up. The Georgie triple-rig did that same thing. They got in the trees, and the upstream boat went underneath the other two. It was stuck under there. 

Neff: That was a common thing for the triple-rigs. I'd heard of it before, too. But that's the only time it happened to us, down the left side in <Crystal, ()>. 

Steiger: Terrifying! So then you're sittin' there and you got one oar, and you got no control. 

Neff: No, we're just scramblin'. "Everybody okay? Okay. Okay, we're here, we're okay, we're okay. Pete, how you doin'? Let's get this back together." And just do what you can. And you pop it up, get back on, put the oars in -"Hey, everything's fine, let's have a beer!" I mean.... Shit! 

Steiger: So you did, you had a beer right below that? 

Neff: Oh, fuck yeah! (Steiger laughs) I'm sorry. 

Steiger: No, that's okay. It's so funny now -this would drive you crazy -you know, they got rules about.... You can't have a drink now -you can't have a beer, ever. 

Neff: We drank all the time. 

Steiger: I think everybody kinda did. Actually, I think some people still do. But boy, they've about got us beat off of it. 

Neff: I don't know. But I'll tell you what, the guys that were there, like myself, too, we did not drink before a big rapid. We did not do that, and I didn't either. 

Steiger: Drank after the big rapids. (chuckles) 

Neff: Afterwards. Because, I'll tell ya', you know, you respected it so much. And the more you run, the more you respect. And the more you run, the more you respect even the small ones, because you know what? That thing's gonna bite me some day, you know. The closest I ever came to turning over in a cat boat was in <Ruby Rapid, ()> in low water. And I darned near went end-to-end on that thing. I went clear back, lost my oars, you know, and I thought, "God, we're goin' over!" 

Steiger: Were you runnin' it just for fun? 

Neff: No, no, it was on.... 

Steiger: You were gonna cheat it? 

Neff: No, there wasn't anyplace to go -just one place. 

Steiger: Oh, right. 

Neff: And that was it. And, boy, that's the closest I ever came to turnin' over in a cat boat. I never did turn over in a cat boat, thank God. I was proud of that, too, but it was luck, just luck. Luck and a little skill, but luck mostly. 

Steiger: Well, there's a few guys around that haven't turned over too many times. 

Neff: Well, when you meet somebody that says, "Hey, I've never done this, never done that, never flipped," [you can] say, "Hey, stick around long enough, it'll happen to you." 

Steiger: O. C. just flipped his very first time this last trip. 

Neff: Doesn't surprise me. 

Steiger: But it's his first one, fifty trips. 

Neff: He's a hell of a man. 

Steiger: Yeah, he's a hell of a boatman. 

Neff: You guys got so good at runnin' those damned dories I couldn't believe it. I was down there at <Lava, ()> one time, and I watched.... Oh, who's the old owner of _______? Martin Litton. I watched Martin run six boats through there and flip all of 'em. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah. Goin' down the right? No kiddin'? 

Neff: Yup. 

Steiger: Six boats! 

Neff: He tried different ways, but it always ended up the same. 

Steiger: Yeah. I know they had a few of 'em. There haven't been any of those for a while. You might flip one there. (battery change) I forgot where we were. 

Neff: So did I. 

Steiger: I guess we were talkin' about <Crystal, ()> and triple-rigs and stuff. 

Neff: Yeah, I told you about that, goin' down the left side with Pete Gibbs and gettin' it straightened out. I guess that's the end of that story. 

Steiger: Yeah. So you continued to.... I guess we should just run through your career there. You continued to work for Ron for quite a few years, huh? 

Neff: Yeah. I worked with Dick, too, you know, in GCY. I also worked for Fort Lee, and I did the Hatch trip. 

Steiger: And a few trips for Fred. 

Neff: Yeah, a lot of 'em for Fred. And Whale. I worked with Whale a lot. They liked me to work with Whale, 'cause Whale and I always got along, Whale liked me. Whale and I got along good, 'cause Whale was a good boatman and everything, but he smoked too damned much dope, you know. And we'd get up in the morning and go rig, and he'd be smokin' dope from eight o'clock in the morning. "God, Whale, you gotta lay off that stuff." Well, he never did, you know. 

Steiger: No, he didn't. Well, he was, he was really tryin' to dry out when he did himself in. I'm sure that that had something to do with it -with the depression that he got into or whatever. 

Neff: I was shocked when Whale died, 'cause I never did think he'd do that. 

Steiger: You know, I wasn't, I have to say. And I ran a season with him. I don't know if that was before. It must have been after you kind of departed from the scene. I ran a whole season with him -me and him and Connie Tibbitts. Do you remember her, did you ever know her? 

Neff: I do. She was a pilot. 

Steiger: Yeah. What a sweetie. I was stunned when I heard about it, but I instantly went, "Oh yeah, okay, that makes sense to me." And it was sort of like -for me, it was like -I never saw Whale do anything that he didn't want to do. Nothing. He liked to smoke dope, he liked to do all that bad stuff. And he didn't do that much work when I was runnin' with him. 

Neff: No, he was real lazy. 

Steiger: But I never saw him where it seemed like to me that he gave a damn what anybody thought of him. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: He didn't care at all about that. 

Neff: He was the quintessential Hatch boatman. 

Steiger: Yeah. Well, but there's some of those guys that work. (laughs) 

Neff: Oh, yeah. 

Steiger: But he ran a good boat, and when he wanted to work, like when we would go rig, he would always be done first. He'd be done riggin' his boat.... 

Neff: When he was sober, man, he could haul the cash, he could. 

Steiger: Well, and takin' care of his boat, he was always done on time. 

Neff: Oh, yeah. 

Steiger: But just the things that he viewed as his stuff. But I used to.... Several years before he did himself in, I used to look at him and go, "What on earth is he gonna do down the road?" 

(Neff: No place to go.) 

Steiger: There was no future. And he was proud in a certain way. I always wondered what in the heck -he's gonna get in trouble here, the way he's carryin' on. And what's he gonna do about it? 

Neff: He never did have an identity except "Whale in Grand Canyon," you know. He never had a family, never had a steady girlfriend. He never got involved with society or a relationship. He liked me, we ran great together, 'cause he used to call me "Donny Dummy Up" you know, 'cause he'd always try to say, "What are you doin'? What's this?" and I'd say, "I dunno." I would never offer any information. So Whale -we ran good together, we did -but God, I always worried about him. Man, just smokin' that dope like crazy -too much, too much. I'd have to cook, I'd have to cover up for him. That's easy. 

Steiger: I ran this whole season and he didn't.... I don't know that I attribute that to dope smoking. I mean, it wasn't like he was unable -it was more like he wasn't interested. I mean, he did the things that he wanted to do. But he was so much fun, people loved him. 

Neff: Oh, yeah, he was so popular. 

Steiger: He kind of compensated. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: As far as Ron Smith -back to that stuff -I wonder what else we need to say about those years, to be historically significant or memorable. 

Neff: I don't know, I ran with Bill Belknap, he's historical. 

Steiger: And a great guy. 

Neff: Yeah. 

Steiger: I'll bet you liked those sport-yak trips, huh? 

Neff: Yeah, we had a good time. (laughs) 

Steiger: Yeah. Well, I think it's really good for the people, too. 

Neff: It was. 

Steiger: I did one of those with Ross and Terry Collier and a bunch of those guys. 

Neff: Terry Collier, yeah. 

Steiger: I thought it was great. I mean, those people.... I was talkin' to O. C. and he had done a couple, too. He said Belknap, what he put on his brochures, "Why should the boatmen have all the fun?!" (laughter) Which is pretty true, you know. I mean, you gotta hand it to 'em. "Okay, we'll just put everybody in their own boats, and they can all be the boatmen." 

Neff: Good concept. 

Steiger: Well, it's somethin' that we could learn from right now, because we're gettin' all this heat now from the private sector -the commercial sector is. You know, we're hoggin' all the canyon and we're profiting too much from it. Sometimes I think.... I look at how much it's changed in those thirty years, and we've damned sure smoothed out a lot of the bumps for these people. There's no longer any doubt that you're gonna get through okay. (

Neff: That's right.) I mean, it's extremely rare that you see somebody crash. 

Neff: That's right. We made it clear that you can get through there, and you can make it, and it's fun. 

Steiger: But now the people who are coming expect it. 

(Neff: Uh-huh.) 

Steiger: What were those people like when you got out to run <Crystal, ()>? Do you remember those guys? 

Neff: They looked at us just like we're gods, you know -we're gonna get 'em through. 

Steiger: They did! 

Neff: Yeah. And we did get 'em through, but we didn't know if we could get through. 

Steiger: Yeah, what did you think, pullin' out? 

Neff: Oh! I'll tell ya', while I was runnin' I just said, "Please, God" -I prayed, you know -"get me through here, please." That's the way you do it, because you really think you're gonna.... You really think you [don't] know anything. "Please get me through here. Get all these people through here. Please, let my son get through here." That's the way you go. Nowadays, hey, it's easy. Just like kayaking used to be a neat deal. Now they're fallin' off of cliffs and everything. I don't know! I really think that boatmen go through a metamorphosis where they're awed by rapids in <Grand Canyon, ()> and things. And then they think they're pretty good at it -like I used to think I was pretty good at it. And then you find out that you can be bitten by this. You gotta be careful, you know. And so you go through that stage where, I don't know, I call it "the 200-hour pilot stage." Never go up with a new pilot, because he's gonna kill you -(laughs) he might. And never go up with a 200-hour pilot, because then he says, "(snaps fingers) I can do this! I'm good." Where when you're on a boat, you think, "You know what? I'm a good boatman, I can do this." And then you get past that stage, and you finally arrive to the point where you're really good and then you're really cautious. I had a trip with a group up on <Yampa, ()> when I had my Don Neff River Company and Dinosaur River Expeditions, and after we went through that <Yampa, ()> trip, a guy said, "You know, you're too cautious. You never run through the hard part. You don't give us any fun." And I said, "Well, listen, the fun is gettin' through. The fun is not puttin' yourself at risk. Because I've been there before and I've done that." And he said, "Well, I haven't." And I said, "Well, I have. So go with somebody else if you want to risk yourself, because I'm not gonna risk myself anymore. I've been through some things, and I was lucky and I got through it, and I ain't gonna do that again." So it's kind of a metamorphosis where you go through as a boatman. You kinda think you're good, and then you kinda think it's fun, and then you kinda think, "Wait a minute! I gotta be safe. I gotta get through here." 

Steiger: Yeah, there's that pain.... Man, I seemed to be tryin' to hit every rock down there, in a dory. 

Neff: Lew, you've done things I haven't done. You ran those dories, and I tell you what, I don't think I could run dories like you ran. 

Steiger: Oh, you could. Oh, yeah. 

Neff: But you know what? The older I get, the more chicken shit I get. 

Steiger: Well, you know what's amazing is how.... I mean, it's a lot more stressful, but what amazes me is ... how much we know. You just don't.... I mean, how it's possible to get through there without fightin' it. The more that we do it, and it's sort of a collective thing, we learn that you really can.... The nice thing about those boats is they just track. I mean, if you get 'em loaded right, they track like you would not believe. They go where you point 'em -within a certain degree of angle and the current. If you're steep in the current and you have a little hull speed, they just go, and you can go real close to stuff. But O. C., fifty trips, great boatman, he turns over in Lava, last trip. And for me, what you were sayin', anymore I'm only doin' like two or three trips a year, and I'm that way. I'm like you said, I'm pretty pumped up about it. I don't take it for granted at all. But I used to, when I was runnin' full seasons. I mean, I'd be doin' -I mean, in my big years, it'd be like six dory trips and then a couple three other, you know, somethin' else. But invariably, just what you said, I'd say, "Goddamn I'm good at this!" And as soon as you would say that, it wouldn't be but a day or two later, somewhere.... And I would get hammered every fuckin' year, and it would always be after I started pattin' myself on the back. 

Neff: Yeah. I learned that, too. I finally found out that the longer you go, and the more you see the same experience over and over again, the more you see the same river level over again, the more you see what can be. Then finally you come to a point where you say, "Jesus, I gotta get through this." And it no longer becomes excitement to you -it becomes an obstacle. You know what I'm sayin'? 

Steiger: Yeah. I don't even see -when I'm lookin' anymore, I'm lookin' for the smoothest way there is. 

Neff: Exactly.

