Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

Dale Family (Regan, Ote, Duffy) Interview

Interview number: 53.13

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A] 

This is the River Runners Oral History Project. This is Lew Steiger and it's October 11, 1998, and we're in <Kanab>, at the house of Regan and Ote Dale. This is going to be one little session, the beginning of several that are gonna happen in the next month or so, but we're just gonna kick this off. We're going to hear about a little adventure that just occurred not too long ago. 

Steiger: What we're gonna talk about here is, there was an incident that just happened at <Lava Falls>, and you should tell me that thing about.... Well, maybe we oughtta just start at the beginning and just sort of set the stage. 

Regan: We had heard, somewhere along on our trip, that there had been some big flooding at <Lava Falls> down <Prospect Canyon>. So we used the SAT phone and called from Deer Creek, called an OARS trip that had just gotten off the river, and they said that we should get there on the highest water possible to run left. So we kinda planned our schedule around that, 'cause we definitely wanted left water. We wanted to go down the left side. So we camped at Red Slide, and somewhere behind us we knew there was a GCE dory trip. We had stopped and hiked at <Fern Glen> and hadn't seen 'em, and we were just startin' to wonder where they were, 'cause we knew at some point they'd pass us, 'cause they took out two days before we did. We proceeded down to Red Slide, camped. We were gonna get up first thing and go down and check it out, and if it wasn't good down the left, we'd wait and possibly do the right or the slot or somethin'. So we'd gotten up early and gone down there, and were scoutin' it, when Darrell Stewart [phonetic spelling] pulled in. I guess he'd been the lead boat for GCE. He came up, and they had the same idea. They had heard that Lava had changed a little bit and wanted to get high water, so they had camped at <Cove Canyon>, which meant they were just right behind us. We didn't spend too much time scoutin', probably not more than about fifteen minutes. I was ready to go, I didn't want to let it drop too far. It looked like it was the same run. 

Ote: Only sharper. 

Regan: Only the wave after the lateral.... 2nd man: The second hole. 

Regan: The second wave there was very sharp, and it looked like it was gonna stop ya', fill you with water, and then you'd be at the mercy of the river after that. But there was no other option, so Ote and I, we scouted it together, and we decided, "Well, let's go. It's not gettin' any better." And Bronco and André and Pete Gross were down at the bottom of the rapid scoutin' somethin' -I couldn't figure out what they were doin'. We're kinda anxious to go, and finally Bronco comes up and goes, "You guys ready to go?" And Ote said, "Yeah, we're goin', we're ready." He goes, "Okay, well, I guess I'm watchin', then." (laughter) So we'd already sent our people back up to get in the boats and be ready when we got there. Darrell just wished us luck, and we went back up and got in our boats and Ote pulled out, and then I pulled out. Just as I pulled out, O. C. walked by. I hadn't even seen him pull in, and he said somethin' like, "Have a good run, and be down below for me, will ya'?" I said, "You bet, I'll be there for ya'." We pulled out and proceeded to go downstream, and at some point, I don't know, I got ahead of Ote, and went through. The wave that we had anticipated stopping us kind of let me right through, it didn't hit me too hard. It slowed me down, but it didn't fill me with water. And then I was in the right spot. I was in the slot and went right between.... 

Steiger: Left of the domer. 

Regan: I went left of the domer and right of all those shallow rocks. I had such a slick run, I didn't even hardly have any water. I mean, it might have been up to the seats, but that's about it, which isn't bad. So I tried to make the left eddy. I started pullin' over there, I looked behind me to see if Ote had made it okay, and she had, so.... 

Steiger: You tried to make the left eddy at the top? 

Regan: Yeah. I just barely got in there. I mean, just barely. I had to work my way up along the wall for about thirty, forty yards to get into it, and then it was just this rolly, surgy, incredible little -it wasn't even an eddy. I mean, the water was movin' downstream and onto shore, and I just had to row constantly to stay there. And at one point, I thought I could take pictures, but I think I did of Bronco and Pete and André -at least I tried. And then Darrell came down. He had a good run. And then O. C. And by the time O. C. came, I had gone from about the top of the eddy, oh, maybe forty or fifty feet, maybe a little more, downstream, just drifting, 'cause I was taking pictures. And before I knew it, it looked to me like O. C. didn't get square for the lateral. Looked like he kind of three-quartered it, and it just rolled him over. So then I had to put my camera down, grab my oars, and pull out. And in the meantime, it had thrown me against the wall. 

Steiger: The surge had? 

Regan: The surge had. And I had to pull off of there. And in doing so, the boat had gotten by me. O. C. and another passenger were swimmin' free, and two people had stayed with the boat. By the time they'd gotten by me -I mean, I was close to 'em, I was probably here to the door. 

Steiger: So that's like about.... 

Regan: Twenty, thirty feet, yeah. They'd just gotten by me, so I had to pull downstream to catch 'em, and I didn't want them gettin' away. I wasn't so worried about the boat and the people on it. I was tryin' to get those people out of the water. I pulled up next to O.... 

Steiger: So they were swimmin' behind the boat? 

Regan: Yeah, they'd gotten downstream of it. I caught up with O. C. first.... 

Steiger: Oh, wait, so they're in front of the boat. 

Regan: Yeah. And I caught up to O., and he grabbed ahold of the gunnel, and then I extended an oar for the other guy, and he grabbed the blade, and I pulled him in. They hung on the side of the boat, and I really didn't have time to pull 'em in. I turned around, and I was headed for the wall down there, just above the spring. So I had to turn and pull away. I told 'em just to hang on. And I turned and started pullin' back out towards the middle of the river, and O. C.'s boat came down and torpedoed me, right in through the side of my boat. 

Steiger: Oh, man! 

Ote: Where were the people? Where was O. C. and his passenger? 

Regan: They were hangin' on the side. 

Ote: But in comparison to that boat comin' down? 

Regan: O. C. put his hand out and tried to stop it. 

Ote: And so he was close to that? 

Regan: Oh, yeah. I mean, he was at the oarlock and you saw where it hit, it hit on the back hatch. So, I mean, he was far enough away where he wasn't gonna get caught in between it, but he tried to fend it off, so that it didn't hit us, but there was no way. An upside-down boat, you're not doin' anything to it. 

Steiger: It's goin' where it's goin'. 

Regan: Yeah. And actually, it hit me twice. Somewhere up above that it had run into me, too. I can't remember. It didn't punch a hole in the boat, but it broke one of my eyelets -snapped it right off. 

Steiger: On your lifeline? 

Regan: Uh-huh. So right after the boat hit us, I was tryin' to get into where the spring was, so I could get them out of the water, 'cause I couldn't really -I mean, I didn't have much time. It was happening really quick. I didn't really want to go down through Lower <Lava> with them hangin' on the side, so I pulled in there and got 'em out of the water. After I got in that eddy, I turned around, and a guy and a gal were on the bottom of O.'s boat, but they weren't really on the bottom, they were on the side. They were tryin' to pull it over. 

Ote: That's Galwins, the guy who was on the bottom. 

Regan: No, he's still on the side, too. They were like standin' on the gunnel, tryin' to pull it over, and I'm yellin' at 'em, "Get up on the bottom! Get up on the bottom!" Finally they did, they got up on the bottom, and right then Ote and André appear. And they're yellin' at 'em, too. So then I kinda landed my boat, and there's no shore there -I mean, it's just rocks. So I had to jump out and hold the boat, and then I had to check O. C. out and this other guy, make sure they weren't hurt. And I looked up and watched Ote leap from the bow of André's boat, in the air, and grab the bow of O. C.'s boat. In the meantime, they had righted it. They had pulled it over, these two people that were with it. They were hanging on the side, but I couldn't see 'em -all I could see was Ote leaping in the air, this big old swan jump, you know. And she grabbed ahold of the gunnel, and that was the last time I looked, until ten or fifteen seconds later, and she was pinned against the wall in Lower <Lava>, spinnin', going around and round and up and down. She was there for, I don't know, maybe a minute or a couple of minutes -it was a long time. And I'm startin' to yell, "Get out of there! Get out of there!" 'cause I knew that was a bad spot, 'cause I'd been there many, many years ago. Not a [good] place to be. 

Steiger: There's a little micro-eddy up there? 

Regan: Way top of the wall there, yeah. Can't be more than big enough for one boat to be in. But it keeps you there, doesn't let you go real quick. And you must have done two or three revolutions in there, huh, at least? 

Steiger: Okay Ote, so now we should start at the beginning and just hear the way this looked to you. So there you go, you run Lava, and you had a good run, too. 

Ote: Yeah, I finished my run and I had a good run. I was full of water, though, unlike Regan -full. And I was havin' my people bail my boat, and I was also havin' 'em look for André. 

Steiger: Did you fill up in that second wave? 

Ote: Yeah, filled up in the second wave, and was lucky, I think, that I didn't go into the domer, 'cause I think if I would have, I might have hit, 'cause I was so heavy by then. But I didn't, I just got the corner of it. And anyway, I was through the rapid, and saw where Regan was, turned around and looked for André, and then started rowin' to the right shore. 

Regan: André was quite a ways behind us, 'cause we had already pulled out and he was still just walkin' back to his boat. 

Ote: But he was pullin' out, Regan, when we did. 

Regan: Really? 

Ote: Yeah. He was pullin' out. He was not that far behind us. Anyway, I was all the way down to where you pull to the right shore, to that little eddy over there where you wait for everybody behind that rock. André got through, so I pulled in, let my people off so they could go watch the rest of the boats, and waited for André. André came down and I hopped in his boat. We went back up behind that little rock. 

Steiger: Unloaded his passengers? 

Ote: Yeah, unloaded all his passengers, and got ready to be rescue for the rest of our trip. So we rowed up behind that rock and were just hanging out in that kind of quiet water, and all of our -Bronco ran and he had a good run, Pete ran and he had a good run, and the baggage rafts had good runs -actually, one was kind of wild. And then we started pullin' back in to hear how everybody's runs were, and André signalled to Bronco, "Do you want us to run rescue for GCE?" And Bronco said, "Yeah." So André and I rowed back out there. And we actually discussed about maybe I should row and he should -you know which place we should be in. I told him I thought he'd better row out there, 'cause he was stronger. So anyway, we're watchin', and Darrell runs through and has a great run, and he's coming downstream, right towards us, and we see O. C. flip. We're yelling at Darrell, "You have a boat over!" But Darrell isn't hearing us. He doesn't get the picture. 

Steiger: He didn't look back? 

Ote: Well, he looked back. He said he looked back and he saw Denoyer come through right-side up. But you can't see this boat of O. C.'s, it was like black, and it was really hard to see in the river, and he didn't see it upside down. So he pulls in. 

Steiger: Denoyer was actually behind O. C.? 

Ote: Yeah. Denoyer was behind O. C. And so Darrell doesn't even realize that O. C.'s over, even though we're tryin' to tell him he is. So we're going out as he's coming in. So we kind of have this little not collision, but it like kind of messes up the timing, and Darrell never gets it, he never hears us say that O. C.'s upside-down. So we end up going out into the current probably a little too soon. And André's havin' to struggle upstream the whole time, to try to catch, to stay so that we can help. And finally the boat does come down, once they right it. And just like Regan said, we had to.... 

Steiger: So you guys weren't even close. So it was like.... 

Ote: We weren't there to rescue.... 

Steiger: So these guys are flounderin', and you tell 'em how to right the boat, and they go ahead and do it. 

Ote: No, we're tellin' 'em, too. By then.... 

Regan: Both of us are yellin' at 'em. 

Ote: By then, we're pretty close, we're actually maybe, oh, thirty feet downstream of the upside-down boat, and we're yellin', "Loosen the lines! Get on the bottom! Lean back!" (laughs) And they finally did, they got the boat right-side up. But then they couldn't get in it, they couldn't get in the boat. So then they were really in trouble, because they were downstream of it, headed for the left shore. 

Steiger: Now wait a minute, how'd they get -if they righted it, did they just right it sideways in the current? 

Ote: Uh-huh, dead sideways. 

Regan: It was sideways in the current, yeah. 

Steiger: Yeah. And so then it just rolled, and then they're.... 

Ote: Then they were on the downstream side. And I'm not really sure how they got on the downstream side. 

Regan: Well, the boat pivoted. I mean, it was like this. The current's goin' this way, when I saw 'em roll it kinda like that. 

Ote: Okay. 

Regan: And then they were right there. 

Ote: And then it rotated around. 

Steiger: Yeah. So you're sittin' there in the bow of André's boat goin', "This doesn't look good." 

Ote: Yeah. So we're on the left side of the boat, left shore, and the boat's out in the current, but it's just like bee-linin' past us. And I didn't know if André was gonna even get to it. So that's when I like did this jump and caught the gunnel. And had I waited maybe five more seconds, maybe I could have boarded it, rather than go in the water, but I didn't know that. So anyway, there I was, and then I couldn't get in the boat. I couldn't do a mantle, like I do on the Briggs boat. You know how you mantle up and push down and get in? I couldn't do it, it was too high up there. They were on the other side, trying to get in. So we were keeping the boat level, whereas when you tilt it down (

Steiger: You can get to it.). So finally I just like swing my leg up over the oarlock, and like do this little push with my leg and get in the boat. Just as I get in the boat, the guy says, "Get her in first." And I reach over and I pulled her in, and I look up, and we're coming to this pour-over. I mean, this little like blah-dupe-tee-dupe rock pour-over. I knew we'd hit, and he was right there. He was between the rock and the boat, that guy. And I just went over there and I like grabbed this guy and I went whoa! like that [motions pulling guy in] , and then we hit that rock and I fell backwards. 

Steiger: Oh, my God! 

Ote: Oh, it was the scariest thing. That was way scarier than goin' in that little eddy. 

Steiger: Now, how big was this guy? 

Ote: Two eighty [280 pounds]. 

Steiger: Are you kidding?! (laughs) And you just pulled him in? 

Ote: It was adrenaline. I yanked this guy in, and then immediately we hit the rock. Like we went over the pour-over and it went "clunk!" and then I fell backwards, 'cause I was off balance. And the next thing I knew, Lew, we were in that eddy. Bam! I mean, up against the wall. There was no gettin' to oars, there was nothin'. 

Steiger: Were there oars in the oarlocks? 

Ote: No. No oars. 

Steiger: Were there leashes? Were the oars just danglin'? 

Ote: Yeah. 

Steiger: They were there, but they weren't there? 

Ote: No, they were there. And I actually at one point got one in. And just as I got it in, the boat spun, and out it came again. So then I was tryin' to get another one in, and the boat spun again. 

Steiger: It's bangin' against the cliff? 

Ote: Yeah, not hard, though. Not like really loud and not really hard -just kinda just spinnin' and then surging; spinnin' and surgin'. And finally I just realized that the only thing we could do was keep the boat level. And that's what I said to the people. I said, "Let's just keep this boat level. Eventually the river's gonna let us out of here." And it did. Eventually there came a surge that picked the boat up and took us downstream towards the wall and we hit the wall as we went out. And the lady -Sue was her name -she went to stick her hand out, and I went, "No, Sue! Don't stick your hand out! Keep your hands in the boat!" I mean, it was like I yelled at her. 

Steiger: You learned their names while you were in there? 

Ote: No, I learned that afterwards. But I didn't say "Sue," I said, "Don't touch!" I said somethin' -I'm not sure what I said. But I know it was somethin' like, "Keep your hands in the boat." "Get your hands back in here!" And then I yelled at 'em a couple of more times, "Just keep the boat level!" (laughs) It was really exciting. I remember being in there and seeing Denoyer go by in the current. And his eyes were like, really big. But finally, like I said, we came out of there, and I managed to get the spare oars out. I didn't even deal with the oars that were in the water. 

Steiger: Yeah, 'cause it was easier to get the spares anyway. 

Ote: Number one, I'd realized that those oars are like so heavy for me. It was like, "I'm not gonna reach over the side and pick up that oar!" So I got the spare oars out of the little thing and stuck 'em in. I took my time, I didn't like hurry or anything. It's just like, "Okay. I might go downriver a few miles." And then I started strokin', and I was sittin' way low. It felt like I was sitting way low, and maybe the seat was gone. I could hardly even get the oars in the water. And then I yelled at the people again to keep the boat level, and finally I was able to pull to the right shore. But whew! And then I checked 'em out, asked Sue if she was okay -and I forget the guy's name -Jim maybe -if they were okay, and they said they were, and they thanked me. Oh, this is funny. Jim goes, "You're a drinkin' lady, aren't ya'?" And I went, "Well, a little." He goes, "Good!" I think he had somethin' in mind, to get me a fifth of something or whatever. And I've heard from Sue since then. 

Steiger: Wow. 

Ote: That was pretty exciting, the most exciting, scary thing I've ever experienced on the river. 

Steiger: Sounds like not much time ... 

Ote: No, to think about it. 

Steiger: ... to make a plan. 

Ote: Unt-uh. 

Steiger: That was a metal boat, too, huh? 

Ote: Yeah. Now, that was spontaneity. 

Regan: Darrell didn't seem to be too concerned about.... I mean, none of 'em. So the boat floats through Lower <Lava>. You know, you go downstream and pick it up. Seems like we've always tried to make sure that that doesn't happen. 

Steiger: And we almost always do it, too. 

Regan: Yeah. 

Ote: He just didn't realize.... It wasn't like he wouldn't have gone out there. He just didn't realize that O. C. was over. He didn't see it. 

Regan: We had another boat that went through Lower <Lava> this spring. 

Steiger: Yeah, we should actually.... 

Ote: Duffy? 

Steiger: Yeah, he should come over here and tell us that story while we're at it. 

Regan: C'mon, you can do it. 

Steiger: You're a professional now, you have to be able to recount these things. This is Duffy Dale over here. You can do it. Just tell us, in your own words, what the hell went on there. 

Regan: Say what you saw, what you did. 

Duffy: What I saw? 

Steiger: "There we were. We were eatin' lunch...." 

Duffy: Want me to do it? (

Steiger: Yeah!) Okay, we were sittin' down in Lower <Lava>, eating lunch, and we were waiting for Expeditions to come through Lava. We were watchin' with the binoculars, and what was it, the first boat? I can't remember. No, he wasn't the first boat, was he? 

Steiger: I think he may have been. I think he was. 

Duffy: The first boat flips, and we were watchin' him, and they flip, and they were upside-down on the left shore, and they were just sittin' there, they weren't doing anything. 

Steiger: I remember the motorboat was out there. They weren't too worried. 

Duffy: They were just sittin' there, waitin', wonderin' what they were gonna do. Finally, they were just barely startin' to come into Lower <Lava>, and Cindell tells me to get up and get to my boat and row out there and save 'em. And I was like, "Should I?" I was wondering if I should or not, and she was like, "Well, yeah, get out there! Just go do it!" And finally I just went out there and untied my boat and jumped on and started rowing out there. Carol was on my boat, and she was on the boat with me. I rowed out there and rowed up to the top of the eddy and they came around the corner of Lower <Lava> and came down. I rowed out there, and then Roger rowed out there. 

Steiger: Yeah, with me in the boat. 

Duffy: And you guys were upstream of 'em of and I was downstream of 'em, and I was rowin' upstream, tryin' to stay stopped in the current, and they came to me, and I jumped up out of my seat, and jumped off my boat onto their upside-down boat. Some girl jumped off that boat onto my boat at the same time -we switched. And right when I jumped across onto the boat, I grabbed the flip line, and just started leaning back. And right when I did that, it just flipped right over. I jumped in, lost my sandal, lost my hat -got 'em both back -jumped in the boat. I was the only one in the boat. [I] grabbed three passengers, pulled 'em into the boat, and then Chuck finally jumped in, and then I got the two spare oars for Chuck, put 'em both into the oarlocks for him, and he rowed into the eddy below the little riffle right there. And then I ran back up along the cliff and got in my boat, and rowed back up the eddy to make it into the shade with this girl where lunch was. 

Steiger: Yeah, that was pretty phenomenal. 

Ote: You were there, huh, Lew? 

Steiger: Yeah, I was there. And like Duffy said, we were sittin' there eatin' lunch, and we really weren't too worried about it, because here was this motorboat. The motorboat was downstream then, in the right eddy, at the bottom. And so we were just eatin' lunch, and we weren't even thinkin'.... 

Ote: That you should need to rescue. 

Steiger: Yeah, we weren't even thinkin' rescue. And so we see this boat go over, and we still weren't thinkin' rescue. You know, it was like, "Well, these guys are gonna get it together." And so we're just kinda sittin' there eatin' lunch, and then they kinda don't get it together, and they're comin' and they're comin'. And then just as they're floatin' into Lower <Lava>, we go, "Holy shit! They're comin' down here! We'd better go get 'em!" And it was like Duffy said, Cindell's like "Duffy, get out there!" (laughs) And so Duff got to his boat really fast, and he was out there. And then Rog is like, "C'mon, Lew, let's go!" And we went and Rog just took his knife out and cut his stern line. He just cut it off right at the boat. Otherwise, we would have never got out there [in time]. And we got out, and like Duffy says, we were behind 'em. And really, we got to the boat, and I'm sittin' there, I'm thinkin' we're gonna take all these people off the upside-down [boat]. I had it in my mind, this mental picture of here's all these people standin' on this boat. Let's get 'em off before we right it. I was thinkin', "Ah, we'll just scoop these people off," 'cause that's pretty easy to do, you know -just make 'em jump off the boat. But it all happened too fast, it was like we didn't do anything, we just rowed out there. It was like, "Okay, let's...." And then before we knew it, Duffy had jumped over, and it was just like you said, too: it was like he jumps off of this boat, and as he jumps off, he gets the flip line, and boom! the next thing we know, the boat's right-side up. And then the next thing we know, the people are in the boat and we're rowin' back to shore. And it was true. And then it was like, "Oh, shit, now here's Carol in Duffy's boat." And she was tryin' to make it over. We didn't want to leave lunch, you know. And she just barely got to shore before bein' swept into this next little rapid. 

Ote: She didn't get there. 

Duffy: I told her, "Pull! Pull! Pull!" She was like, "What should I do?!" I said, "Pull! Pull! Pull! _________." 

Steiger: Yeah. But she finally did get over there. Yeah. And so that was that. 

Regan: (inaudible) 

Ote: And then you rowed back up to lunch. 



