FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Wilfred Killip

Interview number NAU.OH.28.66

Wilfred Killip, who has been with the Flagstaff Public School System since 1936. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on June 10, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, November 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in <Morenci Arizona>, 1911 

    Parents 

    Father,John Wilfreed Killip 

    Mother, Florence Faragher Killip 

    Came from the Isle of Man 

    Father was a carpenter 

    Mother was a housewife 

    Brothers and sisters 

    Schooling 

    <Morenci Arizona> 

    Hermosa Beach, <California> 

    Northern Arizona University, 1932 

    Description of when Wilfred first came to <Flagstaff> in 1932 

    Marriage and family 

    Description of <Flagstaff> in 1932 

    Description of NAU campus in 1932 

    Heating plant, heated with wood from the sawmill 

    Instructors and other staff at NAU, 1932-1936 

    Aaron McCreary 

    Rudy Lavik 

    Chester Deaver 

    William Tinsley, history 

    Eldon Ardrey, Shrine of Ages choir 

    Francis Osborn, industrial arts 

    Mr. Berg 

    Teaching position at South Beaver School, in detail 

    Fifth grade class 

    Description of building 

    Additions in 1948 

    Hot meals program during the Depression 

    Class size, very large 

    Types of instruction 

    Pre-primary grade for Spanish speaking children 

    Faculty members, 1936-37 

    Thomas Weitzel, principal 

    Bob Robles 

    Ellen Harrigan 

    Gertrude Schnebly 

    Elsie McCauley, 2nd Grade 

    Betty Irish, 1st grade 

    Alma Acker, pre-primary 

    Students 

    Mexican-American 

    Dunbar School for black children, 1937-53 

    South Beaver 

    Parents occupations 

    Worked at mills, city maintenance, custodial 

    Saginaw mill 

    Southwest Industries 

    Babbitt’s sawmill 

    School supplies and equipment 

    Parents opinion towards education more supportive prior to WWII

Tape 1, Side 2

    South Beaver School, continued 

    Extracurricular activities were few 

    Sports and scouting after school 

    Girl Scouts, 1936-37 

    Ted Spencer 

    Boy Scouts 

    Dr. Fronske 

    Hill Redman 

    Teaching at Flagstaff High School, 1938 

    Industrial arts and physical education 

    Faculty and staff 

    JP McVey, principal 

    Harry Micke, science/chemistry 

    Edith Erwin, commercial 

    Olive McNerney, foreign languages 

    Bertha Mae White, girls physical education 

    JC Booksloy, English 

    Ruth Dotson, home economics 

    Anise McGinley, librarian 

    Archie Anglin, commercial 

    Other jobs held in the Flagstaff Public School system 

    Principal of Flagstaff High School, 1948 

    Assistant superintendent of schools in late 1950’s 

    History of <Flagstaff> schools since 1938 

    Junior high school system 

    Old high school 

    Remodeling of Emerson School, 1940 

    Additions to South Beaver School, 1948 

    Sedona School, rebuilt in 1948 after fire 

    Thomas Elementary School, 1948 

    Gymnasium and woodshop for high school 

    Mount Elden School, 1953 

    Marshall Elementary School, 1954 

    High school gymnasium remodeled, 1954

Tape 2, Side 1

    Sedona School auditorium, 1954 

    New Flagstaff High School, 1954 

    Auditorium 

    First public swimming pool 

    Additions to Mount Elden School, 1956 

    Additions to Marshall Elementary School, 1956 

    Lura Kinsey School, 1956 

    Sedona School cafeteria, 1957 

    Thomas Weitzel School, 1958 

    Additions to Kinsey School, 1961 

    Leupp Boarding School, 1961 

    Public school for staff’s children 

    East Flagstaff Junior High School, 1962 

    New Thomas Weitzel School, 1962 

    Sechrist School, 1962 

    Cafeteria for high school, 1962 

    Addition to East Flagstaff Junior High School, 1965 

    Additions to Sedona School, 1965 

    Administration building, 1965 

    East Flagstaff Junior High School, swimming pool, 1965 

    Thomas School, 1965 

    Coconino High School, 1965 

    Flagstaff Junior High School, 1968 

    Christensen Elementary School, 1968 

    Superintendent offices 

    Additions at <Leupp> 

    Additions to East Flagstaff Junior High School

Tape 2, Side 2

    Additions to Leupp School 

    Other construction projects 

    Additions to Marshall 

    Additions to Flagstaff High 

    Additions to Mount Elden

    Additions to Kinsey 

    Additions to Christensen

This is an interview with Wilfred Killip, who was assistant superintendent of Flagstaff Public School System, and has been with Flagstaff Public Schools since 1936. The interview is being conducted on June 10, 1976, at the Public Schools office at 701 North Kendrick in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Mr. Killip, when and where were you born?

WILFRED KILLIP: I was born September 2, 1911, in <Morenci Arizona>.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Who were your parents?

WILFRED KILLIP: Mr. John Wilfred Killip, and Florence Killip.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was her maiden name?

WILFRED KILLIP: Faragher, F-A-R-A-G-H-E-R.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did they come from originally?

WILFRED KILLIP: The Isle of Man, a small island off of England.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: They were immigrants?

WILFRED KILLIP: [Yes.]

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they live in any other part of the <United States> before they came to <Arizona>?

WILFRED KILLIP: They came directly to <Morenci Arizona>.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What did your father do here?

WILFRED KILLIP: He was a carpenter.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did your mother have any occupation?

WILFRED KILLIP: No, just a housewife.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you have any brothers or sisters?

WILFRED KILLIP: Yes, I have three brothers and one sister.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did you have most of your schooling as a child?

WILFRED KILLIP: I went to school in <Morenci Arizona>, and <Hermosa Beach California>, and then to Northern Arizona University.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was where you received all of your college education? (no audible response) Do you remember the schools in <Morenci> very much? What was it like? Was it like a one-room schoolhouse?

WILFRED KILLIP: No, it was not a one-room schoolhouse. They had two elementary schools, plus an elementary school that was combined with the junior high school and high school as all self-contained.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: When did you come to <Flagstaff>? It was when you went to the university?

WILFRED KILLIP: I came to <Flagstaff> to go to the university in September of 1932.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: And you've been here ever since?

WILFRED KILLIP: Yes, ma'am.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: When were you married?

WILFRED KILLIP: August 14, 1938.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What's your wife's name?

WILFRED KILLIP: Joyce.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you have any children?

WILFRED KILLIP: I have two sons: one son by the name of John and one son by the name of Norman.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do they still live in this area?

WILFRED KILLIP: John lives in <Kansas City>, and Norman lives in <Phoenix>.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, when you came to <Flagstaff>, can you kind of describe the area to me, like the downtown area? What was _________?

WILFRED KILLIP: Well, of course it was much, much smaller than it is at the present time. There were very few paved streets. The Santa Fe depot [was] located where it is at the present time. There were some shops on Santa Fe Avenue - some buildings and Babbitts' and the Monte Vista and those areas were pretty well established on Aspen Street. West Cherry, where I first lived, for example, was all dirt. The roads to the OLD Flagstaff High School were mostly dirt and cinder-type roads. And of course very little was out at East <Flagstaff>, as we know it now. The Greenlaw Shopping area was not developed, it was strictly small cabins for tourists, owned by the Greenlaw people. There was an undeveloped area to the west of the Greenlaw Shopping Center, which was known as Sunnyside at that time, which has completely changed, because with the release of the Greenlaw, the state lands, for development.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where should we go from here? Who were your neighbors? Were you living on campus then, or did you live in town?

WILFRED KILLIP: In 1932, when I first came to school, we lived ON the campus. The freshmen students lived in what was known as Taylor Hall, and the sophomore students lived in the small wooden cabins directly behind Taylor Hall, which have been taken out. Then as you became a junior or senior, you had the privilege of living in what is known as Bury Hall.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Describe the campus more to me as far as existing buildings at that time.

WILFRED KILLIP: Okay, as you approach the campus from the Sitgreaves, or Old 66, and from the south was the building that is now used, I think, as a journalism building, was the Training School. And directly south of the Training School was the library administration, which now I think is used for mostly administration, and it has a faculty dining room in it. Then southeast of the administration - or the Gammage Library, as it was known - was called Old Main. In the Old Main building, of course, most of the classrooms, an auditorium, woodworking shops, domestic science or home economics, was established in THIS building.

To the east of Old Main was Taylor Hall. To the east of Taylor Hall was Bury Hall. East of Bury Hall was the dining hall. I think it has been renamed as Hanley Hall after it was remodeled. North of Hanley Hall - as it is named now - was Campbell and Morton Hall. I think that was the extent of the buildings at this time that were on the campus. I'll have to correct that. Behind Old Main was a gymnasium. To the east of the gymnasium was "the cabins," as we referred to them - the wooden cabins for the sophomore students. There was a dairy, the college had their own dairy, which was approximately where the student union building - I think that's the name they used for it - that's that large building with the half-circle-type roofs. It was about the establishment of the dairy.

Also, behind Taylor Hall was the central heating plant. In those days, the heating plant was stoked or fed by wooden slabs from the sawmill, which were brought in by train. Each student that worked in the powerplant had a three-hour shift. His job was to "stoke," as we called it, or put these large four-foot slabs into the boiler for the electricity and the steam for the buildings.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: A little different! (laughs)

WILFRED KILLIP: Yeah, just a little bit.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any professors particularly well that had been there for quite a while?

WILFRED KILLIP: I recall a few of them. Of course, many of them have passed on or deceased as of this time. Some of those that I remember that I think are still living: Aaron McCreary, who was the basketball and freshman football coach, also worked with track. Rudy Lavik was the varsity football coach, and the freshman basketball coach. Those two gentlemen are still alive. We also recall… (tape turned off and on?) [Chester] Deaver was a science teacher. He is also alive, living in the <Oak Creek> area. Others that I remember that I think have passed on is Mr. William Tinsley…

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What did he teach?

WILFRED KILLIP: History. Eldon Ardrey taught music and was noted for his choir work, Shrine of Ages Choir. I think he was the one that started the Shrine Choir at <Grand Canyon>. His wife is presently living in <Flagstaff>. I remember Mr. Francis Osborn, who was an industrial arts teacher; Mr. Berg, who was an industrial arts teacher. And there are others, but I can't recall them at the present time without further study and so forth. Those were some of the ones that I recall and had contact with while going to school.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: When did you graduate?

WILFRED KILLIP: I graduated in 1936.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you have a job at that time?

WILFRED KILLIP: I was very fortunate - I FELT that I was very fortunate - in that prior to my graduation, the <Flagstaff> schools needed a teacher. I applied for this job, and received the job in March, prior to my graduation. Through the courtesy of the college and the <Flagstaff> schools, they received a temporary certificate, so that I could start teaching in March. And I finished my college work by taking a course in the morning before school, and a course in the afternoon AFTER school, and a course by correspondence. As you are aware, I'm sure, in those days we had the tri-quarter system - a better word than tri-semester. We had a quarter system - three quarters during the regular school year, and one quarter or the summer school quarter. I was again fortunate in that they employed me in March, and I was allowed to continue my work and graduated in June.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where were you employed, at which school?

WILFRED KILLIP: I was first employed by the Flagstaff School System to teach at South Beaver School, fifth grade.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Can you describe the South Beaver School building to me?

WILFRED KILLIP: The South Beaver School building is exactly the same in 1936 as it is today, except for additions that were placed ON the school. Additions that have been placed on the school at a later date than 1948, were four classrooms and an auditorium. The present building that faces west on Beaver, except for the auditorium, is exactly the same, except for the remodeling, updating, carpeting, and so forth that are in some of the areas, plus libraries and other types of facilities that have been added to the South Beaver School.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Basically just school rooms then? ___________?

WILFRED KILLIP: Right, basically we had strictly classrooms. There were areas for a small kitchen, in order to serve warm meals in those days, because that was in the Depression era and the school at that time did not have school cafeterias, but they did come in and serve warm meals to the children who needed them. Also in that area there was a small sewing room-shop area, that was not greatly used because the classroom facilities were soon needed for regular classroom work. Of course the class sizes in those days are very much different in size than they are today. Some of the classes I recall - especially mine - was fifty-eight students the first three months, and sixty-eight students the second year of my teaching in South Beaver. It was quite a chore, the rooms were not large enough to take care of that number of children. We would place desks very close together, and eliminate the aisles. In fact, we would sometimes have aisles so that there was two rows of seats together, eliminating one complete aisle, in order to get the number of students that we wished, into classes.

Classes were very much similar to that in the building at that time. Very few were under forty, and most of 'em ran forties to the sixties, which became quite a chore. Perhaps we did more "busy work" type of instruction, where the students were spending a great deal of time writing, in order to keep them busy. And also to keep them better under control or better under discipline because of the writing activities versus the individual type instruction that is trying to be stressed at the present time.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: How large was the faculty at that time?

WILFRED KILLIP: If you could just wait a moment, I could go and get another booklet, and I can give you the exact size of the faculty, if you wish to wait just a second. (tape turned off and on) South Beaver faculty in 1936 and '37 consisted of a principal who taught the sixth grade in addition to his principalship; one fifth-grade teacher; one fourth-grade teacher; one third-grade teacher, two second-grade teachers; two first-grade teachers. At this time, we were having a class known as a pre-primary. In those days we did not have kindergarten. We used the pre-primary in the South Beaver School because South Beaver School was ninety-five to about ninety percent Spanish-speaking children. The district felt, in order to give these children a better opportunity, that they should have a pre-primary grade. This was a disadvantage to the Spanish-American child, because the pre-primary was usually a six-year-old student, which made, or had a tendency of making them one year older than the Anglo when the time came for graduation from high school. Therefore, South Beaver had a total of nine teachers.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of them vividly? [Or could you give a description of some of them?]

WILFRED KILLIP: I can remember most of them very well, because I had the opportunity of working with them for a year and a third. We were a very close group in those days, because we WERE so small. Thomas Weitzel was the principal [and] sixth-grade teacher. He was a short and stocky young man, very dictatorial, but ran a very good school. At a later date, he was transferred to a new school that was built in East <Flagstaff>, or the old Sunnyside area, known today as the Mount Elden School. After a short duration in the Mount Elden School, at the opening of school in the month of August, he had received a heart attack and passed on. At a later date, I'm sure that we will run into it, where there is a school named in his honor, which is in the East <Flagstaff> area, on North Fourth Street.

Bob Robles was a young Spanish gentleman who taught in the fourth grade, and he had a very good rapport with the students because of his background and the type of background that the students that WERE in South Beaver.

Mrs. Ellen Harrigan is also a very capable lady. She is presently living, and I think the last I heard of her, she was in the nineties.

Mrs. Gertrude Schnebly, related to the Schnebly family that did live in <Sedona>. That part of the area there is named after her family, such as the Schnebly Hill. Elsie McCauley was a short-structured [i.e., statured?], very small lady, taught second grade. She graduated in about 1934 from NAU, of course that was known then as the Arizona State Teachers College, and taught for about one year in South Beaver School. And at that time she married, and the ruling was in those days if you were to marry, and you were a lady, you had to resign at the time that you were married. So I would assume that from reading the records that she must have gotten married during Christmas of 1936, and had to resign her job when she came back to work on January 1, 1937, because she was married.

Betty Irish was a first-grade teacher, a medium-height, very heavy-set lady, but did have a great rapport with students.

Alma Acker, whose mother at one time I think was the county school superintendent for <Coconino County>. She had worked for a number of years in the Flagstaff School System. Preferably, her assignment was pre-primary, because she had a great deal of ability with young people.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Good. Okay, maybe you can talk about the students a little more. You said that they were primarily of Mexican-American background. Were there any black students there at the time?

WILFRED KILLIP: At that time, no ma'am. At that time we had what was known as the Dunbar School. The Dunbar School was… If you don't mind shutting it off… (tape turned off and on)

I think in 1926-27 was the first year that the Flagstaff School System built a school for colored children - or as they are known today, the black students. This school stayed in operation from the 1926-27 school year to the year of… (tape turned off and on) The Dunbar School continued on 'til the 1953-54 school year. As you probably are aware, in those days the schools were very much segregated as to black students and Spanish-speaking students. Therefore, the Dunbar School [students] AFTER the 1953-54 school year, were brought into the different schools, such as Emerson and South Beaver. PRIOR to that, up around 1948-49, the upper-grade students, seventh and eighth-grade students, were allowed to attend the junior-senior high school at the Flagstaff Junior High School on Elm and Sitgreaves.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were most of the children who went to South Beaver School, their parents, were involved in the mills, the lumber industry?

WILFRED KILLIP: A great number of them were, yes ma'am. Also, some of their parents worked in two or three lumber camps or mills that we had in town at that time. There was a mill known as the Saginaw Mill, which is located where the Holiday Inn is at the present time. Also, the Southwest Mill was at its present location. Babbitts had a small mill operation on the site of the Town and Country Motel. And a number of the parents also worked for the City maintenance; also for the college as custodial help; also the Flagstaff School System in maintenance and custodial help.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it difficult to get supplies and books at that time?

WILFRED KILLIP: I would say it was very difficult in my times, starting in school at South Beaver in 1936, of receiving supplies and books, et cetera, of the necessary instructional instruments and supplies, because we were at the end of the Depression. As you recall, the Depression started in the early thirties and continued quite for some time - I would almost say into the early forties. But I think there was more initiative on the part of teachers, principals, and students to try to furnish their own type of supplies, and be more conservative with supplies. In those days, if I recall correctly, it was very common to use the textbooks for two students. And that was another reason I think you would find that the aisles were eliminated and the desks were placed together, so that two students could use one textbook. Also, it was very common practice to use both sides of the paper. Also, it was very common practice if the student were to write some article, or we were to give them written work to do, that half pieces of paper were used, and generally used on BOTH sides. Very seldom was the full sheet of paper used, unless the assignment required the full sheet of paper. If it did require the full sheet of paper, it was also noted that if the half sheet on both sides would suffice, that was usually the assignment. Usually spelling pads and so forth were used on both sides. But students brought many of their own supplies from home, such as pencils, notebooks, or tablets I think is the word we used to call 'em - used in those times.

If we were to have special projects for basketball and things like this, they usually tried to help by furnishing. I recall my first basketball team in South Beaver, where the principal, two teachers and myself went to a number of country schools that had been closed down during the Depression. Got their playground equipment, their basketball goals, and transported them on our own time, our own vehicles, to bring 'em in, erected them ourselves, and formed the basketball teams and the things that we wanted, that we felt would help the children. In those days, we did not have basketball uniforms for our students. We usually played in what we called our street clothes, and it was quite a revelation TO the students in South Beaver, years later, to be able to compete on teams and have school-furnished uniforms. I think this did a great deal to encourage the students and build up their morale.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was the opinion of the parents towards the value of education?

WILFRED KILLIP: I am sorry to say, but I feel that the parents' attitudes toward education at the present time is much less than the att[itude]

[END TAPE I, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

WILFRED KILLIP: Then it was in 1936. I feel that the people in 1936 and up through World War II had a great, great deal more respect FOR education, a great, great more respect for the principals and the teachers, and were much more willing to work with teachers and the principal to see that their child got the best that was possible FOR them. Rather than to find fault with everything that was suggested or tried to better the child. I feel that there was a greater desire for those people to see that their children were receiving the best education possible.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of extracurricular activities did the children have at that time?

WILFRED KILLIP: I think you would have to say they had very, very few - VERY few, in fact. As I mentioned a moment ago, the initiative of the principal and some of the teachers were the ones that created many of the extra-curricular activities as they're known today. As I mentioned before, basketball, for example, or activities such as athletics, was not part of the regular school day. This was usually done by people, teachers, who would like to see the children have an opportunity to participate in softball, as it was known in those days, basketball. In the elementary schools there was very little athletic programs at all. In fact, there wasn't any athletic programs - only those that were carried on by those people or teachers who wished to devote their time after school. I would say that probably the most activities of that time were the athletic-type activities and scouting.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: There was Boy Scouts, or Girl Scouts also?

WILFRED KILLIP: There was both at that time - Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts. I recall quite well that when you applied for a job, it was usually asked of you, along with your contract, if you would have time for groups such as Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts. Also, many times it was asked if you could work with church young people. Most of the young people's work in town was all volunteer work, and a great deal of it was placed on teachers, because the teachers were supposed to be trained in handling young people.

I also recall very well that my wife-to-be was a teacher in the Flagstaff School System, and she did have a Girl Scout group. And that particular group, with some interested citizens, did build what is known now as the City garage area, which was considered to be in the outer part of town, a small cabin for Girl Scouts. I would say that one of the main persons to instigate the Girl Scouts was a school board member by the name of Ted Spencer, whose wife and he had four girls. This was a very active, good project for him and his family to keep the four young ladies busy in scouting.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: About when was that established? Do you offhand know the date?

WILFRED KILLIP: Well, roughly I would say that the cabin was first started in the 1936-37 years. Before it was completed, I would say it was in the 1939-40 years. It was completed after my wife and I had become married and did live in that vicinity of West Cherry Street, and it was close to our home. She had a great deal to do with the supervision and the construction - along with other people as Mrs. Spencer and Mrs. Betty Babbitt. There are others that I cannot recall right offhand.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Who was the leader of the Boy Scouts?

WILFRED KILLIP: I do not recall what you would call the council leader of the Boy Scouts at that time. I do recall an individual that was probably the most active individual IN scouting at that time, and I would say that Dr. Fronske, who is presently living IN <Flagstaff> with his son, Bob Fronske, was probably the main pusher of Boy Scouts. Along with Dr. Fronske, the one who did a great, great deal of work WITH the Scouts themselves, would be a gentleman by the name of Hill Redman. At the present time, Mr. Hill Redman lives in <Las Vegas> near his daughter, and for many, many years he taught in the <Flagstaff> schools. He WAS principal of the Flagstaff Junior High School. He was principal of the Lura Kinsey School, until his retirement.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did you teach, or did you teach after the South Beaver School?

WILFRED KILLIP: I was very fortunate in being able to move from South Beaver School after a year-and-a-third of teaching. There was an opening in the Flagstaff High School in my major field, which was industrial arts and physical education. At that time, the industrial arts teacher resigned and went to another area to do college teaching. The position was open, and I applied for the position with the understanding that my ability in industrial arts, my ability in coaching, would be an asset to the Flagstaff High School industrial arts. And coaching of football and basketball with Mr. R.W. Wheeler, who at that time was the total coaching facilities of the Flagstaff High School, with an assistant by the name of Mr. Harry Micke.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Who was the principal of the high school then?

WILFRED KILLIP: The principal of the Flagstaff High School when I came and applied for the industrial arts and coaching job was J.P. McVey.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: This was 1940 then?

WILFRED KILLIP: Actually, when I started teaching in Flagstaff High School was the year of '38-'39 school year.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of the other faculty?

WILFRED KILLIP: There was a great number of the faculty that I recall, certainly. Mr. D.F. Pullen [phonetic spelling], who was a science/history teacher, who later became the principal of the Flagstaff High School. Mr. Harry W. Micke was a science and chemistry teacher. Mrs. Edith Erwin, who was a commercial teacher. Mrs. Olive McNerney, who was a foreign language teacher, and is presently living on North Leroux Street. Mrs. Bertha Mae White, who was girls' physical education teacher. I think she came after this date that you have mentioned. Then there was Mr. J.C. Booksby, who was in charge of the English department. Mrs. Ruth Dotson, who was in charge of the home economics department. Anise McGinley, who was library study hall teacher, who is presently the librarian in the Flagstaff High School. There were others in the school, such as Archie Anglin, who was also in the commercial department. I think that is fairly close to the numbers that I recall. I think there were a total of… thirteen teachers in the school year of 1938-39.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you teach at the high school until you took your present position?

WILFRED KILLIP: No, ma'am, I taught at the Flagstaff High School for a number of years. In the year of about 1948-49, there was an opportunity to be the principal of the Flagstaff High School. I applied and was again very fortunate in that they considered that I had the qualifications for that type of a job. Then I served as the high school principal. Just one moment, and I'll be able to give you… (tape turned off and on) [In] 1948-49, I became the principal of Flagstaff High School, to serve in that capacity for a number of years. Then I became the assistant superintendent of schools with Mr. Cromer, who was superintendent at that time. I was the only assistant superintendent that the district had. And then later years, I would say in the late sixties or early seventies, the district, with this tremendous increase after the war years, decided that they needed three assistant superintendents, and the assignments were changed. Instead of being one assistant superintendent who had many, many duties, such as curriculum, personnel, maintenance, transportation, cafeterias, et cetera, it was divided into three parts. And the three parts were divided similar to the following. One was in charge mostly of personnel and federal-type programs. Another was in charge of curriculum. And my job was assistant superintendent of auxiliary services, dealing mostly with the maintenance repair of buildings, transportation of students, cafeteria, warehousing, and et cetera.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, now maybe we can go back in time to discuss a little bit of the history of the Flagstaff Public schools.

WILFRED KILLIP: I'd be very glad to try to bring you up to date with the type of construction and instruction - construction of buildings that I have been involved with in my years with the <Flagstaff> schools. The first one that I recall while I was still a shop teacher, was that the district decided to go away from the self-contained seventh and eighth grade, and install a junior high school system. This was in the year of about 1938-39, and after much discussion the district decided that they would add eleven classrooms onto the north end of what we called or referred to as the old Flagstaff High School, which has been torn down in recent years. The eleven rooms were added to the old high school on the northeast side, a three-story type construction with three classrooms on the basement floor, a storeroom. The second floor, or the main floor as we referred to is, was, was a teachers' lounge, workroom, and three classrooms. And on the top floor were five small classrooms. Those rooms were built on the top floor at about twenty-two by twenty-four foot square, which we thought were tremendous size in those days. The average load in those classes was in the neighborhood of the thirties to forties, and it was departmentalized. Also in that area, there was supposedly been one of the most up-to-date music room[s] with acoustics and so forth, but the band most of the time drowned out the whole school system.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where was the old high school located?

WILFRED KILLIP: The old high school was located on Elm Street and Sitgreaves, which at the present time is a parking lot adjacent to the present high school gymnasium-auditorium. If a person were to drive by there, they would see this large area that's unpaved, as to where the old Flagstaff Junior High School was established.

We went on from the 1938-39-40 project, [to] the remodeling of Emerson School. So Emerson School students were moved to the junior high school-high school complex. The extra rooms were for students to seventh and eighth grade. Fifth and sixth grade students were moved into empty rooms in the high school. The lower grades were moved into the Federated Church across the street, to complete the remodeling. The remodeling was completed, and the children then moved back into the Emerson. The seventh and eighth-grade children were moved to the Flagstaff High School complex.

At a later date, going on from there, [it] was felt that there needed to be some additions to South Beaver School. In about [the] 1948-49 time, the school decided that they would put a gymnasium-auditorium combination and four classrooms onto South Beaver School. Also, about this same time, the Sedona School, which is in the Flagstaff Elementary School District, was struck by lightning and burnt to the ground. It was necessary for the district to build new classrooms. So in the 1948-49 year, they built six classrooms in the <Sedona> area for elementary children. The elementary children in <Sedona> were from first grade through eighth grade, and they continue at the present time the same arrangement with an addition of kindergarten.

About that same time, the district felt they needed a new elementary school. And a new elementary school was built at the present site of the Flagstaff High School, a wing-running north on the high school grounds as it is known now. At that time there was nothing in this area except the City maintenance garages. The City maintenance garages were asked to be moved, and the City was kind enough to sell the land that the City garages were on to the Flagstaff School District to build a new elementary school. The new elementary school was to be known as the Thomas Elementary School. The Thomas Elementary School was so named in honor of the superintendent of schools, Mr. J.Q. Thomas. Mr. J.Q. Thomas had ceased employment about this time with the district, and the school board felt because of his many years of service to the Flagstaff School District, a school should be named in his honor. In this school there was administration offices, nurse's facilities, eleven classrooms, and of course the necessary restrooms and so forth that go with a new school. It was considered quite an accomplishment. It was considered to be one of the most beautiful schools in the district because it was built of the natural stone. Malapai rock as it is known, with the idea that the window trims and the trims of the building would represent the green of the pine trees, and the natural rocks. Everybody thought it was quite an honor and a beautiful construction.

At this same time, the district decided to build a new gymnasium for the Flagstaff High School. That is the gymnasium that is presently standing on the high school property. It was built in the 1948-49 era. I think the gymnasium at the present time is about twenty-five years old. Also at that same time, the group or the school board decided to build a high school woodworking shop. In those days the most common activity in the industrial area was the mechanical drawings, the architectural draftings, woodworking, leathercraft, a little leatherwork - referred to as the leathercraft - a little electrical work; but very little welding as we know of it today. This building was built on the west side of the new high school gymnasium, or to the rear of the old Flagstaff Junior High School area. It was connected by a breezeway, as we know it, or a hall from the old junior high school wing to the new high school shop. The building was about fifty feet by one hundred. Everybody was thrilled with the size of the building in those days when we had shop in one room, thirty by thirty. To receive a new shop of about three times larger was quite an accomplishment. Along with this same thing, when the new high school gymnasium was built to accommodate about 2,200 students, and had a playing floor of about 112 feet long and about 80 feet wide. It was considered the showplace of Northern <Arizona>. In fact, it was such a showplace that for a year or two after it was completed, all the college, ASC - or Northern Arizona University as it is known now - all their basketball games were played in this gymnasium because of the size and because of the seating capacity.

We go on from there, and in about 1953-54 school year the east part of <Flagstaff> started to grow a great deal, and it was felt that a school should be built in this area. At that time, the school board superintendent and his assistant visited many areas in the eastern part of <Flagstaff> to determine where to build a school. As we looked the area over and found that, as I referred to once before, that East <Flagstaff> was known as Sunnyside. We went to the north end of Sunnyside where there was no houses to speak of, and it was on Sixth Street - there was no street there at [that] time - we looked at an area of some ten acres. We visited with the people who owned it, which were the Babbitt Brothers Investment Company, and asked them for the opportunity to acquire this land. They were very generous and very helpful to schools, and they did allow the school district to buy this property. I do not recall the exact figures, but I think it was around $500 an acre in that area. The land now is appraised at $5,000 an acre.

We acquired the ten acres, we built a school of ten classrooms, and all the necessary facilities, such as nursing rooms, teachers' lounge, restroom facilities, auditorium-cafeteria combination. As we were in the process of constructing it, and before we finished constructing it, the building was too small. A year or two later - I will give you the exact dates in a moment as to the additions to Mount Elden. There has been numbers of them, and I'll try not to miss any of them.

About this same time, it was felt that there was a school needed in what I would call north of the Flagstaff High School area. At this time in the early 1950s there was no housing to speak of north of the present Flagstaff High School area. The area opened up by the city-type development. It was known as Mountain View Subdivision. This area is the area north of the present high school that runs on the west side of Fort Valley Road, north towards the museum. Of course it became a quickly populated area, mostly with homes - or as we refer to it as the bedroom-type district. So it was felt that there was a school needed in this area. The school board at that time approached the City because this was City land - and they were also developing this City land into this subdivision known as the Mountain View Subdivision - for seven acres of land, which was adjacent to the Flagstaff High School property. Now, that land was in the northwest corner, adjacent to the high school property where the Marshall School is established now.

The way the school received its name of Eva Marshall School, was after a teacher who was one of the first teachers in the <Flagstaff> area, who taught in a small log cabin in the area of the college, or Northern Arizona University journalism room. At the present time there's a plaque in honor OF that school, and of Eva Marshall School.

About this same time - 1954 now - the school decided to remodel the junior high school-high school auditorium, and increase the gymnasium area from a stage-gymnasium combination to a strictly gymnasium. In other words, they removed the archway for the stage and raised the gymnasium floor up to the level of the stage floor and made a complete gymnasium floor there. Also taking the seats from the south of the auditorium out, and taking the balcony out of the high school auditorium, and using for stage productions and so forth, portable or folding chairs, rather than the fixed chairs.

At this same time in <Sedona>…

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]

WILFRED KILLIP: The people of <Sedona> had asked for an auditorium, and asked the district if they would build one - because when they had the fire, as we stated before, several years back - for a new auditorium. The district did decide that they should build a new auditorium. This was a joint venture with the people of <Sedona> furnishing part of the building. And if I recall correctly, it was what I would say the floor, or a cement slab, in the neighborhood of forty by sixty feet. The district was then to furnish the walls and stage. The district at that time enlarged the cement slab to make the gym larger than that. The present gym is about sixty by eighty with a stage on the west end of it.

From there we went to the building of a new Flagstaff High School. The construction started in 1954, and if I recall, it was completed in about 1956. At that time, the district built classrooms in such an arrangement that the shop that was built in 1948-49 could be incorporated, and the Thomas Elementary School could be incorporated into the high school classroom situation. Therefore, after a great deal of architectural planning, the Thomas Wing, with connecting halls and connecting classes, was designed so that we have the present high school classroom, shop, auditorium, swimming pool, and gymnasium in all one complex, tied by connecting halls. If you notice, I did mention that this project, there was a new auditorium built on the high school side. It was considered to be quite elaborate. It had a seating capacity of 1,087 people or students. We also built a twenty-five-meter swimming pool for the people who had requested that something be done about swimming in <Flagstaff>. Many local organizations had tried to collect money and had started to build a small pool in the City Park area. They did build a small pool. They got the pool itself concreted in, but they did not plan on the heating, filtering, and the other necessary items that go with a swimming pool. Therefore, the pool was never used. It was later filled with cinders and dirt. And then in turn, the public asked the school district if they would consider putting in a swimming pool. The school board and school district DID study a great deal and put the pool behind the gymnasium that was built several years prior. This pool was a twenty-five-meter pool, and it had a small wading pool on the south end for the small children, in order that they could have some swimming-type facilities.

At this same time an addition was required or needed at Mount Elden. As I stated before, by the time we had finished the building, the original ten classrooms, we were out of space. So in the 1955-56 school year, the district decided to add to the Mount Elden School six rooms onto the west end of the present building, making that building a total of sixteen classrooms, and at the same time, they did add toilet facilities. This same year, 1956-57, it was decided to put an addition onto Marshall School. Marshall School then did have an addition of four classrooms on the east end of the present facilities. Also at this time, there was a great growth in what is known as the Brannen area. There was a great deal of discussion with the people in the city who were establishing the Brannen area, known as the Pine Knolls area at that time. They had a low-cost housing project being built in this area. So the district studied with the city, with the different agencies in the city and the county, and felt it was necessary to build a school in the Pine Knoll or Brannen area.

At that time, they built the school, and the school then was named Lura Kinsey School in honor of a lady who had served many, many years in the <Flagstaff> Schools. She worked as a teacher, principal, for a number of years at Emerson School. Then when the Eva Marshall School was built, she worked as the principal of the TWO schools: half a day principal of Emerson, and a half a day principal of Eva Marshall School. And then they in turn named this school in her honor. This school is established in the Pine Knoll area on Lone Tree Road. It's adjacent to the south campus of NAU, and it now is in sight of the new mini-dome that is being constructed on the south campus.

In 1957, the people of <Sedona> felt that they needed a cafeteria added to their auditorium to make their facilities similar to the facilities in <Flagstaff>, as we had a cafeteria facility in each school in the <Flagstaff> area. We had a cafeteria in Emerson School basement. We had a cafeteria in Marshall School, and we had a cafeteria in Mount Elden School.

So at this time, the district did decide that they would put a kitchen onto the present auditorium that was in <Sedona> that we had mentioned previously, and so they built a new kitchen facility in order that the Sedona Schools would have their own cafeteria.

In the district, there were several cafeterias, but each school did not have their own cafeteria or kitchen, as to say. They did have cafeteria facilities and the school district transported students from the schools who did not have cafeterias to the schools that did have the cafeterias. For example, South Beaver School was transported to Marshall School cafeteria. The Kinsey School was transported to Marshall cafeteria. The Flagstaff High School and Junior High School, which did not have a cafeteria, students walked to Marshall School, because Marshall School is in the northwest corner of the school campus as we see it today. Most of the children were transported to a certain cafeteria to have the cafeteria facilities. This is why the district felt it was necessary for them to install a cafeteria in <Sedona>.

As the district continued to grow, especially in the different areas of town, a new school was decided to be built in what is known as East <Flagstaff>. In 1958, a new school was built on the north end of Fourth Street in East <Flagstaff>. This school is known as the Thomas Weitzel School. This was a fourteen-room school, and again these fourteen rooms were mostly classrooms with… (buzzer sounds, tape turned off and on) The Thomas Weitzel School was named after Thomas Weitzel, who, if you recall, was the principal of South Beaver School; also the principal of Mount Elden School; who had passed away just prior to opening of school one year. So they honored Mr. Weitzel by naming this school after him.

At this same time, it was necessary, besides building a new school in East <Flagstaff> because of the tremendous growth of the Greenlaw property, to add ten more rooms to the Mount Elden School. These rooms were added to the west side as a primary wing, in order that we would have added facilities. Also, a great growth developed in the Pine Knolls area, as we referred to in another project. It was necessary, because of the growth, to add ten more classrooms to this building. These classrooms were added to the south of the old Pine Knoll-Kinsey School area, with a connecting hall.

About this same time - in 1961, to be exact - the Indian people in the <Leupp> area decided to build a 600-student dormitory school. This school was for Indian students who lived in the radius of the <Leupp> area, so that their children could be brought to this school for their education. Also, this school had the room and boarding facilities for these Indian children. There was a stipulation in this BIA program that any employee for the Indian dormitory school, children cannot attend that school. Therefore, it became necessary for the Flagstaff School District, whose district included this part of the reservation, to build a school in this area to take care of the children of the employees of the Indian dormitory school. The district decided to build five classrooms, office, and added facilities, so that these children would be taken care of.

Also at this time, the El Paso Pumping Station had developed a pumping station there in that area, and the Trans-Western gas line people had developed a pumping station close to this area, some eight miles from this area. Those children from the two pumping stations were transported to these five classrooms. This was strictly an elementary school area. The district did furnish bus service from this area to <Flagstaff> for the high school students. In 1962, growth continued to develop in the eastern part of <Flagstaff>.

Now it will become a little confusing to you, because we have named a school Thomas Weitzel School on Fourth Street and Cedar, which was converted from Thomas Weitzel School to East Junior High School. A new school further north on Fourth Street was renamed Thomas Weitzel School. The Thomas Weitzel School that was originally built on the junior high school site now will become East Junior High School. The new Thomas Weitzel School, which is at the end of Fourth Street and Linda Vista, is a new twenty-five-classroom school, with a multipurpose room. By multipurpose, we mean auditorium, gymnasium, cafeteria, office facilities and so forth, was constructed.

About 1962, the growth continued in what we call the Fort Valley Road area, or north of Flagstaff High School, on up the valley. It was necessary to build a new school, ten classrooms, office facilities, nurse's facilities, multipurpose room – auditorium/cafeteria building. This was known as the Sechrist School. Sechrist School was named after a prominent doctor by the name of Dr. Charlie Sechrist, who had many, many years served on the school board of the Flagstaff School District, as well as serving as a doctor to the <Flagstaff> area.

In 1962, with the growth of this area that we have referred to, the Fort Valley area, or the Old <Flagstaff> area - it was necessary to put a cafeteria into the high school because the cafeteria facilities at Marshall where the high school-junior high school facility became too small. So it was decided to build on the high school-junior high school campus a new cafeteria. And when they were constructing the cafeteria, they so constructed it so that it would serve as a multipurpose room. With a cafeteria for the junior-senior high school and a girls' physical education room for the high school girls, and of course the facilities that went with the girls' physical education room.

In 1962, this is called an addition to the Weitzel School. As I referred to back, was the original Weitzel School and had converted to what is known now as East Junior High School. Therefore, to enlarge this building so it would be available or useable for a junior high school, it was necessary to add to the auditorium, shower rooms, music rooms, shops, home ec, health, art, library, science, and classrooms.

In the 1965 school year, again <Sedona> was in a growing pattern, and it was felt that added facilities should be installed in Sedona School site. Four classrooms, offices, teachers' lounge, and teachers' workrooms were added to Sedona School on the east side of the campus of the <Sedona> area.

At the same time in 1965, it was felt that the high school was growing, and it was necessary for the high school and the administration, which was the superintendent, assistant superintendent, and his staff, was housed in what was known as the new high school. It was felt that the administration should be moved out of the high school facilities to facilitate the work of the principal of Flagstaff High School. The administration therefore decided to move out and add a new building. The building that we are presently recording this in, which is on the corner of 701 North Kendrick, a small malapais building, the administration build a reception room, three administration offices, a business office, the secretary's general office, a machine and storage room, and a lounge.

In 1965, it was decided that East Junior High School should have a swimming pool. So East Junior High School added a new swimming pool to that facility.

The growth continued in East <Flagstaff> in the Greenlaw area, known now as Greenlaw 2. It was decided that it was necessary to build another building further east in this area. So the district passed bond issues to build a new twenty-five-classroom multipurpose cafeteria, administration area, office areas, teachers' workroom, teachers' lounge. This was a new elementary school on the east end of Lockett. There were no facilities at this area, there were no houses in this area. It was then known to be at the end of the Greenlaw, with the hopes that if the area were to grow, it would grow north of the Thomas School and to the south of the Thomas School. The area has grown north of the Thomas School, and the low-cost housing unit is on the south of Thomas School.

Now, this is also confusing, the word Thomas. As you recall, back in 1949, a J.Q. Thomas Elementary School was built and later converted to part of the Flagstaff High School. When we stated that we built a new gym, new shop, Thomas Elementary School in the later date, 1955, we built the high school and connected these facilities by connecting halls. Therefore, to honor the superintendent J.Q. Thomas, who had worked for many years in the <Flagstaff> schools, it was felt that the Thomas Wing of the high school lost its identity, and that they would name a new school in honor of J.Q. Thomas at the end of Lockett Street.

In 1965, the area had grown so much, as we had stated several times, it was felt that we had built three new elementary schools in this area, and a junior high school. It was necessary that this area have its own high school. So in 1965, the district voted bond issues to build a new school. This new school is called Coconino High School. It had all the necessary facilities: thirty-six classrooms, library, gymnasium, equipment storage, locker rooms, offices, auditoriums, band rooms, choir rooms, speech rooms, dramatics, work rooms, storage rooms, and all the other necessary facilities; shop, cafeteria, and so forth.

Also at that time of the construction of Coconino High School, the district decided that they would put in the athletic fields, baseball field, girls' field, and a football field, and put covered seating in this area.

In 1968, the growth factor was tremendous again in East <Flagstaff>, that another addition was put on East <Flagstaff> in order to accommodate the number of children that were coming from this area from the three elementary schools that we have previously mentioned.

About this time, the people, what we call the west part of <Flagstaff>, decided that a new Flagstaff Junior high school should be constructed somewhere in the west part of <Flagstaff>. After many, many public meetings and so forth, and finding it almost impossible to find an area to build a junior high school, the final decision was made to try to acquire land near the Flagstaff High School area to build a Flagstaff Junior High School. They did acquire some land from the city, and with the understanding of the City that we would have usage of the City Park for football fields, baseball fields, Little League fields, and so forth. So in 1968, the facility was started to be built. They built a complete new junior high school for the west part of <Flagstaff>. It had all the facilities. It had the new concept of open pods, rather than the self-contained rooms. It does have its gymnasium, its cafeteria, its commons, its classrooms, its library, its shop, its music areas, and so forth.

The district continued to grow in the eastern part of town, so they built a new school out on what we would call East <Flagstaff> 89, close to what was known as the Smokerise area. This land was acquired through Forest exchange, and the school was named the Christiansen Elementary School. The school had about twenty-six classrooms, with all the added facilities that are needed for a school: multipurpose room, teacher lounges, teachers' work rooms, libraries, administration, and so forth. The way this school received its name was by a school board member by the name of Neal Christiansen who served many, many years as a school board member. He is deceased, he did pass away, and in his honor they did name the school for him.

About this same time, 1968, the growth continued, and also in the western part of <Flagstaff> in the Fort Valley Road area, as we refer to it - an addition of ten classrooms, library, was placed in this building.

This brings us up pretty well to date as to the school additions. In 1973, the district found that it did need more facilities for supervisors, and more facilities for storage, and went into a new system of warehousing. At that time, the district did build a new facility in East <Flagstaff>, south of the Coconino High School, to accommodate some thirty-five supervisors, bookkeepers, business personnel, and in the same area, established a new warehouse system which the district has used since then.

In 1974-75, the growth continued in the <Leupp> area, so the district bought two pre-engineered type classrooms, and installed them in that area. Also at this same time, the district installed eight pre-engineered portable classrooms at East Junior High School for more facilities there because of the growth. In this building there was what we called the pod system - two rooms with folding curtains between 'em, and then two more rooms with folding curtains. These rooms are used for special education, typing, and commercial-type work.

The year 1974-75, the people from <Leupp> visited again and said that the area was going to grow tremendously, and the BIA [Bureau of Indian Affairs] or the boarding school as we referred to further back, stated they were going to come up with a new policy and that they would not be having as many children in their boarding school. Therefore, we would have to have a great deal more facilities. The district did decide that this was true to…

[END TAPE 2, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 2]

WILFRED KILLIP: …multipurpose room, cafeteria, music room, art room, special education room, counseling rooms, in the <Leupp> area, making a new facility there that was quite accommodating for these people. This addition is known as a pre-engineered type construction. Most of the construction, to most the lay people, is a metal type construction.

At this same time, it was felt that East Junior High School needed more facilities to accommodate the growth in that area. At this time, the district and school board erected a shops craft area on the north side of the existing facilities. Also, they erected a new girls' gymnasium facilities - just strictly a gymnasium, does not have the shower facilities and necessary facilities for a complete gym, but it was connected with the connecting hallway that uses the present facilities they had prior, the shower facilities, which was adequate, and the restroom facilities, which was adequate.

At the present time, the district is considering eleven pre-engineered - or as some people referred to them, as portable classrooms - in several areas of the Flagstaff School District. They are presently considering adding two portable classrooms at the Eva Marshall School, two classrooms; Flagstaff High School, four classrooms; Mount Elden School, one classroom; Kinsey School, one classroom; and Christiansen School in East <Flagstaff>, three classrooms. This is a project that is being considered for the summer of 1976.



