TOBE TURPEN INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.27

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's December 13, 1998. We're at the home of Tobe Turpen in <Albuquerque New Mexico>. We're going to talk to him about his years as an Indian trader. Also present in the room is Karen Underhill from NAU, and Lew Steiger is running the sound equipment. 

Cole: Well, to start off with, Tobe, maybe you could tell us a little bit about your parents and how they got into the trading business. 

Turpen: My father got into the business. His sister married C. D. Richardson. They had all lived down in a little town in <Texas> outside of <Fort Worth>, named <Alvarado>. His older sister married Mr. Richardson, and Mr. Richardson had been out in this country and had been an Indian trader. Everybody in <Texas> was having a hard time making a living. They were kinda starving down on those little farms, so she brought her brother, my father, Tobe, out to teach him to trade. He tells some rather interesting stories about his arrival. He came into <Flagstaff> and they put him on a wagon, and there was an Indian driver, a Navajo driver, and it took 'em a week to go from <Flagstaff> to <Shonto>. The Indian couldn't speak any English. So for a week as a boy about fourteen years old, he was in the wagon for a week getting there. When he got there, he was there a few days, and the trader--I'm not sure who the trader was, I suppose one of the Richardsons--said, "Tobe, I need to go to <Flagstaff>, so I want you to run the store." He said, "I can't run this store. I have just arrived and I don't know how to trade, I can't speak Navajo." "Well," he said, "this Indian helper we have here, he knows the prices, and he'll do the talking. All you have to do is just don't let everybody carry everything off. Just watch everything." So he said, "They left me there and they didn't come back for six months." He said, "That's how I learned the business. When they got back, I could speak fluent Navajo, and I just went from there." I don't know how long he traded at <Shonto>. I spent some years....

I'll have to back up a little there. Then he went to the war. He went to World War I for a time, came back, and then married and came back to <Shonto>. I spent some early childhood days--I was born in <Flagstaff>. In those days, any time a lady was ready to have a baby, they had to go to <Flagstaff> because that was the only hospital. No matter how far it was, that's where they had to go. I suppose they could have gone to <Winslow>, but <Flagstaff> seemed to be the main town. (brief pause) He continued to trade there, and then he changed places. He went to <Leupp> for a while, and he went to a trading post called Blue Canyon, that is no longer in existence. It kind of sat out there between <Tuba City> and those Hopi villages.

He had a very tragic existence at Blue Canyon. The flu epidemic came--that great flu epidemic that everybody talks about. And his mother-in-law and brother were visiting from <Texas>, and the brother-in- law died from the flu epidemic. So he took the body to <Flagstaff>, and when he got back, which took him a week or ten days later, the mother-in-law had died. He spoke to me about that many times, how hard that was for a person his age to handle.

Then he was hired by the McAdams Company in <Gallup New Mexico>, to come and work for them. McAdams was a very, very famous trader. At that time there were three big firms in <Gallup>--Charles Ilfeld, Gross-Kelly, and McAdams. What their business was mostly was really supplying Indian traders out on the reservation. So when you supplied these people, there was very little money around, very little cash, so you were paid for these supplies by usually rugs, and in some cases, some of the traders made jewelry. So you had to take the rugs and jewelry. Then of course you had to find an outlet for it. That's where my father was very instrumental, I think. Then he started what we refer to as "working silversmiths." We had a shop there. There was a shop at McAdams in the back of the store where eight or ten Navajo silversmiths worked by piecework. And then of course it's always been a tradition to work silversmiths at their home. You issue them the materials, tell 'em what you want, and they make the jewelry.

He then moved on to a store of his own for a very short time, and then he was hired by Gross-Kelly to come in and take over what in those days we called the curio department. We didn't know what arts and crafts were, I guess, because it was the curio department. It was a large department, he ran that for several years. [He] moved on to another store in 1939, rented the old Hubbell building--Lorenzo and Roman Hubbell had a store in <Gallup> across from the Kirk brothers, which were very, very famous traders. They rented that store. I was in about junior high at that time. His business there was really Indian trading. They handled arts and crafts of course, but they bought sheep and they bought wool, and they bought piñons, and they sold stoves and they sold potatoes and they sold cloth. It was just a regular trading post, just like you see on the reservation.

I came into the business in 1946. I hung around the store a lot when I was a child, and I came in, in 1946. I came back out of the service, and I didn't know what my future was. I wasn't too anxious to go to school. I'd been at college for one year, and I wasn't real anxious to go back. So he asked me to come down and help him. I went down there, sort of reluctantly, 'cause it wasn't much of a store, it didn't look like much. He pulled the same thing on me they did on him. He said, "I need to go to <Oklahoma> and look after my sheep." And he didn't come back for six months! (chuckles) So there I am.

By that time I had really seen that there could be a future in the jewelry, especially--jewelry and the rugs--and I liked that. My dad was real good about leaving me alone. He didn't bother me, he let me make my mistakes. Over a period of time, I bought him out in about ten or fifteen years--probably about ten years. And then I transformed the store from a trading post into an arts and crafts store. The other was just too much. I never did see any profit in the sheep. When you buy sheep, you have to hire a herder, and you have to go out every night and make sure the herder's still with the sheep.

There was just all kinds of problems. Piñons, you'd buy piñons, and when it came time to sell 'em, the market had gone down. You buy wool, and you were at the mercy of a buyer, who came from <Boston> once a year to take the wool off your hands. By the time he got there, the price had gone down. I never saw any profit in that end of the business. Of course the reason that the old trader, like my father, ran it, is that they were just trying to help the Indian. The Indian had to have a place to get rid of those products. Times had changed, it wasn't that necessary. I didn't feel it was necessary for me to have to do that. There were other places that they could move their merchandise; life was changing for them, they were taking jobs.

And so we went into the Indian arts and crafts business. I stayed in that location for twenty years. The Highway Department took the location away from us, and I moved out south of town, a mile south of <Gallup>, and built a store. We are still in the business. I have spent now fifty-two years in it.

Would you like for me to touch on what I've seen happen in the jewelry business? 

Cole: Uh-huh. 

Turpen: Well, when I first came into it, when I came back from the service, it was very difficult. People had placed no value on Indian jewelry--the tourist is the person I'm speaking to, the public. They just didn't see any value there. So every time you sold a piece, you had to convince them that it was really kind of worth something, and that maybe somebody else would admire it and like it. And that was really hard to do. And we spent a lot of years just educating the public. And finally, in about the sixties, it started changing. All of a sudden, the general public saw a value. One of the things that changed it dramatically, was the big hippie movement. They started wearing and selling the jewelry. And the celebrities, the movie stars all of a sudden were on TV with it, and it just sort of changed overnight. Now, all of a sudden, we can't get enough merchandise. Everybody wants Indian jewelry.

I'll move back a little, back during World War II, that something happened. The silver and gold and all precious metals--copper, everything--was frozen for the war effort. So there was no jewelry to be made anywhere. There was no costume jewelry to be made, no fine jewelry. But somehow or another, someone convinced the powers to be that the Indians needed this for their livelihood. There were Indians that weren't gonna make it if they couldn't perform the task of making jewelry. So the government allowed a little bit of silver to be released, and the United Indian Traders Association handled this silver and doled it out to the traders.

But at the same time, just like everything else, everything finally just levelled. There came a black market in silver. And that's another thing. The reason I backtrack is that's what started makin' jewelry more popular or more recognizable, was because it was the only jewelry there was in the whole <United States>. And all of a sudden, here's <Gallup>, this little mecca, and dealers are comin' from everywhere to buy this really kinda junky Indian jewelry that people were throwing together. One of the big dealers, [some] of the people who were most successful, a company in <Albuquerque> named Bell Trading, received a contract from the government to make pilots' wings, and they were stamped out of sterling silver. Well, either they were given extra silver, or they pulled a little off the side, because all of a sudden there was silver for them to make Indian jewelry, and they were Indian jewelry manufacturers also.

But anyway, it worked its way down--this black market silver worked its way down into some of the dealers in <Gallup>, and all of a sudden we became the Indian jewelry mecca of the world--of the <United States>, certainly. And that's when the popularity started.

Then after the war, when other merchandise was available, it just kind of died on the vine on us. Now nobody is interested in Indian jewelry--they want their old fine jewelry. So it took us a lot of years for it to become popular. And as I say, it did become popular with the hippie movement, that's what really helped us. It changed very dramatically over the years. Way back when I first started, every customer, wholesale or retail, the first question is, "Is this Indian made? Is it silver? Is it sterling silver? How do I know it's sterling silver?" "Well, you're gonna hafta take our word for it, we don't mark our jewelry." And we didn't in those days. And then as the years went on, and now recently, the big turn in it is they're not as interested in if an Indian made it--they're interested in the fashion of it. What does it look like? And of course many, many years ago, as I look back, we really didn't make very good jewelry. We weren't original, we didn't do much to adapt new styles. We made the same thing over and over, changed a little something here, a little something there in design.

And of course the turquoise wasn't as available. All we had was what was available. When I say that, what I mean is, if a turquoise cutter had a pound of turquoise and cut it, he cut it to shapes that he liked--he didn't cut it to shapes that you wanted. And there was no way of changing that, you had to accept what was available to you. So we worked around what we had.

Some of the other changes in the business--I made some notes here.... For years, the Zunis made their type of jewelry--the Zunis were stone cutters, the Navajos were not stone cutters. So a Zuni would buy a few ounces of rough turquoise--came right out of the mine, right out of the ground, as we call it, rough-- take it home, cut it, and mount it. They have a little different system, too. They make the mounting first, and then cut the stone to fit the mounting. A Navajo works just the opposite. You give him a stone, and he builds around it. He did not have the talent for cutting the stone, because he didn't have the equipment. Out in the hogans he had no electricity, usually, so he had no equipment for cutting the stones. But it goes further than that, it's just a matter of tradition. That's the two types.

Well, that has changed now, down through the years. Now Navajos are mounting Zuni-type jewelry, making Zuni- type jewelry. The use of coral now, we use coral where the first time I ever used coral in jewelry, I put it in, used it with turquoise, but in the same piece of jewelry. You just can't believe the flak we had from the dealers. They thought we had bastardized the whole business. "You can't do this! This is terrible! You can't take a nice piece of turquoise and stick coral around it!" We've had a lot of things happen like that over the years. Then along came the stabilized turquoise. Stabilized turquoise is turquoise that's been what we call "enhanced." When a mine produces turquoise, it produces a lot of white, a lot of light blue, maybe some darker colors, much more no color than anything else. So people learned how to put color in this by using what we call the stabilize method. They pressure plastic into it. And of course again, it was very frowned on, that this couldn't be used. But it made a very fine stone, it never broke, it was easy to cut, it matched in color, it served a purpose. It took a lot of years, though, for the public to accept it. They still don't completely accept it, but it is used in many forms today, whereas other turquoise could not even be used for it. For instance, Santa Domingo jewelry, the type of beads that the Santa Domingos make. They can't get the natural turquoise even today. It's not even available to them. So most all beads that you see: beads, and where there's beads and shells strung together, that's usually stabilized turquoise. And today in that form it's pretty well accepted.

We went through a time when concho belts and what we call link belts--a link belt is a belt that's not on leather, it's just hooked together with silver. Our belts were selling for $15, $18, $25, $35, depending on how much silver we put in 'em. A fellah in <Phoenix> started stampin' 'em out of nickel silver, and selling 'em for $2.95. Well, of course every one frowned on that, but there was a place for it. There was a place that the public--that was a price range and a look, so nickel belts went through a very, very popular stage. We went through what we call spin cast, where you make a mold and you use a little machine to centrifugally spin this, and you get out a piece of finished jewelry that doesn't need much finish on it. We've been through that. That's still very popular today. Then we started usin' gold. Many of the dealers frowned on gold, "Oh, the Indians never use gold, you shouldn't use gold." But again, these things just take time. As the public accepts them, the dealer then accepts them, and now they're part of the business. And today, presently we're running into something that I don't know what'll be the final outcome. We worked our way through many of these other things, but now we have what we refer to as Asian imports. The Oriental people can make jewelry as good or better than our Indians can. There's no doubt about it. There are laws that are not being enforced, and there's lots of Asian imports comin' in at a low price, and I don't know what it'll do to the Indian business.

Going back a little on the making of jewelry, I might speak to the United Indian Traders Association a little. At one time, the United Indian Traders was an organization of traders, and what organized them--in my opinion what organized them--what I remember of it, was that there was a firm in Albuquerk called Mazell's [phonetic spelling], and Mazell's started dye stamping Indian jewelry. Followin' them was another company called Bell, in <Albuquerque>. Then there was one on the West Coast called Pacific, and they were all taking Indian design jewelry and stamping it out. So of course again it was a lot less expensive, looked like Indian jewelry to the untrained eye. And the Indian traders were very, very worried about this, and they organized the Indian Traders Association, and every trader that joined was given a number and a stamp that you put on a piece of jewelry.

Well, if this worked, I am not aware of it, because over all the years, I can't remember how few pieces I've ever seen with a stamp on it. And I think one reason it didn't work, obviously, the breakdown of the organization, I suppose. But when you issue material to an Indian to take home, he would have had to have that stamp, and you're working a lot of silversmiths. Well, back then, even that stamp was fairly expensive, I suppose. So maybe he didn't want to buy twenty or thirty stamps. But even harder than that, was to get the silversmith to do the job. He might tell you he was gonna do it, but then when he brought the work in, it wasn't there, and you ask him why and he'd say, "Oh, I forgot," or "I don't know, I just didn't do it." Well, the jewelry's made, you can't discard it.

Then the Indian Traders Association, as I remember it, I went to--after I became part of the business as an adult, I went to several of their annual meetings. There was never any discussion of Indian jewelry. Then it had changed into the discussion of the problems of what we used to call the country or reservation trader. And they had their own problems, completely foreign from the problems we had in town. There were a lot more traders out there--there was a little handful of us in town, and there was dozens and dozens of 'em out there. So it evolved itself to where it wasn't the same organization--at least it wasn't being operated for the same reason.

I may think of something later, but I think that sort of covers. 

Cole: You mentioned that the UITA was selling the silver to the traders. Did they have a store, or what was the mechanism to do that? 

Turpen: They had a store. They hired an operator. Actually, the secretary, as I remember, ran it. You know, there wasn't a lot of paperwork, there wasn't a lot of activity in the organization from year to year. So they actually ran it, and they sold it to us at a very good price. See, we could have all gone direct and bought the silver direct from where they were buyin' it. You buy silver from a supplier. There were only two suppliers in the <United States>--one on the West Coast, one on the East Coast--and that's where you buy your silver. Any of us could have gone and gotten it direct, but you had to buy in quantities in order to get a good price. So they got the quantity price and passed it on to us at about a 10 or 15 percent profit. That's how we got the silver. 

Cole: Do you remember anything about when your dad was the secretary of the organization? 

Turpen: I don't remember very much. I just remember him explaining to me the reason they organized. My dad had a little different outlook. I remember him telling me this, he said, "You know, we're all concerned about this, and some people are really concerned. I am not as concerned, because I'm not sure we're even doing the right thing, because our big problem is teaching the public what Indian jewelry is. And we don't have the means to move this merchandise out into the <United States>." See, most all the Indian jewelry in the early days was sold in little stores, little Indian curio stores in <Phoenix>, <Denver>, places in the Southwest. Of course the national parks always carried it. That's where most all your jewelry went. And his thinking was that we can't get it out to the public, we can't expose it, and these people are in a position to do that. They're in a position to put it in dime stores and drugstores and places and little jewelry stores, and it'll make it more recognizable. And he had a theory on that, and I think very possibly he was correct. But that's what I remember of it. 

Cole: Maybe tell us a little bit about your relationship with your artisans, your silversmiths. 

Turpen: They're very easy to work with. I always found that Navajos were extremely easy to work with. They were hard to direct. Way back, you would tell 'em you wanted something, and they'd take it home and change it. When I very first came in the store--maybe even before that--I remember my dad doing this. You see, they pounded silver--what we call "pounded" it-- because the sheets and the wires and gauges were not available. So we gave 'em what we call slugs. They were about an inch square, and the thickness of a silver dollar, and if you wanted what we call a ten- ounce belt made--which was a concho belt maybe two inches by an inch-and-a-half, that would be equivalent to a ten-ounce belt--you'd throw 'em ten ounces, you'd throw 'em ten slugs. They did weigh about an ounce, and they had to go home and pound that. And of course it was really hard when you got down to making like a bezel that would hold a stone, and you'd have to pound it almost tissue paper thin. So way back, makin' jewelry was physical. There was a lot of work in it.

And as far as the silversmiths we worked, a lot of times, sort of families. The husband would come in and you could usually get them to show you, you'd say.... One thing about a Navajo silversmith, he never saw anything he couldn't make--or at least he never admitted it, because when you'd say, "What do you make?" [he responded], "Anything! I make anything." "You make bracelets?" "Sure." "Rings?" "Sure." "Can you make little bowls?" "No, but maybe my sister can." See? And you'd give 'em something--very seldom did they have a sample they could show you, so you just kinda took 'em at value, but over a period of time, everybody knew them. And of course what happened, too, was we all worked the same silversmiths. There weren't that many. There are lots of silversmiths today-- hundreds of 'em, maybe thousands, I don't know. Back then there was, I really thought, sort of a handful, and they just kinda moved from store to store. They'd take my silver and then they'd go get some from someone else, and then if they spent a little more money than they should have, all of a sudden he's takin' my silver and makin' the other trader's jewelry, and then he's takin' his and makin' mine. And they were very slow, they were very undependable as far as time.

We never got beat out of a lot. Needless to say, over a period of time, someone's gonna get in financial trouble and not bring your work back. But that happened very seldom, it wasn't a big problem. They had great personalities. They were fun. Navajos have a great sense of humor. They seemed to always pick the busiest time, Saturday afternoon, to bring their work in, and you had to take care of 'em, because they had to be paid, they had to have their money. It just seemed like they never brought it in at a slack time. And of course a lot of 'em had to come a long way. They traveled. We had silversmiths workin' thirty, forty, fifty miles away from <Gallup>.

The Zuni silversmith was a different situation. The Zuni, we never contracted to the Zuni. I suppose you could have, but it seemed like that just wasn't in their makeup. They bought the materials, went home, made it, brought it in and shopped it around, sold it to the highest bidder. So it was a completely different situation doing business with them, than doing business with the Navajo. 

Cole: Do you remember some of the silversmiths, their names? 

Turpen: Well, sure. In one family we had a girl who still works for us today. She's worked for me now, I guess, for over fifty years, named Marie Silver. Glenn Adakai [phonetic spelling] was a very fine silversmith. I've been out of it for a few years, so the rest of 'em escape me at this minute. 

Cole: You mentioned that they had a good sense of humor. Do you remember any humorous stories that you could tell us about? 

Turpen: Let me give that a little thought for a minute. (pause) I'll think about that and come back to it. 

Cole: Sure, that'd be fine. I've gotta maybe back up a little bit. You mentioned you were born in <Flagstaff>. What year was that? 

Turpen: In 1923. 

Cole: And then I was curious as to what your mother's name was. 

Turpen: My mother's name was Irene Harris. Harris was her maiden name. 

Cole: Was she from <Flagstaff> or the area, or where did she come from? 

Turpen: No, that's another kind of a nice cute little story. My father was in the service and one of his close friends, when the war was over, he was from <Oklahoma>, and he said, "Tobe, I'm gettin' ready to go home. You only live a few hundred miles from me. Why don't you come up to my house first?" And my dad said, "No, I need to get on home." And he said, "Well, I got a good-lookin' sister you'd like." So he went there, and that's who he married. (chuckles) Kind of a nice story, isn't it? 

Cole: Uh-huh. 

Steiger: You mentioned being in the service, too. Were you in World War II, and your dad was in World War I? 

Turpen: Yes, that's right. 

Cole: So what are some of your earliest memories, then, of bein' at the Shonto Trading Post? 

Turpen: Well, I was so young I really don't remember much there. I was only from about one to five years old. But I remember the Indians, the old, old Indians. I have photographs of them with me. My dad said that when I would get in their hair, there was a canyon there that was sort of protected, and he'd take me down there with an old mule and leave me with that mule all day. He said, "We'd just leave you there and then go get ya' in three or four hours and bring you home." I have been back to <Shonto>, because even at that age I was able to remember enough that I wanted to see it again. And when you go there, it's just like out of the past. It looks the same to me as the photos I see now. Of course Blue Canyon is nonexistent.

I used to enjoy goin' to the reservation after I got so into the arts and crafts business so heavy. I made a deal with Babbitt Brothers of Flagstaff to supply their reservation stores. And so I personally made a trip out there twice a year and sold [to] six or eight of their stores. I always enjoyed it. I went to Cow Springs and of course <Tuba City>. I can't think of the others, but they were country-type traders running those places, and they really weren't too interested in jewelry, however they knew they could sell it. It was easier sellin' a can of tomatoes than it was a piece of jewelry, so it wasn't easy selling, but it was a good business, it worked into a very good business for me in some of the places. So I did go back out there. Kayenta was a big store for them. 

Cole: What time period did you start that? 

Turpen: Probably.... Let's see, when did we move to that store? Sixty-six [1966]? Probably about 1955, and for the next ten years. Then they started selling off some of those stores, and we moved and we got so busy that it wasn't necessary anymore. The person that I was doing business with at Babbitt, passed away, so I lost my contact. 

Cole: Who was that? 

Turpen: Ralph Bilby. If you'll give me a minute, I'll look here. Maybe I'll see something also. (pause) 

Cole: What did your mother think of Shonto Trading Post? 

Turpen: Well, there's another little anecdote on that a little bit. At Christmas, my father had gone to <Flagstaff> and had brought her a Christmas present, and he kept it hidden. She knew he had brought something, and she was so anxious to see what it was. When she opened it, it was a clock. And she said, "Of all the things that I didn't need, is a damned clock out here! Time doesn't mean anything!" It was one of those shaped like that, you know, a mantle clock. "If there's something I didn't need, it was a clock!"

They used to have a lot of fun out there. They only saw a white person every six months, guaranteed. That was the postmaster, the mail carrier. He came every six months, and that was the only guaranteed white person that they knew for sure they would see. And you can imagine, living out there, in case of illness, it took you days.... There was no doctor, there was nothing there. It must have really been hard. And then the archaeologists kind of started comin' in there. There was a lot of ruins out there, and a few times a year, those archaeologists would come through, and they just loved that, that there would be people out there.

And then some of the photographs I had, evidently a little later they drove their cars out there, 'cause there's old cars in the photographs with me. And I notice in the photographs, most of 'em they took, they usually had some Navajos in it, too. They were with the Navajos in the picture. And the old Navajos were really old-time people back then. 

Cole: Would your parents ever talk about what their kind of economic conditions were when they were in <Shonto>? 

Turpen: Well, I don't think there was any economy-- there just wasn't anything there. You know, that carried over. That just carried right over into <Gallup> and through the Depression. There wasn't any money. Actually, after we moved into <Gallup>, for twenty years, my mother, in order to supplement her income, she took care of boarders. We ate out of the store a lot. We lived right next to the store, the McAdams Store. Our rented house was right next door to the McAdams Store, and we lived out of the store a lot. Down on the corner, a block away, was a meat market and a grocery store that issued credit. Back then, everybody lived on credit. <Gallup>, of course, was always a good town. <Gallup> is still one of the finest towns to make money in that there is. It's just a great economy there, because of the Indians. But times were very, very hard, I think. 

Cole: I don't know if you mentioned exactly what year was it, if you remember when your parents moved to <Gallup>. 

Turpen: Well, I'm not sure, but I think it's probably about 1928. I think I was about four or five years old, maybe a little older. I do remember something as a child on that trip. That was a dirt road from <Winslow> to <Gallup>, and we left in the wintertime. There was snow, and it was very muddy and very rutty, and we slid off into a ditch, and I remember this so well, who pulled us out--a Greyhound bus stopped and hooked to a chain and pulled us out of that snow. And we stayed somewhere over there between <Gallup> and <Winslow>. It was more than a day's drive. It might have been a full day or more drive, but we did stay there. It was probably a two-day drive. It was a long way in those days. 

Cole: Maybe tell us about some of your early memories of <Gallup>, then. 

Turpen: Well, <Gallup> was a very integrated town. I went to school at--it was integrated to the point where we had lots of Italians, lots of Slavs, some Irish, because it was a coal-mining town. Back then, we didn't have any Indians in our school. The Indians either went to an Indian boarding school or a government school. So there weren't any Indians in our school system. I just went through the grades. I went through elementary school and went through the things that everybody goes through with the tough kids chasin' the skinny guys like me. As I went through high school I became active in sports and played almost everything. Fair student. Came out of the service, took a job almost the day I came out of high school, and almost the day I came out, took a job at what was then the Gallup Gamerco Coal Company. They needed a person in the office. And I'd been recommended by one of the teachers. And everybody wanted a job, of course. So they hired me, and I worked there for two years at eighty dollars a month, and quit because I couldn't get a raise. They said, "Well, we'd like to give you a raise, but if we give you one, we have to give all the older guys one, and you're the low man on the totem pole, so no, can't do it.

So I went to work at the munitions factory. They were building a munitions factory, ordinance factory, like the one in <Flagstaff>, and I went to work out there, building it; then became part of it when they started storin' ammunition. Went to college for a year, and then went into the service and stayed in for four years. 

Cole: Were there a lot of Navajos or Native Americans that worked at the ordinance? 

Turpen: Lots of 'em. Very, very qualified and very capable, as far as handling munitions. They came up with some ideas to handle those munitions that were just terrific, to move 'em faster, easier. The Navajo's very good at that. The Navajo adapts. He can do anything mechanically. They can fix automobiles, they can....

A cute little story about what they can do mechanically: I used to go out on the reservation, and there was a period of time there for about ten years when we ran out of Navajo rugs--they quit makin' 'em, and the demand went up. So we had to go to the reservation, to the trading posts--we never went direct to the Indians--and bought these rugs. And when I'd go, I had a friend who was in the car business. He said, "I want to go with you when you go. I want to go out there and see if I can repossess any cars. I'm always lookin' for a car or two." And we went out there one day, and it's hard to find a car out there. They won't tell you where it is. But when you finally do find it, here we are at the hogan way out there, and there's about six old car bodies sittin' there, and my friend keeps lookin', and there's an Indian there we're talking to--he's a Navajo guy we're talkin' to, a little young child almost. He said, "You know, that looks like my car, but there's somethin' about it." "Well," he said, "they took the top off of this one and put the bottom on this one." (laughter) So they had taken to combinin' cars to get a car. That's why he couldn't recognize his car. So they're very capable of doing anything mechanically. 

Underhill: When did you learn to speak Navajo? 

Turpen: I never learned to speak Navajo. I tell ya', my dad suggested that I not learn. That may sound strange to you, but the trading business had changed. It would have been a help--don't misunderstand me--it could have been a great help in a lot of cases--but he spent a lot of his life listening to what I call Navajo "sad stories." He was a very generous man, they always had a sad story for him because they wanted to borrow a little money, and he had to listen to the whole story in order to work his way through what they wanted. He spent a lot of time in his life that he would rather have been doing something else. And one day he turned to me and he said, "You know, you don't have to listen to this, do you?" And I said, "No, I don't." And he said, "Well, then, it might be a good idea that you never learn, so that you don't have to." Now, I understand it fairly well, what I'd call "counter Navajo," but I never learned to speak it. Plus he always said that it was almost impossible to learn it after you were fifteen, sixteen years old. He thought you should learn it as a child. I don't think that's true, because I know people today--I don't know anybody who learned today--but I think it could be learned. But he said it became much harder. That's the reason I never learned it.

He was very fluent, and very loved by the Navajo. He made a statement to me one time.... My dad went through life goin' broke. The only job he ever had was with Gross-Kelly. Other than that, he was always a private entrepreneur. But he was always goin' broke. He'd run it for a while, and then he'd go busted. He never took bankruptcy, he was a very proud man. He never did that, he always paid off. And I was just the opposite. What I made, I kept some of it, and wondered how much more I should have kept. And I asked him one day, "Dad how come you don't ever save money? I don't understand that." He was comin' to me again and sayin', "Listen, I need some financin', I want to open another store." And he'd come to me, and I said, "Dad, how come all these years you never saved money?" He said, "Because I know I can always make a livin'." And I said, "Well, what makes you think that?" And he said, "I can go anywhere where the Navajos are and make a livin'. From the minute I open that store, I'll make a livin' with 'em." I thought that was really an interesting thing to say. 

Cole: You were telling us earlier about the Ceremonials. Were they already started when you ______________. 

Turpen: Yeah, the Ceremonial was a great thing for us. The Ceremonial was the biggest thing in our life. We did as much business in four days as we did any other month. First, that monetarily was a great thing. But it was a great thing for the town. The people that put the Ceremonial together, put it together for the Indians. They didn't put it together for themselves. They didn't put it together to make money. They put it together as a celebration for the Indian. And then it worked. When it first started, the Indians came in to the dances, they started bringin' different dance teams in. They like to see each other dance. And they fed them. It didn't cost them anything to see the show. It was for them.

And then it became aware that this would be a good place to show arts and crafts. So they opened what we call an exhibit hall. It was a wonderful place. It was a great big old wooden building, sitting over there at the Ceremonial grounds where the stadium was. And the traders from the reservation and the traders from town would come in and show their wares and make beautiful exhibits. So it was really, really authentic. The public learned about it, the people overseas learned about it, and all of a sudden it became a pretty good-sized event for a little town.

We had a parade every morning at ten o'clock for the three or four days of the show; a rodeo in the afternoon; and the dances at night. And the dances were wonderful. All the Indian groups would come out on the field, and they'd have about six or eight big campfires all built. It was dark, there was no lighting, there was no cameras. It was just as authentic as it could be. And then each team stepped out and danced.

It has changed dramatically, as times have changed, as everything changes. Now there are no traders there. Now we have arts and crafts dealers that want to sell something retail for a few days. The arts and crafts and painting show is quite good. But it's changed very dramatically from what it was when I knew it. And it was just a wonderful celebration for the town. Everybody dressed in velvet costumes--the men, velvet shirts; and the women, squaw dresses. Just about everybody in town dressed. It was just a wonderful, wonderful event for people back then, because, of course, people weren't as mobile then. You didn't go to <Albuquerque> for lunch, and you didn't fly to <San Francisco>. You were in <Gallup>, and that's where you were gonna be, and that's where you stayed. It just united the people. I was on the Ceremonial Board for several years, and then president of the Ceremonial Association after I was in the business. Even then, we fed the Indians. I'm not sure what they do now. But then of course we started chargin' 'em to get in, so it's changed very much.

Another nice story about the Ceremonial. I was the president, and we had our committees, we had the food committee, the concession committee, the exhibit hall committee, and our sheriff was the head of feeding the Indians. He had a woman that ran a café that always did it for him. And so about the week before, I said, "How we doin' on gettin' the Indians fed?" "I think we're gonna be all right." I said, "What do you mean you think we're gonna be all right?!" He said, "Well, the guy that does the cookin', we always have trouble with him. He's a Mexican fella here, and he drinks a lot. We're not sure of him all the time." And I said, "Well, what are you gonna do?" "Oh," he said, "I'll take care of it. I'll arrest him about three days ahead of time, and then we'll let him out of jail when the Ceremonial starts, so he can do the cooking." (laughter) Nowadays, things like that aren't accepted, but that was a fact, then. 

Cole: What do you think of the future of the Indian trading business? 

Turpen: Well, I guess we'd have to differentiate between the Indian trading and Indian arts and crafts. 

Cole: _____________. 

Turpen: I don't know. I wish I could answer that. You know, we worked our way through so many things that I mentioned earlier, things that have happened to us and have changed the business dramatically, and we worked our way through them. I suppose we'll work our way through this, too. But in my opinion, the business has just been bastardized so bad by people that are in it. They have no feel for the jewelry, they have no feel for the Indian artisan. All they are, is there to make money, and I'm not sure we can survive that, I don't know.

Of course, the Asian imports, the government keeps sayin', "Oh, we'll do something about that." They're not going to do anything about that. That's not going to happen. I'll guarantee you that will not happen. There's no way to control that. If you can't control guns, who's gonna spend the money and the time to control Indian jewelry? It's not that important. They'll have movements, and they'll have paperwork, and they'll spend a jillion dollars, and they'll never get it done. And it's popular enough now, there's enough of it moved to where it pays to bring it in and use it.

As I say, these stores, you go to these retail areas like <Santa Fe>--<Santa Fe> is probably the most popular tourist spot in the <United States> today, and there are stores up there that are just full of this junk. And they're not tellin' the truth about it, they're sellin' it for real when it isn't, and there's no way of stopping it. So either the public becomes aware that it has to be Indian-made or I'm not gonna buy it. I want some sort of a guarantee. That's the only thing I see. I don't know how else to control it.

I'm glad that we have just closed out the Indian arts and crafts part of our store. I ran out of family to run it, and I didn't know anyone to run it, and with times the way they are, too, a little tougher, I closed that out. We still are in the same building, we run what we call our Indian pawn business out of it. I'm glad I'm not fightin' the battle today. 

Cole: Have you always had a pawn aspect to the business? 

Turpen: Yes, we have. When we opened in 1939, we started takin' Indian pawn. I might elaborate on that a little. When you say "a pawn shop," it has a connotation of VCRs and jewelry and diamonds. The Indian pawn is just totally opposite of that. We only take about a half a dozen items. When I say "take," we loan money on about a half a dozen items. We loan money on jewelry, Pendleton shawls, guns, saddles, baskets. The rug business is kind of not so good right now, so they're pawning Navajo rugs to us a little bit. But that's the basis.

Many of the people who pawn need the money, of course, but some of 'em pawn just for security reasons. They want it to be where.... There's a lot of pilferage on the reservation. The hogan left alone, people break into it. Family members sometimes steal from the other family members. So they leave it for safekeeping in many cases.

And we're regulated by law. We have very tight regulation. We're checked, watched over. It's kind of a way for a Navajo person--Navajos pawn, mostly--Zunis hardly ever pawn anything. It's sort of a way for him to bank. See, hardly any of 'em have a checking account or a banking account, so if they want quick money, they have to take a piece of jewelry or something and borrow against it. 

Cole: There used to be a lot more pawn on the reservation. Would it be run pretty much exactly the same as an off-the-reservation store? Do you know if there was much difference there? 

Turpen: No. You know what, there really never was a whole lot of pawn on the reservation. The Indians had the jewelry to pawn. But on the Arizona reservation, the pawn laws were so strict, the rate of interest that you could charge, that it wasn't worth doing. And so there was never what we call the large pawn shops. See, a large pawn shop in <Gallup> will have--we have some pawn shops in <Gallup> that may have $2 million worth of loans. And have several that maybe have $200,000 to $500,000. A reservation store, they might have $10,000. So it never was big.

You see, there never was much jewelry made on the reservation. There were hardly any traders out there that made jewelry. There was a handful of 'em. All the jewelry was made in <Gallup> and by Indians who lived on the reservation, or who lived in <Gallup> because they had a steady job making jewelry.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's December 13, we're in <Albuquerque New Mexico>, at the home of Tobe Turpen. Also present in the room is Karen Underhill from NAU and Lew Steiger, our sound person, and this is Tape 2.

Tobe you used the term "country traders," people on the reservation, versus to your business in town. Maybe if you could compare and contrast those for us a bit. 

Turpen: Yes, I'll be glad to do that. The reservation trader had pretty much of a different agenda than the Gallup trader, you might say. Another thing I might touch on a little bit is <Gallup> was the mecca. There was a good trader in <Winslow>, the Breckman [phonetic spelling] firm, Babbitt had a branch there. <Farmington> had a trader or two, but <Gallup> was the town that the Navajos loved, for whatever reason, so that's where the real traders were, at <Gallup>. The different agenda bein' that the reservation trader sort of had the Indian customer under his control. He lived within ten to fifteen to twenty miles.... Now, we're goin' back a long way, to where the pickup truck wasn't so popular and there wasn't near as much transportation. They had to come by wagon a lot of times. And that was the only place they traded. They didn't go from trading post to trading post, they weren't mobile enough. So that trader had that customer pretty well under control. He could give him credit and know that he was gonna get a rug, maybe a piece of jewelry. They weren't really very jewelry- minded--mostly rugs, sheep, piñons, cattle, something to pay their bill off.

The city trader was rather different. It got to the point where a lot of it was done on cash. Again, if it was done on credit, it was usually done because of the person was making jewelry. It was real easy to lose your credit. I mean, you give credit, and way back there was lots of losses, and that's what broke most of 'em. And then it changed. Then the government checks started coming for all these different subsidies. And again, the country trader was in control, even though the customer could move from store to store now, he's more mobile, they still knew him well enough that they realized that he just had to come back there.

And we didn't get many checks. The checks didn't come to town, they came out there, where they lived. I've been in those country stores where there'd be several feet on the wall of single-spaced names of Indians, and an amount up there, and that's how much that customer could expect every month, so that's how much he was allowed a certain percentage of that in advance on groceries, or whatever he wanted to buy. So there was a different agenda.

The country traders lived out there long periods of time, and they'd come to town. And I'll tell you this true story. The man would come to town, because usually he'd leave the wife there to run the trading post. Usually it was a husband and wife deal. And they'd come to town and they'd get drunk and they'd get on a party. Boy, <Gallup> was a big party town. There was open gambling, we had <Las Vegas>-type open gambling. There was everything in <Gallup> that a man could enjoy. And after about five days--I remember this as a child-- the phone would ring, or someone would knock on the door. "Where's your dad?" "Well, he's here, just a minute." "Tobe? Bill's been gone for a week now. Go find him and get him the hell back out to the store." (laughter) And almost to the man they were that way. They were heavy drinkers and partiers, because boy, they were out there a long time, and when they got to town, they'd let it all hang out. So they were a different bunch--very interesting bunch of guys.

But, you know, overall, they were out there for a reason. They were out there to make a living, and it always worked down to the point where they were out there to take care of the Indian, too. I think, to a person, that that's the way it was.

And of course the Hubbells were just about the most famous, I guess. There may be some others I don't know about, but they were just tremendously famous. They had the store at <Ganado>, they had the store in <Winslow>, they had a store in <Gallup>, and they were educated people. They had college educations, where most of our traders, many of them probably never got through high school.

And then we had sort of a transition period, too, I don't know, maybe in the forties or fifties. The Mormon people found the reservation, I would say, and all of a sudden it just seemed like all of the stores, practically, were run by Mormon people. And they were good traders, very good traders. 

Cole: Would the in-town traders, like your father, when he was running the post, would they extend the same kind of credit as the reservation traders? 

Turpen: They didn't extend it.... We didn't have any guarantee, because most of us didn't get a lot of checks. We might have got a few. We extended it on the strength of who the person was. And you had to give some credit. There just wasn't any way of doin' business unless you did. 

Underhill: You mentioned that your father allowed you to make your own mistakes. (

Turpen: Yes.) 

Underhill: What kind of mistakes did you make when you were just starting out in the business? 

Turpen: Well, as I look back, I didn't make a whole lot of 'em. (all chuckle) I was too tight! No, I didn't. But he just let me make my own decisions, and I did make some. When I first came back, I made some jewelry that you couldn't have sold to anybody, and I got burned with it good. I made jewelry that men would wear--tie clips and things like that, that I thought would be real good, and after bein' in the jewelry business for a while, you find out that 1 percent goes to men, and 99 percent goes to women. And I really made a bunch of that stuff in the first few months, and I got burned with it real good.

I was always very careful. I'm tryin' to think.... You always make a few where they may not be your mistakes--every once in a while you get taken advantage of. I had a very good customer, the Mazells. You know, I mentioned that the Mazells were the ones that the traders were worried about, the United Traders Association. The Mazells, they were Jewish people, and that's who they were worried about was going to infiltrate and ruin the market. Well, when I came in the business, they were my best customer. They had a store down here on the main street, Central and Albuquerk, a big store, and they moved lots of jewelry. I was kind of one of their favorites, and I sold 'em lots of jewelry. But they had their Jewish ways of buying. They would come to <Gallup> and kind of descend on me as a family. They'd come in, the father, the mother, the daughter, her two friends, and they'd kind of scatter around the store on me and start asking prices. "How much is this?" A lot of things weren't marked, and I'd have to make up my mind what it was. And they'd just kind of confuse me over a period of time a lot of times. As they were ready to leave that day, the father says, "What's all those boxes up there?" I said, "Those are boxes of pottery." "What kind of pottery?" "Hopi pottery." "Gee, it's late in the day. I need some pottery, but we can't look at it. Will you bring it to <Albuquerque>?" "Sure, I'll bring it to <Albuquerque>. I'm always lookin' for a reason to go to Albuquerk." So I filled my car full of boxes and I get over here early in the morning and they come in. The person who opened the store was there, and he said, "Mr. Mazell isn't here yet. Bring the pottery in." He always puts the pottery in his room. Every piece is wrapped in a piece of newspaper to protect it. There was lots of pieces, maybe a few hundred, and I unpacked it and laid it out there, and just as I finished the last piece, almost, I'm sitting over there waiting, and he walks in. He didn't even see me--or he sees me but he doesn't say anything. He yells out, "Who's pottery is this?" "Oh, Turpen brought that from <Gallup>." "Why'd he bring that?" "He said you wanted it." "No, I don't want Hopi pottery! I want Acoma pottery. I don't want that. We've got a warehouse full of that pottery. Tell him to pack it up and take it back." (chuckles) So you sell it at a really cheap price and walk. Little things like that happen to you.

Of course the biggest people in the business was Fred Harvey. Fred Harvey was just.... They were the savior of the Indian pottery business in the early days. They moved jewelry. My dad took me one time on a train. The train would come through, and it always stopped in <Gallup> for an hour for everybody to get off and go inside. They went in the restaurant and ate in those days. We sold a lot of merchandise to the Santa Fe Railroad, and some important people were coming through, and they had their own club car, and they'd let my dad know in advance, and he would bring merchandise down, and he'd ride with 'em to <Winslow> and show 'em the merchandise, and they'd pick out some pieces for their wives or whatever. He took me on one of those little trips one time, and I remember how nice that club car was, and those kind of tycoon-type people, smoking their cigars and lookin' at that jewelry and chislin' on the price a little. (chuckles) That goes back a long way.

Another thing we used to do--this is another little side story--we had two or three Navajo ladies, or men too, and the train would stop for an hour and we'd give these people a few pieces of jewelry, a small suitcase full of jewelry, and they'd go up and sit on the platform and sell it to the tourists. And then when they'd come back, they'd pay us and we'd give 'em a little commission. My dad told 'em one day--they weren't sellin' very good--and he said, "Are you tellin' 'em it's old?" "Yeah." "You gotta tell 'em it's old. Tell 'em it's old, that's what they want." "Okay." So they come back the next day, and this one lady says, "This one almost sold, but he didn't buy it." He said, "Did you tell him it's old?" She said, "Yes." "How old?" She said, "I told him it's a hundred years old, and he said 'that's just too damned old.'" (laughter) So we made a little money that way. When I say things were hard, that's how tough they were. A little sale, two or three times a day at the train station was a great help. 

Cole: You mentioned Hopi pottery and your Navajo rugs. Would you actually go out on the reservation and buy that? Or did you buy it through.... 

Turpen: No, the only time we ever went on the reservation was that one, about a ten-year period, maybe five-year period of time, when all of a sudden rugs just dried up on us. No, we never did that. The Hopis would come all the way in and sell us the pottery, and the weavers have always come to <Gallup> to sell the rugs. Of course at one time it wasn't so competitive. Now, one brings a rug in, and they may go a half-dozen places before they sell it--they usually check the prices. 

Underhill: You mentioned customers who were buying jewelry? 

Turpen: Back even into the forties and fifties, there were a lot of people with big, big money that placed a value on Indian things, where the general public didn't. And even earlier than that, evidently, because there's some wonderful collections out there today that were collected way back, must have been in the twenties or earlier. Now, of course I don't go back and remember that far, but you know, we had customers like the Schwinn bicycle people. They placed a value on it. I'd like to think of some others. I can't think of the name now. For instance--I never knew this, of course--but in one of the recent New York auctions by Sotherby's, Mr. Marcus of Neiman-Marcus collected this merchandise all these years, and he was selling it through this auction. And there's wonderful collections of rugs, pottery, jewelry, in <California>. <California> was close enough to <New Mexico>, I guess, that these people came out. The Standard Oil people, Millicent Rogers, she was one of our best customers. Millicent has a museum in <Taos> or <Santa Fe>--<Taos>. And she was a wonderful customer. And those people that had really, really big money, collected this merchandise and placed a value on it where other people didn't even know what it was. And they wore it, displayed it, and used it, and were very proud of it.

I think that's changed a lot. I don't see it today. Of course maybe the reason is, I don't know, we make better merchandise today than we made then. Our jewelry today is better than it ever was. But by the same token, there's so many more people making it. I don't know how you'd collect a piece of jewelry today. I mean, buy it on the strength that there wasn't gonna be another one like it, because that can't be. So there really isn't much reason to collect today, unless it's just something that people see it personal.

Now, rugs are a different thing. However, rugs today are better than they ever were. The weavers today are weaving rugs that fifty years ago they didn't even know how to weave like that. Very few of 'em did. 

Cole: Why do you think that is? 

Turpen: Well, I think one of the things is, I think it's the yarn. And again, that's a transition that we went through like we did in jewelry. They used to spin the yarn, and then all of a sudden commercial yarn became available--good-lookin' commercial yarn, not this real fine cheap stuff. And when that first started bein' sold on the market, "Oh, you can't do that. You're just gonna destroy the business." But what it did, it just made a better rug. And I don't know why there would be better weavers. I think maybe there's just more of 'em. There's lots of Navajo people. There's a lot of 'em out there. Plus, a good rug really brings money. I mean, they can make money weavin' a rug today, whereas used to they couldn't. I think they lost money. It didn't cost 'em anything, of course, sittin' out in a hogan and weaving. They didn't have a job, there was nothin' else goin' on, so whatever they got.... They sheared the sheep. That didn't cost anything. But it was kind of a lost cause. But now, today, there's rugs that bring hundreds and thousands of dollars right to the weaver. 

Cole: Would you say that the trader has had as much influence over the jewelry as they have had over Navajo weaving? 

Turpen: I don't think they have had as much influence in design. There wasn't hardly any of us capable of designing. None of us had that talent. Dean Kirk was the only one I knew of who could really sit down and sort of sketch out a real nice piece of jewelry, and show 'em exactly how to make it. Most of us just adapted. We'd take something and show it to them and say, "Change it this way, do it this way." Maybe a picture out of a catalog or something.

I think the rug people really have worked with 'em. Our silversmiths are so flexible that you don't have to direct 'em very much. They'll take a piece of jewelry and change it over and over and over. I think we've had a lot to do with it as far as marketing, of course, but as far as design and actually gettin' it made, I don't think we've been too influential. They're still makin' the same--except for the very fine inlay work that we do today, our Navajo jewelry is basically where we take a stone and work around it, or multiple stones and work around 'em. It's pretty much the same as it was. 

Underhill: You mentioned the annual meetings of the United Indian Traders Association. (

Turpen: Yes.) 

Underhill: What do you remember about those annual meetings? 

Turpen: Well, they weren't very impressive (chuckles), I'll say that. You know, they all had little complaints about, usually, how they could collect their money better. Things like that. As I say, they never talked about arts and crafts--mostly just complainin' about how, if they were givin' credit, how they could keep from not losin' the money on it. I have a nice little anecdote to tell you on that.

This one meeting I was at, they was complainin', one of 'em spoke up and he said, "You know, we get these checks, and 'Hosteen Joe's' credit is good for $200, so we give him $200. So the check is coming, but Hosteen Joe dies. So now, he's got our canned goods, and we got a check we can't cash, and the government won't cash it, they won't make it good. So we've lost that. We have to take and turn that around, send it back. And we wonder if there isn't some way we could go to the government and explain this situation." So they hashed it around, two or three others jumped in and said, "Yeah, that's what happens to us." "Yeah, I've had that happen. Boy, I lost some money that way, that's right!" (laughs) So there was a trader down in Fort Apache, been there forever, and he was a real quiet guy. He [was asked], "Do you ever have any trouble with the Apaches on this?" He said, "I find it very hard to get a good clean thumbprint after rigor mortis has set in." (laughter) You know, we used to thumb people all the time. Still do, a little bit, but nowadays everybody has a census number and a Social Security number. But thumbprinting was just--gosh, we wore those pads out thumbprinting stuff. 

Underhill: It's coming back in vogue. 

Turpen: Is it?! 

Underhill: Sometimes when you cash a big check. 

Turpen: Really?! 

Underhill: In the mainstream banks. 

Turpen: Oh, yeah, nowadays they can trace that within a flash, can't they? (

Underhill: Uh-huh.) 

Turpen: Yeah, I think I saw that on TV the other day. 

Underhill: What characteristics do you think that traders have in common? You've talked a little about some of the differences between being out on the reservation and being in town, but are there.... 

Turpen: Well, the old-time traders had in common, I think, that they wanted to be in business for themselves. They wanted to be an individual entrepreneur. I think a lot of 'em wanted isolation. I'm talking about more the reservation traders. They weren't too big socially. And I think they had a great feel for the Indian. I think that's the most common thing. They all seemed to stay with the same wife forever. I don't remember any divorces to speak of. Maybe that was the times more than anything else. The wife, many times, was just as important in that store as the man was. She could speak Navajo, and many times kept the books--very important to the store. And, you know, way back, like when my dad was tradin' at <Leupp>-- and I remember this real well--they opened the store at eight in the morning and closed it at six in the evening, I guess, and the Indian customer would come in from miles out, and he'd hang around there all day. They'd keep askin' him, "Are you ready to do your buyin'?" "No, I'm not ready yet." And then about 5:30 or a quarter to six, when they were ready to close, then he'd start doin' business--and not just him, you know, maybe a bunch of 'em. And that was a major complaint, that they couldn't ever get them to do their business. They wanted to visit, and they visited with each other and visited with the trader.

You know, they're great card-players, the Indian people are. They love gambling, they're gamblers. They had eating habits that to me, to this day, are strange. You know, they love canned tomatoes, but most of 'em put sugar in it--buy canned tomatoes and put ásh__ _ikan in it. Vienna sausage is very popular, that Unetah [phonetic spelling] biscuit cracker. That was their staple. And of course lots of soda pop.

The trader, Carl Heine [phonetic spelling], that I spoke of, he ran Pine Springs or Wide Ruins for a few years during the war. He had to go into the service, but before and after, and you couldn't get soda pop-- there was no soda pop available because there was no sugar. And so he made Kool-Aid and put it in bottles, and the bottle was the most important thing he had. He wouldn't let 'em leave the premises with the bottle, see, because he had to refill it again. But, you know, it just shows you how they could think and what they did to make money.

Another little thing that happened out there that I thought was.... I was there one day, and it was a Friday, about four o'clock in the afternoon. All the little school children, the little girls and little boys from elementary were comin' in. There was a big long line of 'em, must have been fifty or sixty of 'em. And they were allowed to come in and pick out something they wanted, a candy bar, mainly. But then I noticed that just about every third one, they got a little package of somethin'. I couldn't see what they were getting, a little package. And finally, when it was all over, one would take a pop, one would take a candy, and the next take a package. And I said to Carl, "What are they taking? What's that package?" He said, "Bobby pins." (chuckles) Those girls wanted bobby pins. 

Cole: We've heard quite a bit, in talking to other traders, about the impact of the FCC hearings in the early seventies dealing with pawn on the reservation. Did that have any effect on the Gallup traders at all? 

Turpen: No, we never had to live under their laws. We only worked under state laws, and then of course there's federal usury laws, but the State of New Mexico has no usury law. So no, that never bothered us. As a matter of fact, what it did, it drove all the customers into <Gallup>, so we kind of said, "Hey, that's good for you guys, we'll take advantage of the situation." But you've heard a lot about that, huh? (

Cole: Uh-huh.) That's strange. I don't remember ever havin' any discussion about that much with anybody. I do know that most of 'em didn't take pawn, because they just weren't given enough percentage to make it profitable. 

Cole: A lot of the on-the-reservation traders we've talked to, that's one of the big things they really remember. 

Turpen: Well, I'll be darned. 

Cole: They feel like that was a pretty watershed issue for them, 'cause it really drove 'em out of the little bit of pawn business they had going, which maybe was that one tie to keep customers intact. 

Turpen: Sure. I just never realized they took that much pawn, to be honest with you. We're used to seeing what we called a pawn vault. You walk into a room, and that's all you see. Back there, you'd walk in their vault, and maybe a few feet over here there'd be a few pieces of merchandise. 

Cole: I was kind of curious, we've heard a little bit, too, about the Navajo Shopping Center and what a big deal that was in <Gallup>, and if you remember much about that? 

Turpen: Well, that was a big deal. They came in and they kind of.... Let's see, why was it such a big deal? What was he doing? Well, the first thing he was doing was overlending. First he came in and started cuttin' prices. You know, a shopping center-type operation. We hadn't had that up until [then]--not in the Indian businesses. As a matter of fact, I'm not sure we even had much of a shopping center in <Gallup> at that time--we might have. Again, that's how things change.

I'll go back a little. About one of the first shopping centers we had in <Gallup>, the fellah came from <Durango> and put one in. And the day that he opened on Sunday, I thought they were gonna hang him. You know, all the competitors complained, the churches complained, and of course he just told everybody to mind their business, stayed open, and was no longer. But when the shopping center came to town, he started cutting prices. But mostly he was overloaning on pawn. He would loan much more than the item was worth. And when you overloan on a piece of pawn, you're gonna get it eventually, it's gonna be yours, and then you have to get rid of it. That happened to him.

And you know the Tanners were so--they were really good traders. What I mean is, the Indians really liked 'em, because they spoke Navajo so well, and they advertised on the radio a lot. They could both sing a little, and they sang in English and Navajo--they combined it--and the Navajos loved it, and they just flocked in there. And of course, you know, there was a lot of action. There was just action everywhere. There was people and cars. But he finally got burned really good on the pawn. And there wasn't enough money to keep him afloat. He kept borrowin' from everybody.

I'll tell you another story. There was an insurance person over here in Albuquerk that put some money in it. He started havin' to reach out and raise money. If you ever went out and looked at it, you could hardly keep from puttin' your money in it, because it really looked good. A lot of people who knew nothing about the Indian business put money in there, invested in it. And this insurance guy one day called me and he said, "Tobe, you don't know me, but you and I have a lot of common friends. Would you come out here? We've taken this place over from Buddy Tanner. The stockholders are taking it over, and they've given me the job of runnin' this damned place. I don't know anything about it. Would you come out here?" And I said, "Sure, I'll come out there." So I walked out, and he said, "Here's the main thing I want to ask you. You know, these two boxes just came in today--my mail. I opened 'em, and they're full of turquoise beads. Look, they're just thrown in on top of each other." They were so heavy, they were coffee boxes--a coffee box is pretty big. Full of it. "What is this?" I said, "You got an invoice on it?" "No," he said, "there's no invoice." Well, what Buddy had done, he had given this to a traveling.... There's always been people travelin' with Indian jewelry--always. And he had given this to some guy and told him, "You go out and sell this stuff and bring me back some of the money and you keep some of it. Just get rid of it." Well, he couldn't get rid of it, so he mailed it back. (chuckles) And he asked me, "What am I gonna do with this?" I said, "Well, today, you can't sell it at all. Just put it in a corner and forget it, 'cause it's not saleable." And then, son of a gun, in about two years when the hippie movement hit, and beads became popular, he was able to sell that stuff.

But that's what happened to the Navajo Shopping Center. Those guys were country traders that came to town, and they just burned us all up for a while. They didn't hurt us much. They hurt us in the pawn a little bit, but we weren't sellin' groceries, we weren't doin' anything like that, so that didn't have any effect on us.

Pawn customers are kind of strange. Once you get a pawn customer, they don't leave you very easy. The only reason they leave you is they just know for sure they can get twice what you've already given. They might do that. But they stick with you pretty good. 

Cole: You mentioned they were advertising on the radio. How would Turpens advertise their business? Was it word of mouth? 

Turpen: We didn't ever do a whole lot of it, really. Everybody in <Gallup> had to do a little radio advertising, yeah, but word of mouth is always the best, that's number one. But all of us had to do a little advertising. Every once in a while we'd take a little ad that we pay cash for pawn. That's about all we had, really. We had nothing else to sell the Indian. That's the only thing we could advertise. The one thing that was very successful for us one time, though, when rugs got so scarce, we went on the radio in <Farmington>. I had a Farmington radio person come to see me one day, and I said, "Why, I don't want to advertise in <Farmington>!" He said, "Isn't there anything you need up there?" I said, "I need rugs." He said, "I'll get rugs for you. You give me some ads and I'll get rugs for you." And he really did. It kind of turned around at the same time. They started weaving. And again, why did they start weaving? They started weaving because the price got right. All of a sudden rugs disappeared, we had to raise the price of 'em, pay more for 'em. But he really got me rugs.

You talk about that radio advertising--let me hit on that a little bit, how good that is. That is really payday, rug advertising. I'll give you one little perfect instance of how well it works. One day I go out to the side of the store and my pickup's gone. I used to leave my key in the pickup, I didn't want to mess with it in my pocket. Well, they'd driven my pickup off, and I thought, "Aw, heck, we'll find it tonight, or they'll bring it back, some kids took it or somethin'." Well, it didn't come back. You know, I really didn't think a whole lot about it. I kept thinkin' it'd show up. About five days later I got really alarmed. I said, "You know, if my pickup's gone, I'd better do somethin'." About the second day, I called the police, and that didn't do any good. So I thought, "You know, I'm gonna advertise!" So I put it on the Navajo Hour that my pickup, such-and-such make, such-and-such color, and there'd be a fifty dollar reward. And in about ten minutes, a young Navajo kid called and told me it was out here in a ditch about five miles out of town. Somebody had stolen it and gone out there, played the radio 'til the battery ran down, and left it sittin' there. And if I'd left it there much longer, it would have probably got stripped. But within about ten or fifteen minutes, I had the word where my pickup was. They really listen to that radio.

And today, the big thing with the Indian people are those videos. They come into <Gallup> and they walk out with a ten-pound bag of videos, go home and watch 'em all week. New business. 

Cole: How would you describe the Navajo economic system? 

Turpen: Cash and carry. They never save a nickel. They don't know what it is to save money. It just isn't in their philosophy. They only live for the day. That's why <Gallup> is such a good town, is that none of that money ever gets put in a bank or in a sock or anything. If it's available, it gets spent. It just doesn't.... They have no philosophy as far as tomorrow. I shouldn't say all of 'em--there are a few, I'm sure, but the big majority get their wages, they spend it. And they're very generous with their children, they buy their kids most anything they want.

Nowadays, they're big restaurant eaters. The story in <Gallup> is that that Furr's sells more steaks than any Furr's in the United States--Furr's cafeteria-- because they bring the whole family in and buy 'em a steak. And their eating habits have changed tremendously. They go to salad bars now, they eat Oriental food. Really, truly, the Indian has always wanted to be like the Anglo, and probably for economic reasons and maybe others, they weren't--but every time they get a chance, they do. They just make that next step forward. And today they're just as much like we as anybody. 

Cole: Would the same be true of the Zuni? 

Turpen: No, the Zuni handle their money much better. I'm not sure they're savers, but they seem to handle their money much [better]. That's why they never pawn. They're able to figure out that they have to pay interest on that pawn, and the Navajo, that doesn't bother him. Doesn't bother him at all. Payin' that interest doesn't mean a thing to him.

I'll go back a long way and describe <Gallup> to you a little bit. It's kind of interesting. It was divided into the north side and the south side--the railroad tracks divided it. The north side is where all of the trading posts were. There was nothing on the other side of town. The stores over there were restaurants and men's and women's clothing stores, dime stores, places like that. The north side is where the trading posts were, and that's where the Indians did all of their business, all of it. There were no restaurants for them to eat at. Later on, some Oriental people came in and put in a couple little small restaurants where they would eat a little. But they spent all their time on what we call the north side of town.

Of course, one of our big problems early on was bootleg days. They couldn't go in a bar, so there was bootleg. And we had lots of heavy-weight drinkin'. They would just drink so much that there was a lot of layin' around, problems in the store. They'd come in and you'd ask 'em to leave, and they didn't like that. That didn't appeal to 'em at all, especially in cold weather. And we had some real problems when they wouldn't sell it, when they couldn't buy it. Of course, you see, they couldn't buy liquor openly, in a bar or in a package store for a number of years after World War II. There was a lot of years there when they couldn't buy liquor.

During the service, my mother wrote me a letter.... This'll really give you an idea of what a separation we had. She wrote me a letter and said, "Son, things are really changin' here. The Indians are eating in the restaurants and going to the theater." They had never done that up until then. Probably the war mighta had somethin' to do with it. You know, these GI kids started comin' back, and they'd been places where this was happening, so now they're part of it.

But <Gallup> has always accepted the Indian people, wherever. We've never excluded 'em. They've excluded themselves way back. But <Gallup> has always accepted them completely. 

Cole: I should ask you, also, when you met your wife. 

Turpen: Oh, my wife--I was back from the service and she was in a nurses' training program. They were training nurses for the war effort, and she was from <Minnesota>. When they finished their schooling, they had to take six months in a hospital somewhere, and they sent 'em all around the <United States>, and she drew <Gallup>. She drew <Fort Defiance>. 

Cole: And what was her name? 

Turpen: Doris Stanich [phonetic spelling]. She was a Slovanian. She had an interesting experience. The sheriff there--these girls all came in on trains, and eventually we ended up with about fifty of 'em out there. They came from different hospitals around the country. And she and her friend were sent on the train to <Gallup>, and they got in there at night, and the sheriff would meet them and take them to <Fort Defiance>, which is thirty miles away. And these girls get off of the train, boy, they're all dressed up in their fur coats. You know, they're from <Minnesota>, and it's cold in <Gallup>, it's wintertime. He said, "Well, c'mon girls, I'll take you out to the fort. But listen, I got a little somethin' I've gotta do first. The two of you are gonna hafta jump in the front with me. I got a couple of drunks in the back seat, and I've gotta take 'em up and put 'em in jail before I go out there." (chuckles) Of course this vehicle had a big wire in it. So that was the first time they'd been to <Gallup>. 

Underhill: And do you have children? 

Turpen: Yeah, we have four children. Yes, we have four grown children. I have one daughter who runs the pawn store in <Gallup>. And my son was in there with us for four years, and decided that he wanted to do something else. So he's moved to <Las Cruces>. But none of my other children.... Well, they married and moved away. My youngest daughter has an Indian store in <Sun Valley Idaho>. She was a dental hygienist, and she kind of wore out on it. I said, "Why don't you open an Indian store in <Sun Valley>? You'll do good there." And she's been there now about three years, has a nice natural touch for it, natural ability. 

Underhill: Why did you stay in it for fifty years? 

Turpen: Oh, I loved it! I loved every minute of it. You know, there's always times when you.... Plus, it was very successful financially for me. But I just loved it. I went down there at eight in the morning and stayed until six in the evening almost every day, five days a week--six days a week, early on. I think the thing that makes it almost the most interesting were the customers. We had great, great customers, except early on when we had such a hard time sellin' that they weren't so great. But, you know, we finally.... I did something that worked out. When we moved our store, everyone said, "Why don't you open in the middle of town? Why are you goin' out there?" And I had already learned, because we were three blocks from the center of town, and when someone walked in our door, they had gone to the trouble of asking someone where they could buy a particular item, or where they could get a good deal, or whatever reason. When they walked in our door, they were almost pre-sold. And that's one reason I moved out there. I thought, "You know, we'll have the same thing." And that followed us over the years. People that walked in were usually ready to buy. If we had what they wanted and they were willin' to pay the price, we made a sale. And another reason I moved out towards town, was Zuni jewelry was becoming very popular and very competitive--very competitive for us to buy--and I wanted the first shot at 'em as they came into town. So that's the reason we went out of town. And today, it's kind of a drawback today. I think you'd be better off in the center of town today. The heart of <Gallup> moved over on the north side where that shopping center is. So we're kind of isolated now, it isn't as good as it was.

But the people we dealt with really.... And over the years we took everybody's check. I don't care who they were, we took their check. We ask 'em for identification or something. We never took a driver's license or anything, and we didn't lose a half a dozen checks in all those years. And we didn't get beat out of much money wholesale-wise either. Most of the dealers paid us too. So it was a good business from a lot of aspects.

And it was fun makin' the jewelry. Early on, a Zuni came in one time with a sun face. It was pretty good- sized, about two-and-a-half inches in diameter. It had the face, and it had rays around it like the sun. And I looked at that thing and I asked him to put it in silver. and he brought it back and the silver was real flimsy, it wasn't very good. I tried another Zuni, and he did the same thing. Zunis don't use much silver-- they use very little silver in anything. So I had a Navajo mount it, and it mounted heavy and it came out really beautiful. I'll tell you, for about three years, I could not make enough of those things. I had about three silversmiths makin' 'em, and they could make about three or four a day, which doesn't sound like many, but that's a lot. And I had the point where I had maybe a hundred of 'em on display, and I had buyers come in and buy twelve, fifteen of 'em at a time.

Then when jewelry really got good--I'll give you another little story here that's one of my favorite stories. One of my biggest sales ever, quick. We were lookin' anywhere we could find Indian jewelry. I heard there was a young man out at <Thoreau> that had some silversmiths working. So I went out there and I said, "You have some squash blossoms? They tell me you're makin' squash blossoms." "Yeah, but none of 'em are for sale. They're all sold." I said, "Well, let me see 'em, maybe I'll get on your list." "Well, here's a sample." So he showed me one. Boy, it was really lousy. The [tonal?] stones were terrible, and the silver was terrible, and I said, "Gees, this is terrible." "Yeah," he said, "but they sell good." (chuckles) About that time, he said, "How many do you want to buy?" I said, "Well, after seein' those, I don't know, but I guess if I bought any, I'd buy a lot of 'em. It depends what the price [is]." He gave me a price and I said, "I'd buy a lot of 'em at that price." He said, "Would you buy a big paper sack full of 'em?" "Well, I might." So he came out with a great big paper sack like that, full of 'em. There was about seventy or eighty of 'em in there. And I bought 'em, and he said, "You gonna pay me cash?" I said, "Yeah, I'm gonna pay you cash." He didn't know who I was.

So I came back to town and the buyer from Fred Harvey came in, and those were sittin' there. "God, where'd you get these squash blossoms?!" "Oh, we've got a bunch of silversmiths working." (laughs) And he said, "Can I have some of 'em?" "How many you want?" He said, "You wouldn't let me have 'em all, would you?" "Well, as much as you buy from us, yeah, you can have 'em all. I've got 'em promised and everything...." And he bought those and gave me a nice profit in just one big transaction! (laughter)

And I made a sale one time, early on. A reservation trader came in with a bunch of.... He came in with a big stake body full of Navajo rugs. You know what a stake body is? (

Cole: Uh-huh.) Full of Navajo rugs. And he told my dad, "Your boy's tryin' to get in the rug business. I'll consign these to ya'." And they were all big rugs, six by eight, eight by ten, eight by twelves--rugs that were hard to sell. Dad said, "Well, you got nothin' to lose, son. Take 'em!" So I took 'em and I said, "Where do you sell these rugs like this?" He said, "Well, Fred Harvey buys 'em sometimes. That's about the only place." So I cleaned those rugs up, I vacuumed 'em, they had mothballs on 'em, and I cleaned 'em and vacuumed and pulled 'em and straightened 'em and folded 'em nice, and worked for a lot of days. Finally one day I loaded my car up and took 'em over here, and my dad came with me. He said, "I'll introduce you to these people. I don't think you're gonna sell any of those rugs, though." Well, I just hit 'em perfect, and I really had a good price on 'em. This guy started buyin' those rugs, and he bought about $1,500 worth, which today would be $200,000, I think. And when we walked out of there, my dad said to me, "Son, I want you to remember this day. That's the biggest rug sale, dollar-wise and size-wise you're ever gonna make in your life." Well, he was wrong on the dollar, but he sure wasn't wrong on the size. He said, "Boy, you hit a home run." 

Cole: And that was to Fred Harvey then? 

Turpen: Yeah, that was Fred Harvey. They had a buying center here. They bought for all their stores right here in <Albuquerque>. And of course they were very particular. It had to be handmade. If it was jewelry, they looked at every stone. They were very, very particular--but everybody was particular back then, everybody was hard to sell--particular on quality, particular on price. Other than that.... They were the big people. We hated to see them go. The day we lost them, we lost a big customer.

And of course the national parks have always been good. They've changed a lot now. They've got these commercial buyers and they don't want to buy unless they have the privilege of returning what they don't sell. So that takes a lot out of it. End of the season, you get your merchandise back. Most of it sells, but there's always some that doesn't. Maybe they got a bad clerk, maybe he don't sell much of it. You don't have any control over that.

There's even customers out there today, one of our big customers when we closed was not Disneyland, but that other park out there--Knotts Berry [Farm] was a big customer. They wanted us to pay the wages of a person that stocked our stuff out there, that looked at it and decided if they needed more and put it out for show. They wanted us to pay that wages. I said, "We can't do that. We don't have that kind of markup." But that's the kind of things you get requested today. That's how it's changed. 

Cole: If you could change anything about your life or work, what would you change? 

Turpen: I wouldn't change anything about the work or the life either--neither one. I've had a really good full life. The business was perfect, couldn't have been in a better place. <Gallup> was a wonderful place to live in. We had a lot of good people there. There was lots of sociability when we weren't very mobile and didn't have enough money to go anywhere anyway. So there was a lot of friends. And again, you just get a jillion laughs with the Indian people. If you know how to visit with them and draw them out a little, they just--they're really funny.

You asked me a couple of things. I was teachin' my boy the business and showin' him, so we went to Cameron, and we were eating there, and this Indian girl, the waitress, told her, "I want cherry pie." And she brought the pie and I said, "You know, I wanted cherry, not apple. You brought me apple." "Okay," she says, "but apple is just as good." (laughter) Kind of their philosophy. We went on up to <Tuba City> to stay that night, and we checked into a motel, and this little Indian girl was behind the counter, and there was a guy ahead of me that registered, and the minute I started registerin', he walked off and turned and he said, "This room is gonna be eighty-nine dollars?!" "Yeah," she said, "that's the rate." "Eight-nine dollars for <Tuba City> in this place?!" She said, "Well, you're on the Rez. You'll either take it or leave it." (laughter) He came to me and he said, "You gonna stay here?" And I said, "I got to. What do you mean? The next place is <Flagstaff>! Cameron's full."

One not too long ago came in. What do they call that thing? They call it.... Gee, it's no good unless I remember it. The dish you get--PrimeStar? She came in the store and I happened to be there that day. She asked me, she said, "Toby, I've got a problem." "What's the problem?" I said, "Maybe I can help you." "I get my mail here, and I get my PrimeStar here. My name is Mary Tsosi, but there's another Mary Tsosi, and she's taking my PrimeStar, and why I'm really mad is she don't even have PrimeStar!" (laughter) That's the kind of humor they have. 

Cole: I should clarify one thing, too. Were you a member of [United] Indian Traders Association at one point? 

Turpen: Well, yeah, the store was, sure. Certainly. We had a meeting in <Flagstaff> one time, and I remember it well because I drove in a snowstorm all the way there. Goldwater was supposed to come and speak to us, but he couldn't get there because of the storm. I was a member. I think Ralph Bilby got to be president or somethin'--was president. So Ralph kind of made sure that a lot of us showed up there. But we had a big meeting there that night. There was a lot of people there. In <Gallup> there were meetings, but nothing the size of that. You know, as I think about it, after the war, that thing got pretty big--at least the yearly meeting did. The two that I remember going to--and I think I went to more--they were big--you know, banquets. But I didn't go to the business meeting the next day. That's why I don't remember much, I didn't go to the business meeting, I just went to the banquet. 

Cole: Lew always has a good question. 

Steiger: Oh, I was just curious where you ended up in the service during the war. 

Turpen: I joined the Navy. My father was in the Navy and he wanted me to join the Navy, which I did. I ended up bein' a gunner off of a torpedo bomber on aircraft carriers. 

Steiger: In the Pacific? 

Turpen: In the Pacific, uh-huh. You asked me if there was anything I didn't want to do over--I wouldn't want to do that over. I just barely got home from that. 

Steiger: You ended up in the thick of all that? 

Turpen: Yes, we were in that big Philippine Sea battle, and we lost a lot of planes and a lot of ships. As you look back, it was a great experience, but you wouldn't ask for it again.

You know, just to show you how important money was, I volunteered for that. I went to gunnery school. They put me in gunnery school, didn't give me much choice. You go through gunnery school and you learn about the guns and so forth. And then one day they had a bulletin board there, and they said, "We need volunteers for, air crewmen," they called 'em. And they said, "You'll get flight pay." That's double your pay. "Plus if you go overseas, you'll get extra hazard pay." So now you're gettin' almost 300 percent. You're gettin' 200 percent more than you wouldda made. And that's why I volunteered--for the money. (laughter) 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Turpen: Well, I don't think so. I think we've covered everything that I wrote down here that I thought would be interesting to you. (pause)

You know, way back, the traders were a very close- knit group, and they were very generous. When you'd go out on the reservation to do business with 'em, they'd always ask you to come in and eat with the family, and if there's anything in the store you wanted--a cold drink or something to eat--they always handed it to you. They were very generous people, and a lot of good people. Those people out at Thunderbird Lodge--I can't think of their name now. You know, there's a big difference--has anybody ever spoken to you of John Collier and the sheep business and the rugs? [

Cole: Uh-huh.] That was a big problem. That became a big problem.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're at the home of Tobe Turpen in <Albuquerque New Mexico>. It's December 13, 1998. Also in the room is Karen Underhill and Lew Steiger. This is Tape 3.

You were just telling us a little bit about what kinds of rugs you would get in your store, versus how some of the traders would just develop.... 

Turpen: Yes. The trader on the reservation a number of years ago was pretty isolated as to the type of rug he would get. If he was at <Ganado>, he got Ganado reds. If he was at <Chinle>, he got what we called the Chinle rug. In <Shiprock>, about all they had were Yéiis or Yéii bicheii rugs. And the weavers didn't travel that far. They wouldn't travel from <Ganado> to <Shiprock>. Today, that's all changed. But they would come to <Gallup>. So we always had a real variety of rugs. Some of the rugs were much harder for us to get than others. The red rugs always came in. Again, the trader on the reservation, also, if he found a good weaver, he wanted to try to get all of that weaver's rugs. And the way he did that was by advancing that weaver money on the next rug that was to be woven, so he could control that rug. And we never operated that way. But by the same token, there were just so many weavers, they worked their way into us. For many years, the Shiprock rug was one of the hardest to buy. I guess the hardest rug to buy ever for us was the Teec Nos Pos. Somehow or another, they controlled those, or there just wasn't that many of 'em woven, I don't know which. Most of the others came in pretty good. And we always had on stock several hundred rugs at a time, for the dealers to buy--dealers and the retail person.

We were not influential in the weaving of rugs. In other words, we never commissioned a rug or gave 'em a pattern or suggested what they wove; whereas the reservation trader would do that. I think way back, that some of the traders actually sketched some patterns for them. My dad said they did. I have a big rug that I saved, my father gave me, and he told me his sister designed that rug. He said she actually sketched that rug and gave it to a weaver. I think what she did, of course, I think she took another Navajo rug and made a variation of it. But he told me that rug was woven at her--that she asked the weaver to weave it. It was a big rug, big beautiful rug, woven by Ugly Devil's wife. (laughter) 

Underhill: One thing we didn't ask you is if you have a nickname in Navajo. 

Turpen: No. You know, I'm kind of ashamed of that, because my dad said that they only give nicknames to those that they like. And they never gave me one. I'll tell you what, I never dealt with the Navajo very directly, once I got established in the business. I did, early. For the first ten or fifteen years, I did. I worked every silversmith, I bought every rug. If they would have called me anything, they would have used my father's name and then added yazzi, "little boy," on the bottom. But since I didn't speak Navajo, they never gave me.... They called my father Hosteen Nez, which is "tall man." They would have called me Hosteen Nez Yazzi if they'd have given me one--I think they would. 

Cole: Did you have any Navajo employees in your store? 

Turpen: Oh, yes. We had almost all Navajo employees. My uncle worked with us. My father was never very good at stayin' in the store. He loved the outside and he loved livestock, so once I came in, he just kind of disappeared. My uncle worked with me, and then everyone else in the store was Navajo--the art clerks. And we worked our silversmiths--we always had at least six or eight silversmiths poundin' away right in the back of the store, plus the ones that worked outside. 

Cole: Would customers be able to go back and watch the silversmith's work? 

Turpen: Yes, and they really liked that. That was a big selling point. That worked very well. And when we moved to our new location we're in now, I designed that store so when you walked in, there was a glass wall on the left, and a big long room with about twelve or fifteen silversmiths workin' in there. And that, again, overcame that question, "Is it handmade?" And then most every customer, we would offer to let them walk through there, and we'd take 'em through, and just about every customer would go through and watch, 'cause it's fairly interesting. It's very simple, really, but it's really quite interesting to see a piece of jewelry being made. 

Cole: Were those silversmiths working by the piece, or paid by the hour? 

Turpen: They worked by the hour. The ones inside we always worked by the hour, and the ones at home we worked by the piece. 

Underhill: Were people seeking the opportunity to work in the store? Did you find that was preferable to being paid by the piece? 

Turpen: It just depended upon the particular individual situation. Some of 'em lived so far away they couldn't come in every day. And some of 'em didn't want to live in town. They wanted to be out in the country. Maybe their kids were going to a school. Maybe the children were going to a school out there or something. Usually, it's just a matter of where their residence was. If they had a little place in <Gallup>, they worked in <Gallup>, they were willing to work in <Gallup>. Otherwise, most of 'em preferred to go home. The only problem with working at home was, see, they had to use a blowtorch that operated on kerosene. It's a lot harder to develop heat than the kind of torches we use, the natural gas torches. So it was a much bigger job. Not todays--we have these little tanks they take home. They have the same gas that everybody else has. But when they had a blow torch, they had to pump air into it to make it work, and it was a lot bigger job. (Steiger adjusts equipment) 

Cole: Do you remember any of the Hubbells yourself? 

Turpen: Well, I remember Roman Hubbell. He was kind of a dapper man. He always wore kind of a fedora- type hat--maybe a stylized western hat. He was short and kind of pudgy, had a little weight on him. Lorenzo was before my time. Roman was noted for being very generous with the Indians. As a matter of fact, he was kind of frowned on by some of the traders because he always paid a little too much for everything, they thought. Roman had some great contacts back East. As I say, he was an educated person, and he knew people that none of us ever would have known. So he had contacts for sales and for friends and places to move merchandise the rest of us knew nothing about. 

Cole: What about C. N. Cotton? 

Turpen: Well, C. N. Cotton was the head of Gross- Kelly, and he was a very, very distinguished, wonderful man. Everybody loved C. N. Cotton. My father worked for C. N. Cotton. He worked for him at Gross-Kelly. He owned a big, big home in <Gallup>. He was wealthy back when people weren't wealthy. He owned a big home-- fine, fine home full of Navajo rugs. I expect he was a very well-educated person. I remember him, but I was too young to have ever visited with him or anything. 

Cole: How about C. G. Wallace? 

Turpen: C. G. was the trader of the Zuni Tribe. C. G. came out here from <North Carolina>. He rode a train out here. As a boy he had read Indian books, and he fell in love with the Indian lore, and he decided he wanted to be.... Now, I'm quoting what he told me. I'm repeating what he told me. He came out here and he stopped in <Albuquerque> and went to some of these pueblos. He wanted to be an Indian trader. I don't know, he told me, "I wasn't very impressed with those Indians. I just wasn't impressed with 'em." And so he came on to <Gallup> and he got on a wagon and went to Zuni, and he fell in love with Zuni and he stayed there. Early on, he was the leader of the Indian jewelry business. He was more instrumental in making, developing, selling Indian jewelry than any person that ever was. Very successful bussinessman. Built the first really nice motel in <Albuquerque> back in the early forties, when motels were just being built. He had the foresight and built a wonderful motel that lasted--it's still there--but lasted in popularity for forty or fifty years. But he really knew Zuni jewelry, he knew every Zuni by name, he knew every family. He lived there and spent his life there, except at the end when he came here to <Albuquerque>. 

Cole: How about the Staples? Burton Staples? 

Turpen: I remember the name, but I didn't know him. 

Cole: You mentioned the Kirks earlier. What about Mike Kirk? 

Turpen: Well, across the street from us we had the Kirk brothers, and I suppose early on John and Mike were partners. That's a little bit before my time, because by the time I came into the business, John was in <Gallup> and Mike was out at <Lupton>--both very prominent in the making of jewelry, the buying of rugs. Very prominent people. Just two different personalities, but big in the business. John had two sons. He had Tommy and Dude, who were in the business, big time. When we opened our store in 1939, the store that I've spoke of a lot, we were right across the street from them. I think my dad chose that location realizing that there'd be a little overflow from their business, because they had it all. They closed at noon for lunch 'til one o'clock, and we stayed open, because we'd get a customer out of there now and then. And we almost really just about built our business on the strength of what they were, and they were very, very fine people. And again, as I look back, I don't know how those traders made that much money, because there wasn't much cash. But they had the biggest, finest home in <Gallup>, too. We never did, we always lived very humble. But those people that were in that business early on all had big homes and lived very well. 

Cole: Any other.... Why don't we look at all the other names ___________. We're looking at a list of the incorporators of the United Indian Traders Association. 

Turpen: That's pretty well the ones that I really knew. I knew some of 'em, but I never spent any time with 'em, to know anything about their background. And of course, you see, both Gross-Kelly and Charles Ilfeld and the Kirk brothers, who were the big firms in town, all had their, as we called it, curio departments--big departments of Indian jewelry and rugs and whatever else the Indian was making--big departments of it. And back then, even when I came in, the buyers, the people who owned stores--that's what we would call buyer, more--and the national parks--they came to <Gallup> to do their buying. A lot of 'em came exactly the same time of the year. Others varied it a little.

<Estes Park Colorado>, was a big place at that time. There were several good stores there. And they would come in, in February and March, and do their buying. And then you'd have to give them until the end of the summer to pay you. They took a billing. But they'd come in and select their merchandise. But we did not have to go to them, they came to us. That really made it very nice. Then it changed. Then all of a sudden we.... Well, for a long time, even in the good days, everybody came to our front door. Now, there's probably more jewelry made in <Albuquerque> than there is in <Gallup>--certainly as much.

Kachinas were always hard for us to come by for many years. They pretty well control those kachinas out at <Keams Canyon>. For us to have any stock of kachinas at all was kind of strange. They just didn't get in that far with their kachinas. They controlled 'em pretty good, so they were very hard.... But then what happened, we had a crossover, the Navajos started makin' kachinas. Once a Navajo starts makin' somethin', you've got mass production now. (chuckles) It's like a water faucet. Of course you can't sell a Navajo kachina as a Hopi Kachina--however, many of 'em are sold that way. But some of 'em got to be very, very good carvers. The Navajo can do anything. And today, our inlay work, our multi-color or channel or whatever you might want to call it, done by the Navajos, is as good or better than any ever done by a Zuni. They really have talent. 

Cole: Were the traders out at <Keams Canyon> ones that were.... 

Turpen: Yes, they'd control it. Plus, that's a long way to come, you see. That's a three-hour drive almost. You could go out there, and they'd have shelves full of 'em. So they pretty well had control. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Turpen: No, I guess that I've talked for a long time here. I hope you have something there you can use. 

Underhill: Absolutely. Very good. 

Cole: Thank you very much. 

Turpen: You're welcome. This might drum up a little business for me! (laughter) Don't know who's going to see this, but you never know! (tape turned off and on)

In all these years, the one thing I did do, when I was finally capable financially, I saved a lot of fine jewelry, both old and new, and I collected Navajo rugs-- not particularly by weaver, but just rugs that I liked, rugs that appealed to me, that I knew were good, and I thought would become scarce. And I collected probably 130 or more, maybe 150 Navajo rugs. And I know they're good ones, because Eddie Foutz came and spent a whole day with me, lookin' at 'em, a while back, and at the end of the day he said, "You know, Tobe, you're smarter than I ever thought you were. You did a good job here." So I pass that on to you, that I did do something, I was thinking in some way, because I really think that I might have one of the biggest jewelry collections that there is--and a nice collection of rugs.



