GEORGIE CLARK INTERVIEW



[Begin Tape 3, Side A]



This is a continuation of the interview with Georgie Clark.  We're at the South Rim of the <Grand Canyon>, it's November 7, 1991, about 9:35 in the morning.  I'm Karen Underhill of Northern Arizona University.



Underhill:  We'll pick up a little where we left off yesterday.  We were talking about your experiences as a woman on the river, and I'm wondering how many other women run commercial trips.

Clark:  Well, you don't have any women running commercial trips.  As of now, with the concession in, and all, then you have some that are learning to be helpers and run the motor all right and row boats, but they of course don't own the concession, but they do work running the motors and rowing and they do a real good job.  I think they do real good, in watching them I think some of them are very good.

Underhill:  What did you think about the image of women in the movie "Six Girls Against the Colorado"?

Clark:  Well, in "Six Girls," you mean in that Look?

Underhill:  Yes.

 

Clark:  Oh, that was one, of course, I was with.  (laughs)  And they come through that.  And that was up on the <Glen Canyon> that was made, and then that was when I had the wood boat to row.  That time I remember because when we got down to <Lee's Ferry> I run that rapid about three times.  They were able to get it back up with a helicopter, just for you to keep running that riffle below <Lee's Ferry> (laughs) so that they could get more of it on the ending.  And the girls were fine on that.  They had quite a few of the pin-up models, so they were quite the glamorous girls.  I forget the name of the one lead one [Irish McCalla] that was quite a glamorous person, and quite down-to-earth.  Very much down to earth, too, at the same time.

Underhill:  How did they portray the women in that movie?  Were they helpless or were they strong?

Clark:  Neither one, particularly.  Actually, they kind of posed them for their looks, mostly, because it's going to be in Look magazine at the time.  And so really, it was more to show the girls.  They didn't really play it either way, they just showed the beauty of the girls more than anything.  (chuckles)  I mean, the thing was really -wanted to show more of that than that they hiked and all around, which they did, up to <Rainbow Bridge> and all -but more to show their beauty, also, while they were doing it.  They had lots of hikes on up there, up on the top of <Rainbow Bridge> I had helped rub the Moki steps in.  They come on a rock down to the bridge and they had been there originally, but on <Glen Canyon>, and you couldn't use a hammer or nothing because you'd break the sandstone and you had to stand just like the Indian and run the stone back and forth to make that foothold deeper, because we must have bigger feet or they've worn off, of course, with time to make it so that you could get your toes in them.  And then I always used a belay on people for safety, but they used the toe-holds unless they needed it, you didn't use the belay, and oddly enough, I can't remember anybody ever really needing a belay.  There never was any tugging on it, because I used to take fifty Scouts down there all the time, because on <Glen Canyon> I couldn't get nobody else before the dam, and I started in with the <Los Angeles> Scouts, and I had fifty at a shot all the time, and with one other person and myself, and we would have the fifty Scouts and then they wanted all the hikes and everything, and I used to take them to all those places and belay them and everything.  I used to take them on overhangs and everything that people today are afraid of it if you take them down it.  At Deer Creek there's one little narrow ledge -it's nothing like I used to take the Scouts on, and I just didn't realize that people would think that was something, you know.  And I used to take Scouts across it all the time, where you went on your -you had to raise up on your toes and you couldn't even get on your knees because it was so narrow going across the ledge and you'd look way down, you know, and a big overhang, and you raised on your elbows.  And I never thought nothing about it, we called it a "hidden passage."  I used to "discover" things [with] the Scouts, to amuse them.  Then for their initiation, then we had a rope with knots in it they would come up and then we'd go up early and we'd take eggs and then when they come up this rope, right at the top, we'd hit them on the head with an egg.  (laughs)  And they'd get a big kick out of this, real big one.  I got along with the Scouts real well, we had a lot of fun.  And I gave each Scout one thing to do only -it'd depend whether he liked to get up early or late and he'd do it every day and just no trouble, because one thing they'd remember and not mess it up.  So I'd just have each one all the way down, and then that wasn't that much work.  Then you always let them have their own camp at night.  And we went away, the few adults that we had stayed away.  And then they had to put their -at that time they could have a fire -they had to put it out.  Well, we always stayed away to be sure it was out (laughs) after they got to bed.  And all these type things.  So they liked that too, so I got along with them real well.  I still like them today.  I take them on the Grand, you know, I'm the only one that really takes Scout troops, because I had all boats loaded -I took sixty-five down from <Wisconsin> not over three years ago and had separate groups with them, but I like them.  I took the young ones -I took all the eight years old -they were eight to seventeen.  Then the most interesting I ever took down was Japanese, because then they come on eight to seventeen and I had -I think it was somewhere near fifty, around fifty of them because we had every boat loaded.  So then I took the young ones, as usual, and everything.  So then they were so organized, that gee, I didn't have to organize them because the little ones already knew to untie the ropes with the bags and the bigger ones would get it and throw them to the others.  And gee, they were so organized, you can't believe it.  And they never hear a word -you never hear the Scoutmaster yell at them, there was none of this whatsoever.  And then they will play as hard as anybody, and in the dirt and sand, and then before lunchtime, you know, and you never hear anything, is what puzzles me, is how they know how to do it.  Then they'll go dive in the water, get cleaned up, and they have a white t-shirt they put on every night.  And when they'd appear for dinner they're like they come out of a bandbox?.  I'd feel dirty in comparison because they just, with that color looked so good -you know, their skin and their hair -and so white t-shirt, oh, they always looked like a bandbox.  And you can't look that good when (laughs) you're blue eyes and white skin.  (laughs)  You never quite look like that.  And so I used to want to shoot them for that, always looking so good.  And then the Scoutmaster would bring, had Japanese beer, but they'd do everything within reason, just at night, just so much.  And they just do everything that way.  So then as we went down, then too I found that they -at night one night I looked around and I thought, "Oh, boy, I bet they'll be trying to hike these cliffs" -they looked inviting -so I was going up to tell the Scoutmaster, "Be sure not to let them hike at night," unless somebody was with them that knew the country, and that we didn't usually do that.  I didn't have to worry.  You know, they were gathered in rings and that they were actually gambling with money!  And the Scoutmaster laughed.  He was right beside me, because he evidently knew I was going to be surprised.  And he said, "Well, gambling is a way of life in our community."  And this was from the Gardenia Community down in <Los Angeles>.  And he said, "We teach them how to gamble."  And that they work for their money, that they set up work and they even paid for their own trips, they had to save, and then they had this much money -they all had the same amount, they're not allowed to borrow, and they learn what it is to lose and that you can't borrow, so that they learn how to gamble, because that's the way of life.  They was so fast, I know I was talking one day, and I said, "Gee, I wouldn't want to get in the root of one of them," and they was playing in <Redwall Cavern> with the ball  and all this kind of thing.  And he said, "Well," he said, "You when they graduate, they have the black belt."  And he said, "It's for self protection.  We're slight built."  And they're not to talk about it.  It's nothing to brag about, and not one had ever mentioned it.  But he said, "It's just a self protection."  Every one of them had it.  So, boy, did they give me the education!  (laughs)  And then on the last day they always take pictures.  They wanted initiation.  Okay, we initiated them, because we had planned an extra day so we could.  So then we initiated them all.  So then just before the next day they was going down to get on the plane, so then he wanted a picture so he got them altogether and he said to us, "Would the boatmen mind to come over for a picture?  We'll get you in a white spot in the front."  So we went over.  We were all ready and we went over and we were all kneeling down and, oh, he said, you know, the usual thing, when they say anything, well then to smile and so forth.  And so then at the right time when he give the word, why we were all smiling big and broad and over come buckets of water that we hadn't seen them get.  (laughs)  And they just drownded us!  (laughs)  And I do mean drownded us!  And here we're like sitting ducks.  You know, we're down there on our knees with a big grin, you know, waiting for the picture to be took.  (laughs)  And then all this water would come over on us.  They really got us!  So they had quite a sense of humor.  They thought that was real good.

Underhill:  What was your favorite trip on the river?  Do you have a favorite?

Clark:  Oh, not exactly.  I have a lot of awfully good trips.  But I like them where you have fun like that.  But I was so interested in how organized they were and how much they taught me, you know, because you always try to organize everything, but in this one, why it was the other way around.  So I won't ever forget that trip from that fact of being on the other end of it, almost, you could say.  And they was so tiny, those eight-year-olds, that I was worried about them going between the boat and the tube (laughs), you know, when you went through a rapid, I was hoping it wouldn't open up very much, because they were so tiny they'd go out.  But it was such a good trip they went out.  Down below Whitmore they had picked the -it was a six-day trip, they made it seven so they could get initiated and have a little extra hiking.  But they were sure good.

Underhill:  You talk about them pouring water on you.  What were some of the other funny moments you've had on trips?

Clark:  (laughs)  Well, at times it's hard to recall, some of them have an awful lot of different things happen.  But different things like that will occur at times, so they like to play jokes on you or something of that type, you know.  (laughs)

Underhill:  You mentioned other women running the river. . . .

Clark:  Oh now, some of the other companies, there are some of them employed that have them, a few on motors, not many.  Quite a few row, though -an awful lot row.  More row than anything.

Underhill:  What sort of skills do you think it takes to be a good boatperson?

Clark:  Mainly, if you know the water to begin with, more than anything else.  And it don't take as much strength at all as you think, because I rowed ten years when the water was really big, and you had the more heavy boats.  Because these boats are harder to row, like this one out here that's in the museum.  And the boats you have now are lighter, but also they can upset easier too than those then in that boat can.  So there's two, six of one and half-dozen of the other one.  But it mainly takes knowing the water, rather than being so strong.  I wouldn't say you have to have -you have to have good health, but I'm talking about not actual physical strength.  It's in knowing the water and when to do it all.  And so that's the main thing, and I think that's why a lot of women are really good on that rowing.  They're really good -they just don't have any problems.  So they're really good.  Then on the motor, they have to get used to a different change altogether because then the speed is totally different.  Because you use a motor, everything happens so fast, that now you have to get that changeover, you know.  Both knowing the water, but being used to how fast things happen with the motor.  So the motor was sort of a different thing, we'll say.  On that, naturally, it isn't strength again -good health but it's just in not panicking, being more calm -particularly with the motor.  You almost need to be more calm than otherwise, if anything does go wrong.  And even a lot of fellows really don't have that either.  And then of course the more forgiving people are if it's a man, because I have had men when I had the ten-man boat that did everything wrong on rowing, but the boats actually took care of everything because those three boats had such a balance that they almost could go through by theirselves.  And I know that if I'd had women rowing, that people probably had a fit to do what the men did sometimes.  You know, but being a man, they got by with it.  (laughs)

Underhill:  What do you think about the feminist movement that has occurred more strongly in the last twenty years.

Clark:  Well some of it, I kind of think they go overboard in a lot of ways.  I mean, you know, that I think some things are quite a bit overboarded.  Some things are true, but I don't know, I just walked through life and did what I wanted and just jumped anything else and forgot it, more or less.  I didn't talk about it or anything else, and still don't.  So I think all your trouble is on many things it's a little too overboard.  I think certain things. . . .  Then it is true on salary and all, that you have a hard time.  But I think sometimes they go over a little bit overboard too much -particularly on sexual attraction and all of this.  It is true, naturally, that a woman can always say "no," and that's the end of that, and it may mean losing their job, but it's -you get along somehow, and this type thing.

Underhill:  How do you think commercialization of the river has affected the Canyon?  Do you think it's helping to preserve the <Grand Canyon>, or has it hurt, having lots of trips and people?

Clark:  the Canyon, itself, I don't think it hurts at all.  When it comes to the side canyons, the hikes and all, I think it'll always be the same.  Somehow the change in the water, you don't have the animals you used to.  You used to have so many ring-neck lizards and everything, and you don't see a whole lot no more.  You used to have even otters once in a while.  You actually had some otters -and you don't [now].  You had lots of beaver and you have a few [now], but not that many.  And you just don't have as much wildlife.  And then, of course, I'm one of the few who objected to the Grand ___________ _____________.  They know it, so it's no secret, of ___________________ [shooting the rows?] and putting in, importing the sheep in.  Because then you get a good population of them, then they sell them to ranchers in <Texas> and what-have-you, which I don't like because I'm to "live and let live."  So things you raise to be shot, I don't go for.  (laughs)  I mean, so that I make no bones, and they know it, so it's no secret on these things, because I happen to be an animal lover.  I like animals from the word go.  I've always had pets of some kind and hope to have one until the very last day, because I like pets.  To me, they just do a lot.  I have always liked them.  And I like just anything that wiggles, actually.  It doesn't have to be special, don't have to be petted, where you just. . . .  Anything, I just pick up mongrels -I always say I'm the Humane Society of Nevada.  (laughs)  When they say "what kind?" and I'll say, "Oh, I just pick up mongrels."  (laughs)  And I always have them live a lifetime because I usually have them checked and they get good meals and kept up, because you have to realize society, if you're going to have things in town you can't have them -at least not <Las Vegas> -you can't have them running loose, because it's not the place.  So you have to go with how things are.

Then at the same time when some things are disappearing, though, with people moving in -like now they have a big argument on turtles and people moving in on the land out from <Vegas>.  Well I like turtles, I had some, and I really like them, but then again, it's just like I said about dams and your plants.  When you keep getting more population and they keep wanting places to build, why, there you have the argument again between the animals and the people.  And eventually it's going to be the animals that go.  And so then I don't see why you should keep any species or anything to continue, because if they're gone, they're gone.

Underhill:  Mentioning your love for animals:  You had a couple of dogs named Sambo that you took on trips with you.  Can you tell us about that?

Clark:  Oh, yes, in the old day, _________ a lot of dog.  It was just a little mongrel, come to my door, and I was going to find a home, then I become attached to it and oh, I didn't see anybody I thought would be good (laughs) good enough to take it.  And I decided "I'll take it over to the river, why not?"  But I had a leash on it on the river, I took care of it.  It was small enough I could pick it up and it had long hair.  Then I had a place in front it could ride, and then I had a pad on the side of the motor -and this was when I was running a motor -and it could come down onto there.  And then when we come to a real big rapids, then I had extra clips on its life preserver that I could put clips on, because I knew the boat wouldn't upset, and I was sure it wouldn't go off this way.  And so when people would see me put the clips on the dog they'd know that something really big was coming.  (laughs)  They knowed it was going to be a mighty one!  And then he'd bark at the waves coming over and he loved it!  And the bigger they were the more he'd bark and he'd try to jump up for them, you know, so he was real entertaining.  But he didn't bother people, but he didn't want them to pet him.  So therefore I told people, "Now, if you don't like a dog, all you have to do is never try to touch this dog, because he won't hurt you, but he'd just as soon you didn't."  And I said, "So if you ignore him, why, you won't ever see him at camp," and they didn't.  Because somehow that dog was a one-person dog and didn't bother people.  It only wanted off first, was the odd thing.  You landed, somehow the dog wanted that leash unhooked so he could get off.  So I just said, "Let him go to shore first after we get well landed."  And then he would run for a few minutes.  He stayed away from the kitchen somehow, because there was people there.  And so I just never had to train him, because he was just that way, and slept on the boat with me, so he was just no problem.  Because he just was a one-person dog and didn't want nobody petting him.  So then they could never complain on that dog, because he didn't bother them.  (laughs)

Underhill:  What year did Sambo start going with you, do you remember?

Clark:  Not exactly.  It had to be from 1955 on, because that's when I had big boats.  And probably after I got it down to where I was sure they were safe, probably about 1957, I guess, because I wouldn't have took him, I'm sure, if I felt a bit insecure on anything, because I wouldn't wanted to have had the addition to watch something when I would be needing to watch the people, if I felt insecure about anything.  So it would have had to been when I was pretty secure on everything, that I would have the time to watch him in rapids and all to get him in and everything like that.

Underhill:  Is your love for animals related to being a vegetarian?

Clark:  No, not at first, because I was born and raised in <Chicago> and I didn't know anything about meat.  We were just so poor that we couldn't afford it, and just didn't have it, so therefore you didn't become accustomed to meat.  So then as I grew older and then knew where it come from, then by that time I didn't like the idea.  But that was many years, because you were so far removed from anything that looked, you know, of animals.  Because you remember, I'd never been out near -and this is way up -I was gone before I was ever near anything enough.  I'd never been near a cow or horse or nothing to really know one end from the other.  (laughs)  You know, because they were farm animals.  So there was nobody that knew less about a farm than me because I was strictly in <Chicago> in the middle of the -right close to the Loop all my life.  So there was nobody that knew less about anything, except water, which I was in all the time, Lake Michigan.  But otherwise ________ myself.  But then I didn't like it [ed: meat], as I found that too, and then I didn't have a taste for it.  But neither did I really eat, as I told you, pie and things that are sweet because couldn't afford that either.  So then I never acquired a taste for it because we didn't have it.  You know, you just had apples and that to eat, straight, and things that were more cheap.

Underhill:  What kind of food did you take on your trips on the river in the early years?

Clark:  Oh, we had to carry canned food on long trips then, because then I didn't carry a frame and you didn't carry ice -you couldn't.  And so you carried different canned vegetables and things and canned meat for people.  I never objected to either people or as far as animals go, I feed my dog meat, but as far as I'm concerned -because I pretty much live and let live.  I don't think because I do something that you have to do it.  (laughs)  I don't think what I do is just right any more than what you do.  So in so many words, I'm a live and let live ___________.  If they want to do it voluntary, fine.  But otherwise, you don't ever hear me saying a word about anything, of their personal nature.

Underhill:  Initially, you ran the river for a number of years by yourself or with just a couple of people.

Clark:  Oh yes.  For a long time I rowed the boat.  Usually it was fellows that went with me, but a lot of times then, because as I said I didn't tend to push nothing and they didn't go too often.  (laughs)  So I'd just keep going down the line, you know, and then selling real estate I'd keep talking.  Then when I was in the winter and all I used to rock climb and go up climbing mountains and all that type thing, too, so I met a lot of fellows.  And I'd get them to go with me.  But swimming wasn't then in popular or water sports.  So water was something they didn't know.  They knew other things, but oddly enough, water is the one thing -really rough water -that even today a lot of people are real fearful of -really rough water.  You wouldn't have people go today if you had the water as wild as it was in those days, because the average person would not want it.  They would just have so much fear of it and they're be a lot that wouldn't want it at all.  So if we turned the clock back, had the muddy water and the fierceness of it, you wouldn't have people going, even today, at all, for sure.  And not, if you had to take a long time, because you were patching boats then.  Because you did do a lot of patching the older boats -maybe they punctured easier, I don't know because they were older -but you did patch a lot of boats, whereas now you don't really do that too much with the good neoprene and the water is so slow it don't have the power, that you really don't patch a lot of boats any more when you have your equipment good.

Underhill:  In your book you mentioned that you enjoyed the solitude but you also like people.  Would you rather go with a group of people or by yourself if you could, if you had a choice.

Clark:  No, I like a group of people.  I like a group as a group, though.  I don't like a little tiny group, because then I don't -believe it or not, while I talk good here, when I run the motor, because I'm six foot back from the other boats, then actually I'm not with people at all, and I don't attempt to talk to them because it's too hard to talk to them from back there.  And so I tell them, you know, I talk at night, but during the day there's no use, because I'm concentrating on the water and I have to be very careful running three boats because I run with the current too, not by power.  And my boat is not "power" you can say.  (laughs)  So I have to be sure where I'm at all the time.  And so I concentrate more on the water.  But I rather like that to a certain degree.  Then you're with people on your A break and noon and at night and that's fine.  Then I like so much, because I just got used to it again -like I told you, our mother made the little pads that were private -and so at night, then at a certain time, at nine o'clock, I don't want anybody on the boats, and I say so.  It's in my literature and all -at nine o'clock everybody's off the boats, period!  (laughs)  Then because it's -I just like the privacy.  I don't mean that I exactly go to sleep then, but I like to get washed up and cleaned up because I don't get a chance to get cleaned up.  So between that and when I have them up for coffee, I have to be cleaned up.  Then I get up in the summer at three o'clock, because I take my bath in the morning from three to four, because usually you're up there and have the coffee pot ready for people when daybreak comes, because we go early and they always want coffee right away.  So you have to move it out.  And so that way, why then if I just sleep then I can get up and have my bath when nobody is awake.  Then I have such a good place to get a bath because I have the motor mount with the little bucket for water -you have to get used to cold water (laughs) because you gotta pour cold water on you, but if you can get used to that water you can have your bath every morning and that really wakes you up and I like it, because I'm used to it and I like it.  Nobody there, for sure, that time of the morning is around or anything else.  Even if it is a little moonlight, why, you're not running much chance. . . .

Underhill:  Who have been some of your friends on the river over the years?  Anyone in particular come to mind that you've been close to in running the river?

Clark:  Well, I have a lot.  Well, Mike Goben has been -a lot of them have been with me for years.  I still have a lot of them that are way back.  I had the one fellow who can't go on the river, and to keep acquaintances with him all the time, was with me clear back in 1955, he's a professor at USC, and he went two trips a year all the time, and then he went to <Mexico> with me.  Then he thought when he'd retire he'd go all the time.  But he always had trouble with his son and he always had to wear clothes.  He was not one that could wear a bathing suit, because his feet would swell and his hands.  And he had to wear gloves and all.  And then as he got older and went, then the sun reflected on his face and he'd get skin cancer on his face.  So then when he retired, here he can't go.  But he still has parties for us every year.  He'll come up and ride the bus, because he's just crazy about the river and the river people.  And so he just keeps in contact, because he liked it so well.

Underhill:  Is that Orville Miller?

Clark:  Uh-huh.

Underhill:  And how did you meet Orville Miller?

Clark:  Oh, I met him when I advertised and I was going to take a low-water run.  And it was going to be the first time I'd ever been in at low water, because then there was no more water, it just kept going on down, you know, because the snow melt was over.  And I advertised for hikers that had good strength hiking, that we might have to hike out and leave the boats, because I put flatly "I don't know what can happen to us.  We just don't know a thing."  And so then he was one that come in at <Phantom Ranch>.  So then a real good helper had to leave me, that was a man, because I was looking for those that would be of some use because you are going to get on rocks and everything.  And then when I went up to <Phantom Ranch> -because we used to stay overnight there -and then he was in a chair tipped back and he was snoring with his mouth open, and he was real white and pasty-looking, and I thought, "Oh boy, that don't look like much help!"  (laughs)  My first impression was not very good.  And I told him that later, that that first impression was very bad.  And he somehow sensed this.  As he went along he somehow sensed right off the bat that, you know, somehow I didn't think (chuckles) that much of him.  So we were doing different things -as I went along, why then he improved.  But always happened to like all the women, you know, and all this type thing.  Well, I thought, "Hmm, that does it," because, you know, it's one of these (laughs) that way again, so that didn't improve it.  But he just kept coming and going along until then I did like him, later.  But it wasn't because my first impression was very good, it wasn't at all.  (laughs)

Underhill:  We were talking this morning about current river trips and wondering how many romances have sprung up on trips.  Is that common?

Clark:  There's a lot, and a lot where they get married.  Al was just telling me his sister-in-law, who's been divorced some time, has a couple of children and works and all, but anytime she -somehow things hadn't panned out when she went with anybody, and she really was the type who wanted to be married again.  And so then last year -she hadn't gone for a couple of years, and then last year she went with me again, and then she went as a helper on Al's boat.  So then at night, down where I told you we have a party on our trip one night -we plan for a party night -and so there it was a real success.  We had quite a family group, too.  But it just turned out to be quite successful.  And then she met a fellow from San Frisco [ed: <San Francisco>] and they become real good friends, and then he wanted to pair way up, because he couldn't get off from work and she could, to come up to see him, and then she told Al, "Oh, I don't think I'm going."  But then when he come back she had went up and then he said she was just head over heels in love.  So then they managed to get together quite a bit and so then now they're going to get married.  And she already turned in her resignation, she's going to move up where he's at to San Frisco.  So you have these things happen.

Then Al, as I told you, was separated.  His wife got the divorce.  It wasn't a case of men, she just wanted to go her own way.  You also have divorces.  But then on the same trip he met a girl that I took.  I got special permission.  She was a helper, but she was having to change jobs and she wasn't going to get a vacation, she said, "If I can't go on that, I can't go."  And I said, "Well, I'll try to get you to go, even as an extra helper.  I'll see if I can get special permission, because I can't take you without it."  And so they give me special permission and so I took her.  And that's the only reason she was there.  And then he met her and then they got to going together.  So again, they're serious.  So you have these sort of things.  Both directions happen.

[END TAPE 3, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

Clark:  All the time, both going forwards and backwards.  (laughs)  You have them coming both ways.  _____________________________.

Underhill:  How does the river affect people?  Do they relax more and become more open, or?

Clark:  I think they become more theirself.  And I think this is good.  Actually, I think it's a good place to meet and a good trip to have.  It was more-so in the old day, it was even rougher.  But even yet, it's a good trip -at least the six-day, not shorter than that -six at least, or eight.  Because I think the person then, the real person comes out.  So then I think if you meet anybody you'll tend to know them better.  And then when you're out like that and you're not wearing makeup or nothing -the women -or anything else -suntan lotion's about it -and you're just you more -you know, not the clothes or nothing, you all look pretty much the same eventually.  (laughs)  If it's colored water, colors you know.  And so that you're more down-to-earth about everything.  So I think you do know a person a lot better by the time that they take a river trip.  I know boatmen or just anybody -I know them better by the end of the trip, just even watching them, as to their type and everything else.  You know, their disposition, which is real important in marriage (laughs) comes out.  And then if they can even have -you don't have too many rains, but if you have a rain, a few things where you get a little uncomfortable, then it's good too on anything like this, because that really brings anything out, you know, as to the nature of people.  So if they have something a little uncomfortable and all that type thing, then I think it's good.  But I think you do know the people and it's a pretty good opportunity, really, for people, the same things, to meet.

Underhill:  Have you had many passengers that have been afraid?

Clark:  They're not afraid now.  After the first half-day they will come, a lot of women, a lot of men too, that don't swim or something.  Well, I tell them, "I don't plan on you swimming!" (laughs)  "Let's hope not!"  (laughs)  And after the very first rapids, oddly enough, they get over it.  And when they see the kids that I take and all, particularly, then they think, "Well, gee, if she takes them, it must be alright," you know.  So the average get over it and have a really good time when they get relaxed and realize that they're going to be okay.  And like I tell them, if your arms, you feel they don't keep you hanging on tight enough, the boat is not going to upset -not mine, the others you don't do this on  but on mine, then you'd be alright if you want to secure yourself.  But otherwise, not.

Underhill:  We talked about <Glen Canyon> a little bit.  How active were you in the fight to stop <Bridge Canyon> and <Marble Canyon> ______________.

Clark:  Well then, not many people had went that could actively do anything.  The Scouts had went, but you mainly had the kids and not many Scoutmasters.  And then I tried to get Sierra Club to go, and they wouldn't go at first.  I had had a lot of the board members with me that went down all the time.  But I don't know, if they didn't say anything or what, and there was such a few people objected -I just wrote, in fact, to a fellow in <Utah>, up to public television there, the same thing, that there was nobody who really objected, and he did come down himself.  He knew the Sierra Club hadn't objected to it, because they then was interested in <Dinosaur>.  They'd hiked up there and took a few trips, finally, up there, with the club as a whole.  So then they agreed that if they wouldn't put it in <Dinosaur> they wouldn't object to Glen.  And I knew this right from the beginning, because I was in the Sierra Club myself.  Then finally after the dam was already starting to build, then the club went with me, late in the day, it was too late in the day to do anything.  Elliott went with me before he was here _______, to get his own concession.  So then they went down -it was too late to do anything.  So then there was just nobody at that time interested enough in rivers to object to a dam as such.  And then as I said they had this one up to <Dinosaur> and had kept that, but had let this one go in.  So they did know it, and what-have-you, but the board members knew it, they had went with me and I never heard anything.  And myself not being in, too, I'm not a lot, as far as being any good at promoting, because I don't really care to go, oh, to offices and all this and that and yak a whole lot.  I just don't.  I still don't, because even now, when a lot are doing this and that about the raised concession fees, I just think that if the government wants it, they're going to get it, and that's it.  Because it's always proven true, if they want it, they get it.  (laughs)  In most cases.  So eventually.  So that I just. . . .  It's going to be, so I accept everything more it's just going to be.  When it comes to political things I'm not about to enter into many political goal things, because I don't think that I would talk well enough and I just don't think that that is the place where I'd be a leader, is on anything like that.  I just don't think that way I'd be any good at it.

Underhill:  How do you think things have changed since the National Park Service has developed the concession system?

Clark:  They do have to have some rules.  Some rules, of course, are way out too much.  They have to have rules, however, that's for sure.  Some things, like everything in the government, don't always make quite good sense on things.  Some few things -sanitation could be improved, but are wrong.  One that I always argue with them on -and as I tell them, they're boss, so I do what they say, and that's the end of that, but that I don't agree with them on some few things.  But they have it on the hand washing, of having punching holes in this one can and then they dip it and hold it up and put their hands under it.  Then this is free.  Well I had always said this same water goes back in the <Grand Canyon>, so why not just wade out in the river and wash your hands?  You know, instead of setting this thing up like that.  I couldn't see, you know, the people didn't want to get their feet wet.  Well, I said, "Boy, they get their feet wet on my trips" because where the boats are at I don't try to pull them clear up.  If you're going to be stuck on the sand and they wade out to begin with -because I'll tell them "You might as well get used to getting your feet wet," right off the bat, because then it's just better.  And I do that right at <Lee's Ferry>.  I don't try to pull up the last inch.  There are a couple of trips that even put a ladder up that they can walk to get onto the boat.  And I think this is getting just too far out, because you're not trying to have a yacht trip.  If you're having a yacht trip, why then you just go up to Lake Powell and forget it -at least I would!  (laughs)  And so I don't like to see it where you try to take away, oh, just everything from a natural trip, where you're, you know, like that not getting your feet wet, for heaven's sakes!  So a few little things like that I disagree on, that they so concentrate on, will give you a demerit on.  So there's just a few of those things I disagree, but the rules as a whole, you have to have.  You do have to carry toilets, and you do have to watch that people pick up.  And you have to check the cans, because people naturally in America don't pick up unless they're checked on, because they haven't been used to it.  And you do have to, or you'd have terrible camps.  So all those things I go whole-heartedly for.  And that type thing.  So the percentage of it is good.  They took a lot of the rules from me, and a lot of them have to be, when you keep getting more people.  It's just some of them little things, those little things, as the saying goes, it breaks the camel's back.  It's just some of them little things that I think are way out.  And that's usually set up just by somebody that went down a canyon checking who come up with this idea and somehow gets it through that isn't on the Canyon all the time with a group of people.  They're not really out there all the time, because there's nobody been out there as long as I have, of course.  And I never had anybody object to wading out and getting their feet wet.

Underhill:  How have you seen things change since 1945 to now?  How has the river changed?

Clark:  Well, naturally you don't have the flow, so you don't have the thrill of it at all, because your flows -you just don't have water, to begin with, to come through the dam.  Then they can't have the big flows they used to have because the boats now couldn't run it.  Single boats, because everybody has single boats or rowboats, and they will upset, even without hitting the holes and all, which they did in 1982.  My own single boat upset and all too, because they do it.  Big boat didn't, but the others did.

Underhill:  Was that on <Crystal>?

Clark:  Well, they upset different places on single boats.  They didn't have to get to <Crystal>.  And that's everybody's trips, because if they just can't take the big water because they're not used to handling it to begin with.  And the reason I set up the big boats in the old day was to have a boat I could say didn't upset, because I had a single boat, but I didn't promote that one.  I promoted the big one, as the boat at first and then I had the single then later and more-so as the day after the dam come in was being built, because then it was safe enough that it was alright.  The single boat can upset just like a rowboat, you know, because they can get off balance, go up agin' a rock, and so you can see that if you would look at one with the tubes.  You could realize that it can upset just as easy as a rowboat, because it doesn't have that balance out there.  As I said on the ten-man, it was good when it had the three boats, but then when they got them in lighter, then the light boats just didn't work so good.  (laughs)  And I couldn't handle them for that reason.  If you could have still got them made like this I'd have still had them.  But those light ones just weren't doing what I wanted them to do, because I wanted them so you could either row them or have the motor on them or both, and where you could go anywhere.  But they were falling short on that, and then just rowing takes time.  And now you've got so much smooth water -you take down by <Nankoweap>, you have a lot of smooth water.  And it's beautiful beyond words, but it is smooth.  Real slow current.  You have a lot of it down above Lava.  It almost backs up the other direction for a long ways, because now with the silt getting placed in different places now, when it picks it up from one spot, the up and down, then it puts it down where you don't need it.  In <Nankoweap>, you don't need any more sand camps -you've got tons of them (laughs) because this [is] where it goes and then goes down there, you know.  (laughs)  And then it's wiping out a lot, but it comes over the back -the whole thing is, when you have the dam it doesn't replace the silt that's lost, because most of the camps are lost to water, when they had the rainfalls coming over the top, and then it washes from the back, washes the sand down from the back, because several camps I stayed at washed not by up and down of the river but from the rainfalls.  And in the old day, see, it got replaced, because there's all this silt coming down, then it would place it as it dropped down -the high water, you'd get it right back.  But now you don't ever get it back, because there isn't any.  So it isn't so much the up and down water, really, as it is -if you look at it I can show them place after place, is from the rain coming down, and then tearing through a camp and it never gets replaced again.  I can ________ think of five real quick I used that all the time, that are that went.  [Huh?]

Underhill:  What do you think running the <Colorado> will be like in twenty years?

Clark:  Oh, it'll get more commercial and more rules and you'll probably -I don't know, it depends a lot on the water you get.  If you had big snows, then that would change everything to where they had so much water they had to let it out of the dam.  And then with time I would just say that you're going to have to make camps at certain elevations or certain spots up in the rocks, that even if they use artificial means, because the dam and everything's artificial so I don't know why they would hesitate to simply level off some places there up high to where they would stay there, that you could have for camps.  Because you will keep coming up short on camps in the spots you need them in, where rapids are.  Because otherwise you have to go faster and get down into those still spots.  Then there's plenty of places, and will always be.  But otherwise, you're going to have to make artificial -the rocks and all like that, because of your dam.  And this all stems back to what follows the dam.  It's just the way it is.

Underhill:  How do you feel about increasing the number of people that go through the Canyon?  Would you rather  see that limited?

Clark:  I don't think so, because I think as it stands right now, it is not that bad and I have to agree with them.  When concessionaires run over their given amount, that then they're getting too greedy and not to go along the lines with what it is.  Because with what  it is the way we leave <Lee's Ferry>, they soon spread out when you have motors and oars both -and you do need both.  You don't need one or the other, because this spreads then out, because all the motors have certain days, they get to a certain point and it spreads them out good.  It's good to have them different days.  And wanted to have five, six, seven, eight days, is good because it spreads them.  And so you'll hardly ever see another motorboat, for all a lot have left in the morning.  I don't leave 'til noon.  And you know the first day I may see them vaguely, but then I never see them again, if they don't have trips that are longer than mine, I just don't see them.  So it's only the rowboats, and then the rowboats, if they have too many in a spot, they back up and then down by Lava you just see about fifty of them, and so that it's bad.  But it hasn't been bad on camping.  You do see a lot of them, but people like to see one another.  I never had nobody object to seeing another trip.  I have never had it happen.  You hear this, but I've never had it happen that anybody objected.  In fact, they're anxious -they break their neck waving.  (laughs)  So I always wonder, others saying they don't want to, they all break their neck waving.  Because waving is one of the most natural things.  Because when they're going through a rapid and taking pictures, I keep telling them, "Have your mind on hanging onto the ropes.  Don't be waving to the people on shore, if it's real close in a hole."  If they're right close to a hole, you need to be hanging on and not one hand up waving at them.  I said, "That's for tourists," and I try to get them not to.  In spite of anything, there'll be somebody (laughs) there'll be somebody gonna raise that hand.  It's just something that American people do, is wave that hand.  You can't stop them.  And they're that way when they pass another  group.  I think they like it!  Even my own groups, when I have another group, why, gee, the one group I have breaks their neck wanting to know where the other group is and how come they haven't seen them.  And I said, "Because we're not supposed to!"  (laughs)  "Well, you know, we got acquainted with them on the bus, we'd like to see how they are.  We don't have no stops together?"  And I said, "No, because that's the way" (stumbles) "I thought it was to be."  Then I've had people that wanted a single boat just by itself, to have just fifteen people -fine.  And I had some policemen out from <New York>--wanted a boat by theirself.  "Good, I got just the boat for you."  And so they come out and everything.  Then I happened to have quite a few girls and women and all this on the other boat and all this kind of thing, and they looked at them, but they were on their own boat.  "Under no condition," I said -now they wanted their own boat -"no condition do we contact each other unless you need something."  If you need a motor or something, then we interchange or give a signal, but otherwise, if we happen to, and usually time it so one come in the other one was going out, or anything like Red Wall or places to see.  So then before you knew it the fellows, they were going out at <Whitmore>, and then here were the girls coming in the others and they thought, "Gee, how come?" you know.  And so (laughs) so they stayed for the dinner down at the showboat and they said, "You know, we did it all wrong."  They said, "We wanted a boat by ourself, but we didn't really think about the fact that we would be by ourself total."  And they said, "Then we looked over and saw all these women, and we liked to went crazy."  (laughs)  And no contact of any kind, you know.  (laughs)  He said, "When we come again we'll come out, but we're not going to go with a group, we're not going to stay a separate group -no way!"  Yeah, because right now they just about have a fit, you know.  The guy that was running the boats said, "They're about to have a fit, wanting to come over to your camp."  And he said, "No, I told them we can't camp together.  It's agin the rules."  (laughs)  We can't do that.

Underhill:  They waved a lot, huh?

Clark:  So sometimes you find different -I've had different groups like that.  Then they found that they weren't really as happy, because somehow the more human nature as a rule, I can, particularly on my group, because as I told you I promote a lot of singing and oh, anything I can like that.  So then our group always looks like it's having more fun than their group.  And then because I go early and then I do get the good camps, because I go so early that I plan I will get them and usually do.  (laughs)  And normally I do.  So then I do have the good camps, that they can't stop at.  So I do have the good ones.  So that part is true, you know.  And then they give about two looks about that time, about how come this or that, you know, because they go later in the morning, usually.  And the smaller group, and all, if they want to be later, well fine.  Just whatever suits the group.

Underhill:  Why do you keep running the river?

Clark:  Oh, I love the river.  I will always love it.  It's like what I said when I first swam it all, then I said, "This is for me, I'm going to be here forever."  And people now keep saying something about "when are you going to retire?" and I said, "Well, I'm retired to the river.  I'm married to the river and I don't plan a divorce."  (laughs)  I always tell them that.  When I was younger and then they knew that I was divorced and all, they'd keep saying, "Don't tell me you don't plan to ever get married again."  And I said, "Well . . . " this was in the wild day of the rapids, I said, "I don't think I can ever find a man that'll give me the thrill of the big rapids."  (laughs)  "If I do, okay, but I don't think so."  (laughs)  And that shut them up, you know.  You always thought of things to do.  They'd talk on reincarnation or something:  "You believe in it?" and I said, "Nope, if I did, I think I'd be a black widow spider."  (laughs)  They always got a big kick out of seeing what they could get me to say.  They'd spend their time thinking how they could get me to say something.  (laughs)  Because they knew I would use it!  They know I would.

Underhill:  Yesterday when we were talking, you were describing that first swim with Harry, and you were up on the ledge and you were sitting above the whirlpool and I asked you about the year, and then we started talking about something else.  Can you continue to describe that first swim after you were up on the ledge and it was night -what happened then?

Clark:  Well, mainly, he was so cold.  He was really cold, and so there's no way that you were going to sleep because. . . .  Well, you didn't dare -the water  was so high and the rock was so narrow that you might slide off the thing.  So knowing that fact and the fact you were so froze, your preserver was wet, you didn't have anything, and you hadn't had food -only a little candy -so you just weren't going. . . .  You were glad when morning come.  Yeah, you were real glad, because you sure -I wouldn't have, anyhow, knowing water, I wouldn't have hiked out.  Like Harry said, "Well, couldn't hike out, so I had to continue."  (laughs)  But I wouldn't have anyhow, because knowing, I'd have went on ahead.  But then you were almost glad to go in the water.  And then the next morning, there was no whirlpool there.  The whirlpool had throwed us out and that's when I found out that whirlpools travel.  In those days, you had big whirlpools, heavy whirlpools, that you don't have now.  But I found then, they traveled.  You just had so many then -with the silt and everything, you had really big ones then, really big ones.  Even way down the lower Canyon, the last little canyon had whirlpools like you wouldn't believe.  The water was so violent then, going into Deer, which is now just a real smooth ride up above Deer there.  And in the old day when the water was so high, it would push agin the walls.  It's real narrow there, but it'd push and it'd push hard enough that it would push one boat way up high and then another one way up high.  I had one fellow one time, and he had canoes -even though it wasn't popular then -and I had a hard time making him hang on.  He'd always go "quack, quack, I'm a duck," you know, and I would almost get mad at him.  So I said to him, in here, I said, "Now we go up on this wall with one boat, so you'd better hang on, because we go up and slide back, but you get a jolt when you go up."  And so he didn't pay no attention and he went off.  And then there was a whirlpool right there and he went down in that thing the third time and we threw him a rope and he grabbed it and we pulled him up.  But I was so mad at him, before I pulled him up I went back and put my head down to his and said, "quack, quack, I'm a duck."  I was so mad at him, I wasn't sympathy [ed: sympathetic], I was mad!  (laughs)  Because I'd told him and told him, you know, and it was his own darn fault.  So I was plain mad.  Couldn't resist it.  And he always remembered it.  We called him Whirlpool Kelly.  So when I used to write to him back east I'd always write "Whirlpool Kelly" on it.  So everybody wanted to know -the postman said, "What on earth does that mean?"  (laughs)  Whirlpool Kelly.

Underhill:  What was his first name?  Was that his last name, Kelly?  His last name was Kelly, or his first name?

Clark:  I have to think.  I remember now -we called him "Whirlpool" so many years.  I'd have to go back and write him, because we just called him "Whirlpool."  Always addressed him, even, that way.  Just Whirlpool Kelly.  Well, they came back on quite a lot of trips.  His son come with him, but I had no more problems.  From there on, boy, he hung on and his son hung on.  I didn't have any more problems.  (coughs)  I had a boatman the same way.  He is a far way up in the Fire Department, so he wasn't used to really being told anything.  And he goes along real good, but somehow -and _______ this was again in high water -and in <Lava Falls> he was determined to sit on a seat that was further back towards me that is not for passengers, because the boats work so hard back there -I don't know why, but they just get a wilder ride than the others further up.  And I didn't know why, but they always did, so I never let a person sit back there.  And I told him, "That is not a seat."  And he always said, "I'm going to be back, because the boats are active, but I can hang on," he said.  He didn't have [weight?] or nothing.  He said, "You're not talking about a regular passenger."  And I went "Hmm."  And I said, "Well, I guess you have to learn the hard way," is all I said.  So sure enough, when we hit Lava, he went off.  And he grabbed some ropes as he went down, but he went through Lava hanging onto them ropes.  And then we pulled him up.  Then I haven't have to say a word, and ever since that time.  And neither does he ever attempt to sit on that seat.  But it took that, unfortunately.  He just thought he was good enough, that was not for him, because he was in top physical condition and all this stuff, you know, and being way up in the Fire Department, he thought he was above this.  But he found out!  He still goes with me all the time.  See, I have these people for years.  You've probably been with me fifteen years.  A lot of the people I have now are from long ago.  I have them, and then I have their sons.  If they're in the Fire Department they bring the Fire Department.  (laughs)  I have one generation to the next.  I have from one generation into the next.  Because, see, on Orville, I've had his sons and all that.

Underhill:  Great!

Yesterday, you mentioned the story about the dam and the river in <Mexico>.  Can you tell us what happened on that trip?

Clark:  Oh, that's a long story on it.  But to start with, I had run it before the dams were in.  So okay, they're going to build a dam, so I didn't run it.  Then they had the dam was finished, so then Orville had been down, he said, "Oh, the dam's finished so now we can go."  So then I always had everything in August because then that was when you had water.  Usually you had to have the rain to have enough water to go through there.  And Lake [Chapawa?] was up to the top of it, out of <Guadalajara>.  So then I flew, we went down and always flew a lot by little plane, and I flew with this and wow, the gates were loose and I said, "Hmm, you can't even get a boat in, you can't, with that, I wonder how long that's going to be?"  And so then we checked with the ones in <Guadalajara> and they said, "Oh, it'll be okay, we'll let this water and close the gates and all will be as usual."  Okay, so then we planned to go on down.  So down there, then to get the truck you have to pay first, because they always say they don't have money for gas.  And then the back of them are always canvas covered and we have to ride in that, usually with the little bugs and all too, and takin' our boats down (laughs) because we fly the boats down and then pick them up.  So anyhow, it was raining and we had a rough start to begin with, getting them out of Customs had been a job and somehow everything on this one was turning out to be, not going so smooth.  So anyhow then, in the pouring rain we get in this canvas and it leaks some to begin with and we're going down this road, which is something, then the drivers down there always have been -they seem to get there, but they sure drive wild, you know.  They swish all over the place.  Then all of a sudden we come, we're getting down towards this canyon, they said, "We gotta go around this curve, because the rocks are sliding and we don't want you in here."  And we got out and then the truck took off and took around the curve and then we had to walk around this curve and the rocks are falling!  (laughs)  Because it was canvas, he said he didn't want us to be in the truck if anything happened.  So we got around safely, thank goodness and got back in.  Then he went down, and then here was this water roaring again.  I mean, up like it'd been before, you couldn't get near the river and you were up quite high.  And so before I knew what was happening, they're unloading this because these are little boats which you could unload fast and he always has you helping.  They're unloading these boats, and they said, "Oh, we got to get out of here because they're going to have another rock slide and we won't be able to get out."  And they just literally slammed things out and took off before we could say "scat," "boo," or anything.  So here we're standing -we got groceries alright, but (laughs) we're standing in the pouring rain, not a one with anything on.  And this same Morrison, might as well make the best of it, we're so wet anyhow that it doesn't matter, outside if anything will warm us, to put a tarp over us, because we didn't take anything anyhow.  So then towards morning we went -then when daylight come we went back up to where -hiked to where they controlled the dam.  They were going to cut it off, be okay.  They said, you know, you can roll your boats down the hill, no problem.  It'll be okay now, because it'll be off.  So okay.  So everything's going to be fine now.  The sun came out, so we rolled the boats down the mountainside to where the water was and [Kanamen?] was setting up the boats and everything and had everything about ready.  We had the people and everything on the boats, the three boats together -they were like this ten-man out here -and has this one little motor and two oars.  Everything's tied in good because you tied in everything really tight, particularly on this trip for sure.  And we weren't quite ready to go because I was going to pump the boats up to be more solid, just when we were ready to go.  And all of a sudden I looked up and here's two Mexicans, they're throwing the ropes in.  And they said in Mexican, [Worwo?] could understand them, and they're shoving the boats out and said, "You've got to go, we're going to open the dam."  (laughs)  And then we're on our road.  And I mean, we're at 500 feet below this dam, is all.  And by the time that we're even trying to get out, this thing is on us.  And so Ralph and I tried to start the motor, is the first thing that happened, and then the boats was so soft that the motor and me both just turned right underneath, doubled right underneath backwards, which had never happened, but the boats were not hard enough to take the [power?], and so then here I am clear underneath the propeller and the motor.  Then at the same time, one boat come up on top of the other one and a girl--she was alright but the boat flipped over end so she was inside, no problem.  So then it rode through and it took me quite a while to get out from there, because remember now, you're in this powerful water.  And I have to be careful, this fool propeller, you know, that I've got, because then to hang onto ropes, you just can't panic.  And thank goodness for my early swimming, because then I was used to it, in so many words.  It came back -it'd been a while, but it came back like it was yesterday on the swimming, and I'm glad it did.  But it did come back, just like it was yesterday.  And then I got out and Earl said, "Oh my God, thank God."  He said, "How'd you ever hold your breath so long?"  And I said, "I don't know, but you do funny things when you have to!"  (laughs)  I don't know either.  But anyhow, then I got up.  But then here we have one boat with a boat on top of it, doubled under half-way, and then just one boat solid sitting here, so we have to sit in this one boat (laughs) because we can't get this boat over yet or anything.  So then we weren't getting that one boat back over, because we've only got a half a boat in the middle as yet.  So then I said, "Well, the only thing we can do" -they have trees that grow out from the walls down there -"is to grab a tree and to hang on for dear life and then figure out how to work our way around the trees as the water comes up.

[END TAPE 3, SIDE B]

	GEORGIE CLARK INTERVIEW



[Begin Tape 4, Side A]



 

Clark:  But on this one was the first one and I had never taken women in <Mexico>, and then Orville Miller, who said, "Oh, you have to do this so many times, you know, that it's old hat.  Why don't we have some women?  I don't like an all man's trip."  So okay.  And so I had some nurses who _________ a woman doctor who'd been with me on the Grand a lot.  And so they were passengers and then we didn't have that many men -we just had the two men, actually -it was all that we had and had the women.  So it was some job as the water came up.  I never thought I would be trying to wrastle [ed: wrestle] in a tree, but here you are, you know (laughs) between the ropes and everything as water comes up, trying to get up above these trees that stick out.  So then you get up for a while and then all of a sudden, they start cutting water.  So then you've got to get back down and not get caught on the trees.  So it was quite the workout.  So we're all so worn out then, and I said, "Well, now we're back down," and then we managed and when it was calmer, getting that boat out from underneath.  And I said, "Now we'd better find a place, and we'll have to get sleep."  So then lots of beaches then.  So we found a place and pulled the boats up as high as we could and then did get some sleep and all.  So then woke up, everything was the same and so we said, "Well, we'll probably just get stuck on a bunch of sandbars now."  So then we started down the next day and we're all rested and everything's good and we got the boats hard now.  These are tough little boats.  And we're going down, so everything's going -the motor even is going, believe it or not.  So then I'm running the motor, but all of a sudden I hear a peculiar noise.  Can't figure out what this noise is.  It's a hissing sound.  Is that an air leak somewhere?  So we're looking around while I'm going.  They're looking, I'm running the motor -can't find a thing.  And I said, "Well, I think we'd better land.  I'm just uneasy.  I don't know what that is, but it's something that's not supposed to be."  And you know, I couldn't land!  The water had been coming up gradual -enough that you didn't realize, and it doesn't come in a wall when you're further down, it just keeps coming up.  So I knew what was happening.  I said, "Oh my God, they're letting that dam out again!  And here it comes again."  It starts out like this, but then here it comes just like this all of a sudden.  So I said, "We'll just have to get prepared for whatever it is.  I might as well turn the motor off and use oars or let the water take us, because it's not going to do any good."  So then I looked down and then it made an abrupt turn like this and I said. "Oh oh," I said, "we're going up on that wall, and I just don't know what will happen after that, but" I said, "you'd better be prepared to hang on.  I just don't know exactly what happens.  So then sure enough it went up and then the boats were, this time, were upside down.  Then we were hanging on and I just had a few of the people on my end because you couldn't see the other, and the boat was kind of hung up a little bit.  So this doctor up north said, "What do, Boss Lady?"  He used to call me Boss Lady.  "What do, Boss Lady?"  (laughs)  Then the water was heading to shore on this one spot.  And I said, "Well," I said, "I don't know, but I think we're going to have to hike and get out of here somewhere if they keep doing this."  And I said, "I think that you'd better -the water will take you to shore."  And this girl then -one fellow had canceled at the last minute that was supposed to go from <Guatemala>.  He had a coffee plantation, had been with me.  And he had his niece to take his spot, who'd never been on a river.  And she was here, and I said, "You two'd better go, and go right to shore and just keep hiking straight," because I had been over it by plane.  "You'll come to a highway, and a bus will come there that will take you into <Guadalajara>.  And then I'm sure you can talk him in that you'll pay him there," because he didn't have the money.  So okay.  So they're just starting to walk when they landed over hill and dale.  They had quite (coughs) an affair with that, you might know (coughs) just starting over (laughs) know anything you know!  And so then when I'm talking to him I'm treading water.  And then the boats had took off without me!  So then I knew that they would drown, because it's a dam.  It's just a short ways below, that's a thirty-foot drop for an ore mine.  And so I knew that sure and heck -because I knew they were in shock, because Orville had been yet more or less in shock.  And I knew that they'd never make it.  And so then my swimming come in good, because then I didn't take/go for another swim.  And that put my feet straight down, because I had learned with your feet straight down, let the water take you, go real fast -whereas if you pull your feet up and your knees up, you float on your back and if there's anything, it will turn you some, and you won't, because I'll put my feet down.  Then sure enough, I come up to the boat, but now getting to that boat was going to be the object of something.  And so that I knew then I was going to really have to not wait 'til I was just there just in case -that I'd better try at least to sort of get in the faster water that was over that way.  And then I kept yelling at Orville, and he never even turned his head.  He was on the end and I managed to grab a life line just barely.  And he was coughing his head off because he'd swallowed water.  And they were down in the water.  There was not a one of them on top off the boat for all they'd got in kind of a little whirl there.  They wasn't on shore, but just back.  And I said, "Oh, for heaven's sakes, the dam's below here, you knew that."  I said, "Why didn't you get up there."  And then he said, "Between coughs, I couldn't.  I swallowed water."  So I got up and started pulling the girls up, and I said to him, "Well, hand me the bow line so I can put it across and we'll get you up."  Because we was just getting closer and closer to the dam.  And he, somehow his life preserver had come undone and he'd snapped that bow line into his life preserver, and he had to get it undone.  But finally I got the bow line, then he was a job to get up because he's six-foot four.  And that is something, just to get him up, but we did.  And I said, "Well now we're going to have to grab again any tree, anything."  And I said, "Even if the boat goes, hang onto the tree and get into land, because the dam's below and none of you are good enough to make that, that's for sure."  So I said, "Mainly, just hang on and go for land if you have to -by yourself, even.  Just don't let go of the tree."  But we were lucky that we got the boat in and could tie it up, up high.  So then we stayed again, the boats were upside down, we're on the bottom of them remember, so we couldn't have food that night.  But then the next morning the water was dropped again.  Then we get the boats turned over again, and then you have food and everything, but everybody's in shock.  And I go, "Hmm, now (laughs) now what do I do?"  Because then if it'd been just me, I waited it out [or "I'd have waded it out"?], and I knew there'd been some Mexicans down by that mine, and I'd have waded and kept to shore close enough when it was down that I got them to help me in a few things, portage, and I'd have got the boats out.  But I couldn't do it having this people and in shock, and so you know a woman.  So then I thought, "Well, we might as well, tomorrow morning, start hiking back up, and then see if we can't hike out somewhere, because can't do it."  So we left our life preservers (coughs) and the boat was in fine condition.  But we left our life preservers and just took some -we had canned water, canned beer, and some food.  These were real waterproof bags at that time, these real tough old bags they used to have at one time.  I still have a few of them.  And we took them, and I did take my camera, for all it wasn't working.  I had worked hard to get it and it was so expensive I just didn't want to lose it, so I did carry the camera.  So then we started to hike back up.  And also in the meantime, I forgot to mention that we had lost, one girl hadn't been located somehow in all this and she was missing.  We didn't know what happened to her.  So then as we were hiking back up, going up looking for a spot that I think we might be able to get out of -and then on the side we're on I discovered there's no way you're going to hike out because the cliffs are so high.  But on the other side, then I could see trails way up high to where the Mexicans had had some trails up there, evidently, into corn plants way up there.  But anyhow, I knew then you could probably get there somehow -but it's across the river.  And then as we're hiking up to where I see this trail and think, "Well, I guess we'll have to camp and try for it," I heard a yell.  And the girl is on the other side of the river.  She's alive, but on the other side of the river.  And we get it to her to stay, that we'll be over, we just motioned enough that she got it.  So then I said to Orville, and he's still in shock and I said, "You might as well get some sleep and start talking to these girls," because he always liked the women as I said, "that we're going to have to take the bags."  We only had brought a long rope with us and no life preservers.  "And we're going to have to take them and they're going to have to hang on to those bags, because they float and they're like a life preserver, and they're going to have to hang on and you and I are going to have to swim in front and it will take us about a mile to get across."  It was real narrow, but I said, "It will probably take a mile," because the water was still up.  And I said, "Because we're going to have to."  [ed: Orville responded] "I'm not going to swim that river!"  I said, "You're not?!  Well," I said, "I am, because I have to, because," I said, "you can't get out this side for sure, and not the condition everybody's in.  That's [policy?].  We'll be lucky if we get out the other one."  So I said, "I'm going in the morning, whether you do or not.  Now that's _____ the girls over there and I'm going to try to take food enough and I will be going and bring back what help I can, but [I] have to go because it's the only way out."  So in the morning then he had talked to them and finally had decided they would.  It was the hardest job I ever had in my life to get all of them with these bags tied to this rope in between floating, to get lined up and to actually come in that water, you know.  (laughs)  To get them all lined up was a major operation.  But we didn't swim that river and didn't make it.  [Transcriptionist's note:  I swear she said "didn't" two times in that last sentence, but obviously she meant did.]  And only Orville knew that there were alligators in it.  Somehow we didn't see any of them.  I don't know if they got killed in the high water or what, because I didn't mention and he didn't.  And alligators, oddly enough, are afraid of people.  Because when you go down, they'd see people, they would dive in the river.  The crocodiles down by <Mexico> are not that way and they'll just sit there and you don't dare think that they're going to dive anywhere.  So crocodiles are another subject, but the alligators I think are afraid of people.  I don't believe that they really [would] come right up towards anybody.  I don't know, but they are the ones that will dive if they see you.  But the crocodiles, not so down low by <Guadalajara>, because I found that out real quick too.  So anyhow, we didn't have them.  So then we're going to go up this -there was some trail there, not much, but a way you could go up.  But anyhow I was afraid of the snakes in the trees.  I didn't say anything about that either, but they do have some kind of a snake that is in the tree that's poisonous.  So I thought, "Let's see, if I make a lot noise maybe somehow that will scare it up higher or something."  So anyhow I had a stick and so then I started talking and kind of rattling the bushes and the woman behind me said, "Gee, you're sure talking a lot more than you normally do."  (laughs)  And I said, "Oh, I'm glad we're just getting out, you know."  And then we come up and sure enough, there was a little village of huts and one pig tied.  There was not a person in the whole thing.  One pig, though, was tied to one, and I knew then that they'd be back, because they do this -they tie a pig by it's leg so it can't go too far.  And there was a rattlesnake up there, but it was a plain old rattler, thank goodness, so that was alright, we could go around that.  So then there were two trails and I thought, "Oh boy, now which trail do I go on?"  And so I decided to go on the right  one.  Then we found out, the fog come in, and it just led up into the corn field.  So I said, "Well, we'll hike back down in the morning.  We'll sleep here tonight and we don't want to go back in this fog, because you can't see.  We'll go down in the morning and then we'll go out the other trail."  So then in the morning, well then some of the girls were ready and I said, "Well, we'll start and move ahead."  And we just started down in a kind of fog and we come into these guns pointing at us.  Well, they had had -they called them [banderoles?] at that time, that robbed the other camps and took anything -pigs.  They didn't leave any women down there even because they had got raped and everything by these type people.  So when they had seen the silhouette -a guy was coming down then a Sunday night before -he seen the silhouette probably of Orville, and he called it a giant banderole, that he went back up and he got the guards who were up high above that had guns and all.  Because I thought they were better dressed than the regular peon on the river.  And so that was the guards from way up high that had come down.  So then they helped us out.  And this girl that had got lost over there -her feet were so sore -she wore suede shoes which you're not supposed to, and they kept shrinking.  Well, she couldn't get them on.  So they had a burro they had with them and they let her ride the burro out then.  And then they went with us and we went out and then I had told them, you know, when they got into <Guadalajara>, then to have this same plane man come back out to the place he'd pointed out to start looking for us.  And you know that he come in almost like I had ordered the plane, just when we come up there, that he come in there.  You couldn't believe it!  So then we got back to <Guadalajara>.  Then I told him, because the boats were down there, and I said, "Don't even mention leaving the boats to anybody or anything about it.  We just simply left the trip early, because you're going to get me in deep trouble, because then I will have to pay for the boats, because I haven't got them to take out, if I'm leaving them there.  And I don't want to, so you don't mention anything."  And believe it or not, they didn't!  Which is a real hard thing to do.  But they didn't mention it, because they knew I'd really be in deep trouble about the boats and really have to pay for them, if I wasn't getting them out of there.  And this way nobody would ever know the difference.  Because when I went down the next trip again, well then the villagers had cut them up to put in the soles of their shoes.  They were showing me, I had just my name left in the sandal of one!  ________________ boat!  (laughs)  They were pointing, just my name in this sandal, and Orville said, "See, that's how you're going to end up, Georgie."  (laughs)  Well I said, "I hope the rest of me doesn't go in the sole of shoes (laughs) in that case!"

Underhill:  And after all that--first I should ask you, what river was that?

Clark:  Rio Grande Santiago.  It's out from the lake there.

Underhill:  And what year was the trip you just described?

Clark:  Oh, gee, I went on it so much I'd have to look back again.  My sister did get the dates down at the time.  She kept the dates and put it in her little book.  You have that, don't you?

Underhill:  Uh-huh, we do.  And why did you decide to do it again after all that?

Clark:  Well, I had did it a long time, and then once they got settled in with the dam, I probably figured like so many, they might not have the rains and all, it would be more controlled.  But Orville didn't like it.  He went with me, but he was just scared all the time.  And then he said, "I'm not coming on this river with you again.  It's just got my number, and I'm afraid of it."  And he was so afraid of it that it was not good.  So I told him, "Yeah, I realize you're still afraid by the way you acted and everything all the time.  So that I wouldn't ask you to come back on this one."  (laughs)

We also went through a diversion tunnel down there, down by <Guatemala>.  They built these dams, and you're not looking for them, and we'd been through and knew it was coming, but they hadn't started, and so that we get down and it's on a Sunday and we come and here was tunnels to a dam.  And you've got these high mountain sides, you know, going up.  And I said, "Wow!"  And you're down in there where you can never get boats out.  So then I got Orville to hike up to see, because it looked like we could go through them, to see what was on the other side, because they were half filled and they looked wide enough we could get through them.  Okay, so he comes back and he said there was just a guard was all there was working, leaning on a gun, half asleep.  And he said, "I asked him if we could go through the tunnel, and he said 'help yourself.'"  Speaking in Spanish, of course, because Orville could talk Spanish.  "Help yourself"!  (laughs)  And I said, "Could you get anything out of him what's on the other side?"  And he said, "No.  He just does like this and that's the end of that.  Didn't want to talk."  Then he said, "My coming up didn't arouse him or nothing.  He didn't even bother when I walked away.  Never turned around or anything."  That was that.  So he come back down and that was what he said.  So then our boats looked a little bit wide and I said, "Well, we look a little wide, you know."  So we talked for a little while there and had a drink and Orville said, "How do they look Georgie?"  And I said, "Well, we'd better have somebody by the air valves to let a little air out if we suddenly find we're having problems," and that you can't use a motor or nothing going through here, you just have to go and get pointed right and then that's it.  Can't use oars for sure.  So then we did that, and it was real black in there.  And they had some kind of little drops.  They're small, but in there they seemed probably bigger than they were.  Then we got through, then I wanted to take pictures because I'm taking pictures of everything.  So then I grabbed my camera and turned around to take pictures and I hear a yell from one of the fellows.  He said, "My God, a waterfall!"  (laughs)  I turned around, threw the camera down and it wasn't a waterfall, but boy, it was a real drop.  It was a real drop like you have sometimes after dams.  But I'm used to it now, but I wasn't then.  And it was a mighty rapid.  It wasn't a rapid, but it was sure a drop.  And it was real bad.  And so anyhow then I wrecked a motor there because I run it so hard to get away from something that I hit the rocks.  And so then we didn't have far to go to get out, but it was right on the end we're about to wreck everything.  After even getting through, you know, the diversion tunnel.  But it was down below there, we weren't prepared.  See, I'm taking pictures.  If I'd even been looking, but I'm busy.  But the pictures did come out.  (laughs)  And I did get them on TV.  (laughs)  I have real good pictures of that.

Underhill:  It's amazing.

There was one other thing that I wanted to be sure to get in the interview, and that was your work with the Navajos and the Christmas parties.  Can you tell us how you got started with that?

Clark:  Well, I had met Shane Smith and also Joe Muench [ed: Josef Muench] had went to these.  He was the one that had this party every year for the Navajos.  Remember then there was nothing out there except trading posts.  And I was real interested in the fact, and he said, "Oh, there's never enough food, is all, because," he said the church he belonged to separated him from it because he wouldn't -they wanted him to have a building and have the Navajos come in.  And then they didn't have it with -they still had [white Indians?] then, you know.  And so he said, "Therefore I wouldn't do it, so I'm more or less separated from my own.  I'm more Navajo anyhow than I am Presbyterian."  So then he had this way out on the reservation.  So then he said, "I need food badly, is what we need."  So then I started working on getting him clothes.  At this time I had come out from the Ferry Command and it was after Simona was killed and I had worked at Douglas, and believe it or not, which I didn't like, but on Security.  (laughs)  I don't like uniforms, so I convinced them to let me wear slacks.  (laughs)  They had those skirts were so tight you couldn't walk, you know.  And I said, "You won't let nobody else wear that kind of thing.  It takes the attention away from the [motorists?], so why can't I wear [the others?]."  So I was working out there.  But then it came in good, because then I got all their uniforms -the blue uniforms that they changed -for the men's, not women's.  But the men's were great.  I got the jackets and the pants so that boy, I had a lot of them.  And they were just right for the Navajos.  And they gave a lot of them, because at that time they were in full force.  And I forget how many I got, but boy, I got a lot of them.  And even their shoes then that they gave up, which the Indians could wear because they were wide.  Women I had a harder time on because then so many women had high heels, they didn't even have the sport shoes like today.  And you just had a harder time getting the right things for women to do them any good.  For men you did pretty good, but real bad time as far as the women -well, outside of jackets.  I got these clothes.

Then I started to work trying to get food.  So then I had big parties at that time in L.A.[<Los Angeles>] because I took pictures on every trip in <Mexico>.  And when you show them on an eight-by-ten screen, like I said, it made a good splash if they were good at all.  And usually even then I had managed to get music to them and talk and all this.  So that we had always about three hundred fifty people at these shows.  And I got them to bring cans of food for the Navajos and any [policy?] warm clothes.  But even then people brought things you couldn't use at all.  So then I was doing. . . .  But I still needed food, because this wasn't going to scratch anything.  So then I managed to go down to the vegetable market there and I needed a truck too, actually.  And so believe it or not, then I managed to get a fellow and I said, "Well, I need a truck too."  And he can go out and he sees it goes right to the people, it's just no "If and And."  This is not nowhere, this is before everything was a license.  And I said, "You can go right with it and see what's happening."  And so believe it or not, then they made quite a collection for me and things that normally they hadn't eat but would eat in the winter, like sacks of potatoes and things, as well as anything else.  So we got quite the thing with clothes and all.  Then they got their own clothes drive of warm things.  So then we did real good that way.  And they helped more than anybody -was those workers down there, because they probably knew what it was, maybe, to be a little cold and hungry in the early day.  And then I got some candy one time for all they weren't used to it for the kids anyhow.  I know they would naturally like it, even if they, because they were young enough.

So they had this Queen for a Day going on.  And they always gave out furniture.  I didn't want any furniture and the women would go and have a real big fit over this furniture and all and I thought, "Hmm, I'm not going to fit that for sure," but somehow I forget how it was that I could get on.  But I said to the fellow, "You know, I want all of it.  I want candy for the kids."  I said, "I don't want any furniture."  (laughs)  "I'm not home, I don't want furniture."  He said, "I'll tell you what.  In order to get this candy," he said, "we'll put you on and make it a special promotion, so that if you win or anything, it will be for this purpose, and that we will have the furniture, too, since we advertise furniture.  Then we'll also have the person who wins on furniture."  So fine.  So naturally then this was a set-up, literally, to get candy, and also advertise it to send it to the station -anything of food.  So then I got quite a lot for them, because we had a great big truck that went out and had stuff for a lot of years.  It got started and it was real good and helped them.  I got used to coming up -not of a religious standpoint -the fact that they simply needed it.  So that I like coming up all the time.  Then I got a few people to come up with me that would like it.  Because then it was cold and nothing was open -nothing at all, and it was real cold out there and all.

Then I was on the way back, hiked down to <Phantom Ranch>, because the same people stayed there all the time.  And I knew them well, and I'd hike down to see them.  It'd be just before Christmas and back out again.  It was just sort of the early pilgrimage.  That was my one trip down to Phantom.  I stayed with them for the river trip all the time, but then I always came down this one time and hiked back out.

Underhill:  What were those Christmas parties like up on the reservation when you'd bring the food and the candy?

Clark:  Well, they did their own cooking.  Shane had to it that they'd cook food like they was used to.  So then we'd always try to have cornmeal so that they would make their squaw bread out of cornmeal, which they loved -rarely could afford it.  They had to get the white flour from trading posts.  And they just loved it.  So they would have their regular own cooking.  And then he would get from somewhere -they'd never eaten much meat because they can't afford it.  They have lamb, but only when they get very old and can't have wool.  [Transcriptionist's note:  I think she means they have mutton, but only kill the sheep when they are too old to have lambs.]  So they are not ones that go out and just kill to kill anything, because they have the lambs, everything for wool.  They didn't rarely have meat.  So Shane somehow would get something somewhere for them where they cook to have a broth and this type thing.  Because the Navajo, see, is an agriculture setting, as you probably know.  If they could have lamb, then where they have watermelon and corn originally, then that was what they needed.  But they didn't go buy guns and all that, originally, before civilization come in.  You never saw a Navajo buy guns or knives.  It wasn't their set-up.  It wasn't their thing at all.  And you never seen one, originally, ever take any clothes off or nothing.  It's something they just never did, never [ed: under any] condition.  Even to this day, out from where I am, the ones I knew, I never seen one, at no time, you know, tend that way at all.  And swear words -Shine said they didn't have a swear word.  He said they just don't have, that's all.  He couldn't understand the real old ones.  He got so he could understand a little of the ones that were younger and then they would talk, however they do it, to the old ones.  But he said anybody that says they know oldtimer Navajo is a liar, that he's sure, because he lived right with them.  He said the others could, but he said, "There's no way I can guarantee it."

Underhill:  How many years did you work with Shane Smith on that project?

Clark:  Up 'til he died.  Then the dam then come in, got built, and everything changed.  So then we quit.  Because the dam probably _______ we quit in there somewhere, because it changed things.  So then they had taken the land in some areas there, and then they got to -come then to trading posts, got took over and they got to drinking.  Things changed badly then.  Because at first they didn't know it, and it didn't take much to affect them.  They just can't take alcohol at all.  The worst thing that could ever happen to them.  A beer or anything.  They just can't take alcohol.  Their body hadn't been used to it, they didn't have nourishment or didn't know the answer.  But we both knew that they couldn't touch alcohol.  And that was a disaster when they could work and even think of touching it.  That was for sure.

Underhill:  When you look back over your almost eighty-one years, do you think you're an unusual person?

Clark:  No, I never thought, I just did it.  I'm lucky, I will put it, I think I'm a lucky person.  (laughs)  I always had the good health.  I took what my mother said, that everything has to be up.  And if you like something, go for it.  She didn't preach in the line of  money, to just try to get something to make this or that.  It was mainly if you like something, go for it.  She didn't believe in that big twist that way.  She said you can only have so much.  If you can have a comfortable bed to sleep in, enough clothes to stay clean in, and food you like, but not too much, because even then she couldn't see the way people eat so much.  But she said, as you can see, you don't need that much, but some food that you like.  And transportation as things came about.  What more do you need?  She said.  And you know you don't need all that, beyond that point.  So that was the way I always felt, you know, about anything.  You go so far, what more do you need?  So that I was that way, that you just don't need all this.  So I never did go for the fancy homes and the big fancy cars.  I have always just drove, mainly, sedans, because they're handy.  Because you could always sleep in them, you could put stuff in them, or they had big or little ones.  And I have always had vans and do to this day, and wouldn't want anything else.  I mean, even yet it's what I always have.  And as I said, it's all I desire.  And I wear them until they're old.  If they're good transportation -I mean, I can't see any need.  And I handle things so careful that I keep things.  They just do go good.  And I just got rid of a -and it was still running good, I wasn't sure whether I wanted to or not -but even little things they couldn't get, because they just simply quit having it.  And not being a person that could go to all the yards and pick up from something like you can, you know, by. . . .  That I just couldn't do it.  So I decided maybe I better trade in.  But it was a 1973 van and boy, it had a lot of use up here and down and everything.  But it run good.  I'd go to San Frisco [ed: <San Francisco>] every year and they'd say, "Are you still driving that ancient truck?"  (laughs)  You know, they'd be looking and I said, "Well, it looks good yet.  The paint's good."  And it was its original paint job, but I had waxed it and all, and it stayed fine, and it looked just as good as any of them.  And I said, "It looks good.  You can't say it doesn't."  You know, it looks old and it's got good tires I always had.  I always have _______ tires.  And then they hardly ever need air.  I like good tires.  I don't care about comfort, because I don't know, riding on the boats and all, I still don't seem to know the difference or something, because I still have ________ tires.  Others will say something about, you know, it don't ride as smooth as if you had the other tires.  And I said, "Well, somehow I never noticed it," or something.  I guess being used to rapids or something, I never even think about it.

[END TAPE 4, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

Clark:  You know that it's rougher.

Underhill:  You mentioned yesterday that you were a fatalist.  Do you still think that your life is preordained?

Clark:  Oh sure, oh sure.

Underhill:  Would you consider yourself a religious person at all?

Clark:  No, I believe in nature, as such.  I believe in nature.  And to live and let live.  Mainly nature and live and let live.  And the Navajos are that way in a way -they think everything has a place, no matter what it is, because they're not one that goes out hunting for a snake to kill or something.  You know, if the snake don't bother them, they just leave it alone.  So it's the same with me, I never kill a snake on a trip.  The pink ones are actually pretty.  And in only one spot now do you encounter them, and that's down after Lava Falls.  There's a real pretty camp of a beach there, and there's plenty of beach to sleep on.  And the sun comes in because there's a high wall behind it, so you don't need to go back into a lot of brush and trees.  And I tell people, "Don't go back there.  This is the one place that there is some snakes.  And you just don't go back there.  It's their home and leave them alone."  So once in a while you will get somebody that will want to go back anyhow.  And the one time one person went back and I hadn't even known it, and then they come running over and said, "Oh, there's snakes."  And I went back and there was a rattler, which was a hole there and all, and I said, "Well, you came where I told you not to, so you have to move.  We'll help you move down on the sand.  We don't move the snake, we just move you."  (laughs)  And so you just have to be that way about it sometimes, because sometimes you just do get these people that they're going to do it anyhow.  Not too much, thank goodness, but you do get it.

Underhill:  If you could change anything about your life, what would you change?

Clark:  Oh, I doubt that I would, and naturally, if you could change it I'd like to have my daughter live longer and been with me, but again you don't know what could have happened to her if she'd have lived, if she'd have got this or that.  You don't know what could have happened if she had.  As it was, she didn't have money, but she never had an unhappy day.  So for her fifteen years, is what she was when she got killed. . . .  We did everything together, because I was young enough then, as I said, that we just did everything together.  We just didn't have any unhappy time at all.  She just didn't.  And she was so well loved.  She's the only child in the family because my sister didn't have any, on purpose because she didn't have -at that time, in Depression, she wasn't sure she could educate them, and so therefore didn't have them.  And so my brother didn't either for the same reason.  And not that we didn't like them.  And so then she was the apple of the eye of everybody.  So she was well loved, believe me.  And no money, but having a lot of fun.  So you can say on a lot of things, that maybe it was for the best, where it's instant like that.  See, she had no pain, she didn't know anything.  She was singing a song and it just quit.  And it took me a long time and I knew this was actual, but yet I was lonesome for her, naturally.  But that's how it was.

Underhill:  Was the Colorado River a big part of how you were able to cope with losing your daughter?

Clark:  No, no.  No, I can's say that at all, because being taught by my mother, why I just didn't get down, where I had the health and all (coughs) because you have a lot of different things happen.  You just  don't. . . .  Because I'd (coughs) been married a long time the first time too, but they just gradually drifted apart.  I looked at it as no big deal.  It's just one of them things was fine.  But it's over, it's over and that's the way it is.  And so I don't look at anything like that.  I don't make -well somehow I don't make big issues out of nothing.  I mean, that's the way it is.  My mother and I was so close and we thought so much of her, but like she said, "I'm lucky to have you kids and I've had good health and my time has come and that's that and I'm dying at home," which we'd been able to have her at home.  He said it'd be a week, two weeks or a month.  And he give drug to a nurse so she wouldn't have any pain after the accident.  Then they could do that, and that was the way it's supposed to be.  And so then. . . .  And she had such a sense of humor that the one time she had this _____________ down and I thought sure she'd go, then she didn't.  But when she had these, she said, "Straighten me out," which I had did.  Then she was alright and she laughed and I said, "Tell me one thing:  Why on earth did you say 'straighten me out' at such a time?"  She said, "Well, I thought I might as well save the undertaker the job!"  I mean, this was her, you know.  (laughs)  And then one time she's laughing, after this, and I said, "What are you laughing about?"  She said, "There must be two of me.  You know, it's taking me so long to go."  I mean, good natured.  Not bitter, but laughing.  But just laughing about it.  So he just glad that it was fast and she wasn't going to be on us.  And she said, "Oh," she said, "I worry about you kids."  And she said to me even then, "You're the strong one."  (laughs)  But she kind of wondered about my brother and all because he kind of got in trouble sometime and I got him out, money-wise and all.  And she said, "I worry about him and I hate to think about you.  You know, you're not going to be able to save or do anything if you're always helping somebody like that."  She said, "I know somehow. . . ."  And I said, "Don't worry."  (laughs)  "Georgie will survive."  And she said, "Yeah, I believe it."  I said, "You know, I'm ______________ and I'll get along because it's the way I am."

Underhill:  Would you want to be on the river when the time comes?--which is hopefully a long way from now.  Would you want to be on the river when your own time comes?

Clark:  Again, I don't care.  It doesn't really matter, and as far as I'm concerned, if you're dead, you're dead.  It doesn't matter where you are.  I mean, to me it just doesn't matter.  I have a prearranged funeral just like where my sister is, but her (coughs) not because of being morbid, but just if it happens anywhere in <Vegas>, why, why bother somebody you know?  Because I have just the one woman who (coughs) helps me.  So she would be the one, but why have anything for her that's difficult?  So it's just set up, and that's the end of that.  And only if it happens there, because I said if it's somewhere else that's cheaper, well then forget it, do it there.  Because to me it's no different.  So I just don't have that, not worrying about what's going to happen afterwards.

Just like when they took my name off the boat because when the dam come in and one of the river runners said, "Well, she's still running the river commercially, and that's advertisement. (coughs)  I want them to take the name off."  Which they did, off the boat.  So the fellow from the museum wrote and said, "Oh to become immortal you're going to have to die."  And I said, "That's not going to do me much good."  (laughs)  I want things now.  If my name is there, I want it on now, not even _____ gonna die.  Because I don't believe in all that stuff.  Who cares?  At least I don't.  So then when the superintendent before this come in he said, "This is ridiculous," and he put the name back on.  He's the one who put it on, you know.  He said, "This is being so darn little."  He said, "How ridiculous can you get?"  (laughs)  And he put it on, no uncertain terms.  Right off the bat, when he first come in, he said, "This is getting ridiculous."  (laughs)  So he's the one that put the name back on.  (laughs)  So I was glad to see somebody like that, that would figure that's ridiculous, you know.  Because I got a big kick, you know, I'll tell people, "I got my boat right up by Powell's tells you how old I am."  (laughs)

Underhill:  Is there anything that you would like to add to the interview?

Clark:  No, but that mainly was. . . .  In true life, it's just been my way of life that has, I think, give me good health.  Because of being able to take things and not being grabby.  I don't like people who are so grabby for everything, because I think when some people have it, well, they go along well.  I can't understand why they have to get so grabby and to keep wanting more, if they're going along pretty good.  This I can't understand to save me.  And it does ruin a lot of things.  And it does even in anything there is, when they have so much and then they get so grabby.  So I never was that way because of my mother, again.  See, my mother was a good one, because everything I do I can really attribute to her.  Then as long as I had just what she said, enough to get by comfortable, not anything, and transportation  I don't need a new car if the old one is running fine.  You know, and this kind of thing.  So that my living is so simple.  I mean, my wants are simple:  I eat simple, I don't crave a lot of clothes, just any kind of dress and slacks is fine for me.  The hair I do myself -I even cut it, I don't do anything, you know, even that way.  So I don't have any big desire there because I don't follow any -never did, even younger.  I just would always cut it off, and that was the end of it.  So I never made any hobby of myself.  I always liked animals.  Still just love animals, but I have arranged for them too if anything happens, because I just don't want to leave them.  When they have such a good life, because I give them a good life, because I set up for them.  You know, I set up shade trees and I won't have them if I can't take care of them.  I just don't get something and not take care of it.  I either know I can or I don't have it.  And so that it's your attitude, I think [it] has a lot to do with your health, if you can manage to keep a good attitude -this type thing.  And it helped me in all of them, because all my family's gone.  So one by one I've had to look it in the eye as they all went.

So it helps, and divorces and all.  Because I've been married twice -separated.  But neither one was unfortunate.  It was just one of those things.  And me, I have to admit, that somehow marriage is sort of second to doing what I wanted to do.  I have to admit to that _____ too.  So that was how it was.  And I stated so.  The second marriage I said the trips, what I want to do is first.  If I want to ski or do this or that within reason.  And I always worked, remember.  I always supported myself.  I never got a cent from nobody.  (laughs)  And I've never got anything from nobody.  So that always is good too.  Because there are a lot of people who don't want to really work.  I find a lot of people don't really want to work.  Not really work.  And that's bad.  You'd better learn to like to work.  (laughs)  Yeah, to support yourself at least -to be able to take care of yourself or anything you incur.  Yeah, I think this is real bad.  And I feel today, because the way things are, the kids can't work.  I think it was so much better when kids could cut lawns and do things, you know, early, and be able to get work to help theirself a lot.  And I don't mean slave labor, but I'm talking about doing different things so that they can do things, rather than getting paid so much a week or something where they really earn their way.  And I don't think it hurts you.  My sister worked in <Illinois> and in school and everything.  And to help us and to help the family, because she was the oldest.  So boy, we were always adult early, of course, having to work so much.  So my mother said we were always practically adult to begin with.

Then my own daughter was the same way.  She just had been around so many adults that at times I almost felt like well, maybe she'd missed.  But she had such a good time you couldn't say that either.  Because she had a good time.  Not money, but just a good time.  And she could hike.  See, she had hiked all fourteen-thousand foot peaks and thought nothing about it.  She could rock climb.  She could swim terrific.  She could do everything, of course, better than I could.  (laughs)  At that age, how can you beat them?  And so she'd do everything better, so she'd lived thirty for her fifteen.  So there's a lot in your attitude, you know.  But I notice that on the river they get more excited than I do about everything if things don't go right, where I don't.  Because I have that attitude, what is to be. . . .  I do my best and then what is to be will be.

Underhill:  I think it's about time for us to end, but it has been a pleasure.

Clark:  It's been a pleasure talking to you.  You're easy to talk to.

Underhill:  You're wonderful to listen to.  We'll have to do this again.  I sure appreciate your time.



