FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Rachel Brown (Mrs. Willis Brown)

Interview number NAU.OH.28.52a

 

Rachel Brown, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1927 and has lived here continuously since 1929. She is the widow of Willis Brown, who started Brown’s Jewelry Store in <Flagstaff> in 1914. jInterview conducted by Kristine Prennace on July 8, 1976. Transcribed by Susan Deaver Olberding.

 

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

 

Tape 1, Side 1

 

Born in <Texas> in 1906

Parents

Floyd Key, <Texas>

Lydia Emma <Davenport Texas>

Parent’s occupations

Father, rancher

Mother, school teacher

Brothers and sisters

Schooling

Country school

High School, <Kerrville Texas>

When came to <Flagstaff>

1927, visit

1929, permanent

Marriage and family

Husband, Willis Brown

Occupation, jeweler

When came to <Flagstaff> from <Des Moines Iowa>

Lived with Dr. Manning

 

(Somehow, a large section of Tape 1 Side 1 did not get recorded. Mrs. Brown talked about how dry <Flagstaff> was when she came here and how awful the yards looked because they were not watered. Water was too expensive then, but then, the City game water users 1,000 gallons of water for free, and more than that at very low rates so that people could have nice lawns and grow their own vegetables)

 

Description of downtown area

Stores

Hat shop owned by Mrs. Powers

Flower shop

Hospital

Federated Church

Clergymen

Nackards

Library and Women’s Club

Dispute with City of Flagstaff

Decrease in membership

Social aspect

Homes lived in

Neighbors

Peery Francis

Etters

Jordans

Michelbachs

Frank Gold

 

Tape 1, Side 2

 

Dr. Raymond

Other doctors

Social life

Business and Professional Women’s Club

Kiwanis

Women’s Club

Churches

Catholic Church – St. Patricks’s Day

Episcopal Church – May Day

Federated Church ??? Turkey dinner

World War II

Women’s duties

Depression (1930’s)

Effect on jewelry business

Migrations of people from Dust Bowl area

World War I veterans marching to <Washington DC>

Fires

Floods

Water shortages

Lindgergh Springs

Snow storms

Epidemics

Scarlet Fever

Smallpox

Ethnic groups

Tourism

Renting rooms for Pow Wow

East <Flagstaff>

Greenlaw Mobile Court

University

Role of President’s wife

 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: This is an interview with Mrs. Rachel Brown who came to <Flagstaff> in 1927 and has lived here continuously since 1929. She was married to Willis Brown who started Brown's Jewelry Store in <Flagstaff> in 1914. The interview is being conducted on July 8, 1976 at Mrs. Brown's home which is located at 706 W. Aspen Avenue in <Flagstaff> by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City/Coconino County Public Library.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Mrs. Brown, when and where were you were born?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I was born on a ranch in <Texas>, in 1906.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: A ranch?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm. I tell you something, this has no bearing on this, but, they called the doctor, the doctor was 16 miles away, and the doctor got lost and never did get there. This has nothing to do with that--I was delivered by an old woman.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it near a city, or...?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, it was 16 miles from two small towns in opposite directions.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Who were your parents?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Key. Floyd Key.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Your mother?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Lydia Emma Davenport.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were they from <Texas> originally?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And what did your father do?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Rancher.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And did your mother ever have an occupation?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, yes, she did teach school when she was real young.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And she also shared in the ranching activities.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh, yes, oh, indeed.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: As children, did you have to help out on the ranch?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh yes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of chores did you do?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: When we were 10 years old, my Dad always gave us something to earn our own money and I was raising chickens. And of course we were always given stock that was our very own that we had to take care of, like a calf and a colt, that sort of thing that we were responsible for taking care of. And that of course was how we were supposed to build up our stock for our ranches.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you have any brothers or sisters?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I have 5 brothers and 2 sisters.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did many of them go into the ranching?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Two of my brothers.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So they had a start on their stock then...



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where'd you go to school?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: First we went to country school, out near the ______ about 4 miles and we rode horseback or drove a buggy; and then later we went to <Kerrville Texas> to high school.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, so you completed high school.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When did you come to <Flagstaff> then?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: First time I came here was the 9th of May in 1927. Then I went away for about two years and I came back on the first day of April 1929 and I've been here ever since.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, you mentioned that you came up from <Phoenix>. Were you living in <Phoenix>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I had been in <Phoenix> for approximately 4 months.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was in 1927?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And, what brought you to <Arizona>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh, just sort of sight seeing.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! Did you have a job or anything? Were you married before you came west?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I was married, yes, but not to the same man. I was later divorced and then remarried. And my husband was a jeweler. He started Brown's Jewelry Shop and it's now run by a third generation, and the three right in the same location.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The same location.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: He didn't start there originally, it was there, but he moved there later and created the third one that's been there.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, that was in 1929 when he started?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, he started the business back in about 1914.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, was he like a native of <Flagstaff>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, he came here when he was 14 years old and he lived with the Mannings, old Dr. Manning, who I'm sure you've heard a lot of; they were friends and he lived with them until he was, well, until he was married. Not to me, his first wife, but that doesn't need to be in there.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where was he from originally?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: <Des Moines Iowa>.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he ever say why he came to <Flagstaff>? Was it his parents who moved here?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, his brother came here. He and Brown, he came here. He saw an ad in the paper, I believe this is correct, about all the hunting and how wonderful everything was here, and the hunting and fishing, and it appealed to him, so he came and he later married one of the Manning daughters, and then Willis came to live with his brother.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: At 14, he came all the way out from <Iowa>. Tell me a little bit about your first impression of <Flagstaff>.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, I came in from <Phoenix> as I say, and I got off the train, and I'd gotten so hot, in fact, in <Phoenix> I'd gotten a slight sunstroke, not being used to the heat, and there was 6 inches of snow and the lilacs were just blooming all over and I thought this was the most cherry place around.

****No recording on tape for several minutes****



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You were talking a little bit about downtown. Can you think of anything...



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, there was a bank. It was along, I believe, I don't believe it was next door to Babbitt's Department Store; I think it was First Interstate, but you know I can't remember.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: But that sounds right.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I don't remember, seems like it, they were all downtown. And then the J.C. Penney's store. See there was only Babbitt's and Penney's. Penney's had no credit. If you had cash, you could buy at Penney's, if you had to charge it, you'd buy at Babbitt's. And they were the only place(s) around. I mean, you had Sweitzer's hardware and Babbitt's hardware; there was no dime store at that time. And no--there were two or three people--this was not downtown but over somewhere across the tracks, there was one woman who had a dress shop over there. And then Mrs. Powers, she was a real oldtimer, she had a hat shop. I don't know anything about the history of either one of those but I do know I bought hats from her. Somewhere way over across town there was one flower shop and we used to go, you know, up beyond the hospital some ways and across the street there's a forest service station, that was way, way out of town and we'd drive up there to get a permit for our Christmas trees and there was nothing else there. I mean it was way out in the country until the hospital. The hospital, I had no tonic______ about a year and it was in someone's home over across the tracks somewhere over..it would've been, anyhow, I can't remember.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was down past the Safeway store?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, not that far....



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was just at someone's house.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, it had been. It had been at a private home, of course, you know at that time...then some time after that why I had to ______ of course, it's about the same as it was anyway. When I first came here, there was approximately 5,000 people. I went to Federated Church and knew practically everybody that were in the church.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was a large congregation.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, it was for then, an awful lot of people. They say it was ______ our federation with the denomination. I believe most of the townpeople went to church most of their lives. Then later, different ones joined the Baptists, they were the first to pull out, then started their own church, and then of course the Methodist church out in east Flag, the Presbyterian Church, all the different denominations that were in their own church, but we still, at Federated Church, we still, at one time we had a Methodist minister and then the next time we had a Presbyterian minister, and ______ and that was true even back when there was maybe 10-15 different denominations, but still, I think, we only had Presbyterian or Methodist ministers. But they decided that they would go in together that would make them have a better minister, and they could each one have a family minister in a small church and it worked out remarkably well.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of the ministers?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Ragsdale was the first one, no, Johnson was the first one, before Ragsdale was Johnson, I believe. Now I may get this all...Oh I don't remember all of them.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, did they change every few years?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, they did. And I could go back and look them up and remember--you'll find someone else to remember them.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you know the Nackards very well?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, I knew different ones like Mrs. Phillip Nackard. I used to be very good friends, I don't see very much of her anymore, Blanca, Mrs. Fred Nackard, and then I knew the older generation, Fred, and of course his parents.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of store did they have?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: They had, well I suppose you'd say they just had a department store. They had dresses and I'm sure they had men's clothing--dry goods and that sort of thing.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So that was, uh, a little bit later after you came?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, they had their store--it was well established when I came.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it called the New York store?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I don't believe they had the New York store. I think that was some newcomer that had a place across the street, this again, I may be wrong, but I think the New York store was along in there where Sweet Briar is. Sweet Briar, or where Fred had his store somewhere on the left of the new drug store. But again, I could be wrong.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there a man named Bowser Houk in town that had a newsstand?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, but I never did know him, I knew his widow, but I never did know him. He had, I don't know, he died before I came onto the scene.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So that was around the late 20s______ Was there a library in town?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes. It was torn down recently. The library had been--the library was at the Women's Club had started the building. This was before I came here. The Women's Club had the building, they built it, and they worked awfully hard at keeping the building. They were known to have banquets with Rotary and Kiwanis and that sort of thing, so they had all that, they served all of that. They did a remarkable job, and then, they finally, I presume this happened right around the time they built the Monte Vista, but again I don't know that I'm accurate on this, but anyway, they turned the building over to the city with the understanding that the city would finish paying for it if they could have rooms for their meeting place for as long as they had a charter. So then, first I believe, it started in as a museum, and then later, that building became the city library. And then as the library grew and became bigger, the city built an addition for the Women's Club to have their meetings, and they didn't fair real high after that, but then some of the women got mad and they felt that the city owed them something like $10,000 for taking their building, and some real old women's club members, Mrs. Runke to be exact, ______ started it, wouldn't accept the building for their meeting place, and I ______, but the city certainly held to their part of the bargain.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So you were an early member of the Women's Club.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm, but I was not a member when that was going on that was before I came. I mean, I wasn't a member when they were building the building, I was a member when this happened and when the library became larger. In fact, the first thing I remember about that building when I first came here...have you been out to the northern Arizona museum and you see that dinosaur? Well that was in what was the library building at that time and that's the first thing I remember about that. I believe the library was in, upstairs and downtown, I believe it was above the furniture store. I think the call it the Isham/Spencer building. Anyway, and they also had apartments up there, but that's where the library was when I first came, upstairs, up over, one of those, I kind of think it was the furniture store.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now is that down kind of near Bledsoe's is?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, right along in there, it'd be on the same side of the street. Right along in there. Where...Is it McKay's Gift Shop, right about there, upstairs.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Why don't we talk a little more about the Women's Club when you joined? Where was the building after the dispute?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: You remember where that city building was torn down recently to make a parking lot? About 200 or 300 W. Aspen?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right. Now that was where they had the difficulties. Was that the one that was the museum and the library? Then where did the Women's Club meet after?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Right now, well at one time, we still had it a Women's Club building at this time, but at one time, during the war, the Women's Club got down to about 9 members, so we met in homes, and then after, so many women started working at that time, and then later, we became, we grew again, we went back to 120. At the moment, we're meeting in the Episcopal Hall.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: And we had a little club of our own. But, we are quite an active club. Of course, it was very, very social when I first came on. And if you could belong to Women's Club, you had sort of arrived, socially, that is, and there was a literary department, music department, gardening department, we had two formal banquets a year. Quite nice. After times began to change, and what they call working women, or career women, however you want to call it, began to come in. Some of the women, were well, high society of <Flagstaff> didn't like it at all, so they dropped out. Some of them refused to ______



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now where did you live when you first came?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I lived with friends when I first came on Agassiz. Then, at one time, I had an apartment where the library was. Then, I've been living here for 44 years.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When you married, you came here to this house. You've been here quite a while! Who were some of your neighbors right around in this area?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, Francis, Peery Francis and his mother, Polly Francis, lived next door. They owned the house. Peery Francis was sheriff for many years and they lived next door. Back in the early days. Cleon Edders lived up the street two blocks, and then the Jordans, J.A. Jordan, moved across the street, oh, when we'd lived here about 5 years. And the one directly across the street, the ? house, it changed frequently. Flo Compton owns it. Michelbach, they lived in the corner house across the street, the last house next to them. And then Frank Go? lived up in the next block, first house on the next block, on this side of the street. She was a very good friend of mine.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was he an attorney?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm.

 

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2



KRISTINE PRENNACE: ...about Dr. Raymond?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: He and my husband were very, very good friends. He was a fine man.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he live downtown?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes. In the building where he had his doctor's office on Leroux. He was quite a character.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he like to play tricks, you mean, or ?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No. He was just, he was very, he was a bachelor, and he was a very generous sort of person, but he didn't like to help people who asked for help. He'd just as soon ?? He was always buying things for people. He used to buy us some of the darnedest things, I remember one time, he was into natural foods, and he brought us a bean sprouter, and he bought us a table because he thought people should ______ and he bought us a robe, a turkish-type for the bath, and he brought them up to us quite thrilled and they were both men's size and large ______ and I still wear it. The shoulders come down like this...and he loved to take friends out to dinner, and take them on trips, and things like that. He was a really fine person.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were there any other personalities in town? John Francis?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: John Francis. I don't think I knew him. ______ Dr. Manning______ I'm don't think you'd say he was a character, but he was one of the early doctors. And, of course Dr. ?, Dr. Sechrist, they were all very good friends of my husband before I even came. One day when Dr. Sechrist brought Dr. Barnes in, he was a very fine doctor.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that after he took over the hospital?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, bringing other doctors in, I think he was trying to make it easier on himself.______...Dr. Francis, I don't know, I don't think he was generally...he was here when I first came, he was not very active.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: He was older?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: We started talking a little bit about the social life of the community, speaking about the Women's Club, was there anything else that sticks in your mind about social activities?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh, I can't think of anything particular, except, .______...and they were sort of considered a high class organization, and I guess they really were. And then of course there was the men's Kiwanis and Rotary, and then the Women's Club, and then the church groups. And the church groups, they were quite a social bunch, too, and women's society, Federated Church and the Episcopal Guild. They were very important socially. Course, the Catholic Church always had one, too. At that time, each of those churches had one very prominent thing during the year, the Catholic Church always had the St. ______, and it was attended by all the socially prominent people and the businessmen, too, and then the Episcopal Church had a Moon? dance and bridge club. And the Federated Church had Turkey dance, and many, many people made reservations way ahead of time. Then there's mother/daughter banquet served at the Federated Church, and it was the same there...it really was a social thing. Quite a big social thing.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were you aware of any political activities in <Flagstaff>? People who ran for city government?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, really no. I can't say that I was. ______



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Your husband wasn't involved?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, no.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, we kind of talked a little bit about the world wars. World War II, I think, affecting the Women's Club. How did it affect the rest of <Flagstaff>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, like other places, I guess, felt obligated to try to help in anyway they could. They always had ? night meeting. And then, they started, well, one thing we did, in case they ever had to evacuate, like <Los Angeles>, or the big cities, then the Federated Church was to be, how shall I say, headquarters, for helping the people who came through, like we bought dishes and supplies to serve the people if they should come through here. You know, the evacuees, and made arrangements for them to sleep in Reese Hall at the Federated Church.. so that they would have a place to sleep. And then, of course, bomb shelters, became, and you'd see that sign up here and there and everywhere and many women started working who had never thought about working before.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they work because they had to, or...



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, I think that..well, of course, I think that most people work because they want the extra income, but they also felt the need to help. Many, many worked at the Ordinance Depot ______....I think that many of them wanted the extra income, and liked having it...but they would never have had the courage to go to work if they hadn't of felt that they could help their country, but when they got started they liked it and kept on.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You were here during the Depression...



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh, indeed.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How did it affect you and <Flagstaff>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Personally, really I think if affected me very little and I think <Flagstaff> was affected as little as anything. At that time, jewelry, like diamonds and gold and that sort of thing, was not selling. So, my husband changed over to Indian jewelry, put in a silversmith, and that seemed to sell. And of course, he had a pawnbroker's license at that time, also. And then, during the Depression, that kept the store going and prospered. Then, after that was over, he went back to regular jewelry again...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I would have thought if any business would suffer, it might be the jewelry business.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, it did. It would have on diamonds and watches and that sort of thing that people can do without. But somehow the tourists bought, and he hired an extreme fine silversmith...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was an Indian silversmith?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm. Yes, he was a very well educated man. In fact I don't think I ever heard him use the English language.______ and perfect, beautifully, but anyway he certainly spoke the English language real nice. Unfortunately, as he got older he became fat and dirty and went back to the reservation.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So, he didn't stay in town.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, he stayed here until he left here. Then he went to <Los Angeles> and stayed there, and married a woman from some other tribe, and later, he was probably, oh maybe 40, then he went back to the reservation....



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of the migrations of the peoples from the Dust Bowl area coming through <Flagstaff>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, I do. And as I say, my husband had a pawnbroker's license and he came in contact with many of them. And then, they were walking through our town along the railroad and anyway the could, and they frequently came by for food and we'd always try to have something to make sandwiches and give them food when they came by. And then I remember, those who served in the Armed Forces during World War I, they were trying to get to <Washington> to protest, and I remember little about this, except I do remember quite a few of them coming through here. I seem to remember one band particularly, they must of been 40 or 50 of them coming through, and they were in beat-up cars and trucks...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Coming from <California>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I presume. They were trying to get back to <Washington DC> I don't suppose ______a protest then. ______ I don't know, I believe they were trying to get their insurance...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You remember them like a caravan coming through.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm. And then of course, people coming, there's no work here so they'd try to go there and couldn't get back home again. It was pathetic, really. The people coming through and couldn't get home....



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any big fires in <Flagstaff>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Only vaguely. I can't even remember just where they were. I do remember one time there was one across the tracks..______ but I can't give you any definite information about that...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there any flooding?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh, there was a little bit. But I can't remember. I really can't remember that much about it. I mean, it didn't affect me that much. I do remember where it was--it was downtown...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And there was some dry periods. We talked a little bit about the water shortage.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, ever since I've been in <Flagstaff>, there's been more or less a water shortage...dry years when it's been terribly, terribly dry. But there's only been a few years, oh, I suppose it's been maybe more than that, but almost every summer they talk about a dry year with water shortage and fire danger. It's just part of <Flagstaff>.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember when they had to bring in water from Winslow?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Sure do. Hauled it in on a tent car and I remember how terrible it was. And, of course, you know, they had asked people to not to flush the toilets too often and cut down on their water so the toilets would use just a short amount of water, and, of course, no watering lawns at all. Yes I remember it quite well. We used to go to the spring to get drinking water 'cause the water was so...it tasted terrible.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, was it the Old Town Spring?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, we went out to <Lindbergh Springs>, out on Oak Creek Road.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any big snows?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh, indeed. Yes, the first year I was here we had quite a lot of snow and then, of course, in the spring of '29? we had a big snow, and of course, I can't remember the year, '62, '64, somewhere in there, I'm sure you've gotten this in other reports...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, they came right away. Did it damage anything?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, it didn't for us, except we couldn't get our car out for quite a long time, but no, no damage particularly here. It killed all my roses, and that sort of thing, but I don't remember hearing if it did any damage to the city, oh, I'm sure some of the roofs caved in. I remember shoveling the snow off the Orpheum Theater and people hunting someone to shovel the snow. And, of course, that big snow, they, right in this neighborhood we were playing bridge, we'd get together, you know, the other women and play bridge so I started...we had Indian boys from the dormitory would shovel our walk and they'd come every morning and they'd shovel it for us and then we paid them, of course. So I was starting out one day to go up to my neighbors for bridge, and this boy was standing there on the walk, and he was standing there on the shovel looking at me and didn't say a word. And I thought, ok, I'll go by him. So I started out and got out in the snow and it was like up to here and I got stuck in the snow. And I thought I wasn't going to be able to get out, and this boy just sat there on his shovel and watched. Didn't get out to help or anything. I finally got out by myself.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: He was probably amused! (Laughter) Were there any big epidemics that you can remember since you've been here?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No, course, one year, scarlet fever was pretty bad. My daughter had it. She was 7 at that time, I think. But I don't know if that could be called a big thing, but I believe they did close schools at that time. And I believe that one time school closed because of a flu epidemic for a short time. But I can't remember anything else dangerous. At one time, there was a smallpox scare and everybody got vaccinations but so far as I know, there never was a case of smallpox. Maybe someone came from <Mexico> or some place and brought it in...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they just publish it in the paper that you should go get...



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: ______..



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any Mexican-American families? Or Spanish-American families?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, a number of them. I don't know that I remember...Willis, he knew all of them, he knew everyone in town, he knew all the Mexicans, the Negroes, and the Indians, all of them. But I didn't.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he know them from coming into the store?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, um mm.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did they live? What area of town?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well, most of them over in the southern part, over across the tracks. In fact, I don't know if they were over this way at all.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of the Chinese families? Or were there any Japanese?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: I've never seen a Japanese family in <Flagstaff>, but they were, of course, the Wongs, were very early settlers here and they had a laundry. And then, of course, ______... And then, of course, right now, we have Chinese neighbors. Their name is Wong, also, but they do not happen to be any relation to the early settlers, and they are the most remarkable family I've every known. ______ ...They had two children when they came here and four have been born since they've been here. They have four boys and a girl. Everyone are college graduates, One of them is now a Doctor in town and all but the youngest has his Masters. And they do things, course Willis did alot of things for them, he was a ______ really needed to help. Now, they can't do enough for us. Like there's only, the mother and one daughter at home now, they shovel walks and come over and mow the lawn, she's such a petite little thing and I just can't bear her getting out there and mowing that lawn...that's just the kind of people they are. I have wonderful neighbors, I really do. Mrs. Roberta? Sutcliffe, she's a teacher, she lives up the street.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is she any relation to the Sutcliffe family? The florist?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: They had the flower...that isn't their name downtown. It's just Sutcliffe Floral. The Sutcliffe's own the place and these people bought it from Sutcliffe.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember tourism picking up at any particular time in <Flagstaff> or was it pretty strong when you came?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Always. Since I've been here there's always been lots of tourists. In fact, that's what kept <Flagstaff> on the map, I think, was tourists coming in the summer. Everybody that could possibly do so rented a room for the tourist. When I first came up until probably 15 years ago...everybody that had an extra room registered with the Chamber of Commerce to rent to people for Pow Wow, so people could have places to stay for Pow Wow. And people, of course, you know, the motels had reservations for months ahead, you couldn't even find a reservation unless you could find a place in a home, ______ to find a place to stay. The Pow Wow, it's always been a big thing, ever since I've been here. Course, now there's motels and so, people don't rent rooms, but that was quite a thing.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you ever rent a room?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: No. I never had room to spare.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember anything about east <Flagstaff>?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: It was not much when I first married. It was pretty junky, there were no restrictions and people could put any kind of a home out there, it isn't what it is today. It was very small.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you know the Knoles?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Um mm. Mary and Louise were both good friends of mine and Tom and his wife ______...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now is she younger than the twins? Eleanor?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, they had one of the few houses out there. Did they have one of the few homes?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Well I think they were certainly pioneers. I think they had the first what they called auto court back then. They had little shacks and cabins where people could spend the night, and you know that's how motels got started. Just a place where people could stop and ...that's what they were, just little cabins with nothing in them but, And they had a shower and toilets in a centrally-located building, and not in the building where'd they stay. And also, many of them had places where you could cook on a stove and a table. So you could cook and eat in there. And when they first started, you had to bring your own bedroll and your own cooking utensils and that sort of thing, when motels first started. And I think that's what they had out there, I never was in them, maybe later they put in stoves and beds and that sort of thing...



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now is that up on Fourth Street or more on Santa Fe?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Oh that was out on that ranch where they lived. Mary and Louise could tell you about that. But I don't know if they homesteaded or they bought. Of course, Mary and Louise could tell you that.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember much about the University?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: It was very small when I first came, and we knew most of the teachers. In fact, the president's wife and many of the teachers belonged to the Women's Club and they'd try to have it at a time when they could come to at least some of the meetings and take part in our book club or music or something they could take part in. But, the president's wife of the college at that time was very active in the Women's Club. She was an honorary member. Also, the minister's wives were honorary members of the Women's Club.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Who was the president back then?



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Gammage I believe was the first one I remember. ______..Walkup, she didn't belong very long...I think that her job became so much heavier because the president's load was so much heavier, the problems were so much greater. And she had only so much time, she just really didn't have time for Women's Club.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Interesting the way the role of the president's wife has changed.



MRS. RACHEL BROWN: Yes, it really is ______....



