FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Mrs. Bessie Kidd Best

Interview number NAU.OH.28.6

Mrs. Bessie Kidd Best, who is a <Flagstaff> native and was Coconino County School Superintendent from 1929 to 1973. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on February 2, 1976. Transcribed February 24, 1994. Transcriber: Nancy Warden. Outline of Subjects Covered in taped Interview

Tape 1 Side 1

    Born in <Flagstaff>, 1901 

    Parent’s background 

    Father came from <Ohio> and worked for Babbitts, and was a probate judge 

    Homestead near Continental Country Club area 

    Father’s trip to Colorado River in 1907 

    Brothers and Sisters 

    Houses lived in 

    In area near City Park

    Vanderver House 

    Ackers 

    Schooling 

    Kindergarten 

    Training school 

    Normal School 

    Different Awards 

    Cleaning and cooking at home 

    Federated Church 

    Episcopal Church 

    Gave up teaching contract because got married 

    School bus for students 

    Son, Robert

Tape 1 Side 2

    Sisters 

    Front Street saloons and Chinese restaurants 

    M.I. Powers and auto 

    Maxwell car 

    Cemetery near City Park

    Pioneer Days 

    Holidays 

    Betty Rice 

    Dr. Douglas 

    Tree ring dating 

    Percival Lowell 

    People known to Mrs. Best 

    Presidents of college 

    Legislators 

    State School Superintendents 

    World War I, ending 

    Flu epidemic 

    Floods 

    Fires and a hose car 

    Traveling to areas around <Flagstaff> 

    Weatherford Road

Tape 2 Side 1

    Weatherford Road (continued) 

    Father painted as a hobby 

    Grocery wagon 

    Louis Akin

    Scientists 

    Theodore Roosevelt 

    Trains 

    Tom Pollock 

    1906 earthquake 

    Cococnino County School Superintendent 

    First ran, 1929 

    <Lee's Ferry> 

    Mrs. Acker 

    Summer school 

    Consolidating schools 

    Rural schools 

    Accommodation schools 

    Senator Carl Hayden 

    Money for building schools 

    Schools on Indian Reservation 

    Consolidation

Tape 2 Side 2

    Coconino County School Superintendent

    Murdock School 

    Isolated areas 

    <Sedona> 

    Rural buildings 

    Page 

    <Happy Jack> 

    Newspaper articles about her awards and organizations


SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Mrs. Bessie Kidd Best who is a <Flagstaff> native and also who was Coconino County School Superintendent from 1929 to 1973. The interview is being conducted on February 2, 1976 at 909 N. Leroux, which is her home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mrs. Best, when and where were you born?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I was born in <Flagstaff>, May 25, 1901.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K., can you tell me a little bit about your parents?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well my father, Robert J. Kidd, ah, came to <Flagstaff> from <Cincinnati Ohio>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: To work for Babbitt Brothers. And about, I think, about a year later, I think he came about 1889 or 1899, I mean 1899.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right, o.k.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And ah, and then my mother followed about a year later. My mother's name was Evangeline, called her Eva, and they were from <Cincinnati>. And my mother, though was from <Indiana>, just across the Ohio River from <Cincinnati Ohio>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And, ah, her parents, my grand parents on my mother's side were farming people. And ah, my grandfather on my father's side was an instructor in ah, in ah, colleges. Well, and ah, my father, of course, worked for Babbitt Brothers a number of years. I don't know how many. And in 1907 he was elected judge of the Probate Court for <Coconino County>, and that was during territorial days.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And that was before we had a superior court judge. And he was the probate judge until 1912. And, ah, 'til statehood, the law changed so we didn't have probate judges after that. You know at one time, years ago, during territorial days, ah, probate judges, ah, were ex-officio county school superintendents. They held the dual position. But my, the law had changed before my father was probate judge. Then my father worked for the Arizona Central Bank here in <Flagstaff> for about twenty-seven years. He worked for Mr. Tom Pollock, who was a very, quite an outstanding citizen of this community for many, many years. Then he was justice of the peace, I believe for about six years, up until about, I think from about 1920 to '26. He did, you know in the early days you could homestead a ranch.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And if you lived on it, ah, seven months out of the year then you could prove(?) up on it they said. So my father did take up a homestead in the area where the Continental Club is now east of <Flagstaff>. And a historic place of interest now in that area, is the bottomless pits, and of course I own the bottomless pits now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh I didn't know that.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And, ah, at one time we planned to develop the pits. We felt maybe we had some caves under there. But I haven't done anything, thought too much about it lately. However, I do own them.

SUSAN ROGERS: And that was because they were on your homestead, or your father's homestead?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Yes, uh huh. And, ah, then my father was interested in ah, he had many hobbies. One hobby was mining. And he and Ralph Cameron, who was a, a United States senator for the county of Coconino in <Washington DC> during territorial days. He and my father were very good friends, and they prospected together at <Grand Canyon> and along the rim of <Grand Canyon>. And then there was a fine old gentleman here in <Flagstaff> by the name of Dan Hogan. And, ah, my father and Dan Hogan made a trip down the Colorado River from about, I think where <Phantom Ranch> is now, and down through to <Needles>. And, ah, they went in canvas boats. It was a very dangerous trip. Told us many interesting things about the trip, and I guess they were fortunate to get through, because they did, they did have to shoot the rapids as they said. In a few places the walls were straight up and down. I, I think if they could, if they came to some rapids and they could unload the boat and carry the equipment and supplies around, they'd do it. But sometimes the walls of the canyon were so straight up and down, they had to shoot the rapids. And they used to tell us some interesting stories, and that was really quite, I know it worried my mother very much, but it was interesting. I know of one. A Mr. Morriston who has written a book, and I have some articles from him about my father, and wanted me to look up the information. Well, I, I thought that it was maybe about 1905 or 6 that this happened, but I did go to the University, in the library, and go through the old Daily, Coconino Sun, and I just didn't and maybe overlooked it. But Billie Yost told me that when she was looking through the Daily Suns when she worked there to get the items that they have fifty years ago, in 1907 she found this article about my father making the trip. So I sent that to Mr. Morriston to help him with his research work.

And my mother, of course, in those days was just a wonderful mother and housekeeper. But she died at a young age. Died, passed away here in 1911 when I was ten years old at the time. Now let's see, have I told you enough about my father?

SUSAN ROGERS: I think so. You want to mention if you had any brothers and sisters?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Yes. We were a happy family, and I had three sisters and one brother. My older sisters, one was fourteen years older than I am, and the other one was, twelve. Then I had a brother ten years older, and a sister two years older. But I'm the only one living out of this family. But when we were young here in <Flagstaff>, we were really a very, I thought, a happy family. We had, of course, all families have their problems. And I, I noticed that you asked about different places where I, houses in which I lived. Well there's a house on west Aspen St., I think in the six hundred block. The home is known as the Bryant home now. Ah, a lady we all knew so well here in <Flagstaff>, Nesta Bryant. Well it was in that house. It was a brand new house at that time. That's where I was born. Once when I was campaigning I went to this house, and I told the lady, "Did you know I was born in this house?" And she said, "You were, I didn't think it were so old." But they have remodeled it and fixed it. And then I lived on a, we lived in another house just a block west of that in the seven hundred block on west Aspen. And then we lived in a house when I was a little girl, and I don't remember that house, but I know we lived there. It's across from our Catholic School on Humphreys Street. And it was known as the, years ago it was built, I think maybe by Les Hart, but the Lindermann's (her pronunciation) lived there. For Mr. Pete Lindermann who is the dentist and supervisor now. His mother and father lived there. And then we lived on, we called it Railroad Avenue, they call it Santa Fe now. And that was in the seven hundred block, a corner house. And we lived there from about 1914 'til 1933. When I, when we moved up here. I've lived in this house since 1933, so you see it's an old house. But I have always enjoyed this home. We also lived in what was known in the last years as the Vandevier Lodge. It was one of the oldest houses in <Flagstaff>. It was a nice two-story home, and a family by the name of Ackers lived there. And then we lived there. And that's where my mother passed away in this house. And this home, it was the Vandevier Lodge, they called it, burned about two years ago. It's across, it was across from the Arizona Daily Sun office. And it was a lovely home we thought at that time. This home served as the first dormitory for women for the old Normal School.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mmm mmm.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: The University when it was a Normal School. And Mrs. Acker, who was county school superintendent before me, just before me, was the matron of this, the Ackers lived there. And so, that's some of the old houses. Of course, excuse me, I seem to have (keeps clearing her throat). Well, wonder what else now should I say?

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. You have an outline there that you are following or do you want me to ask something? How about a little bit on your childhood, maybe some of your daily activities, both pleasure and chores; a little bit about your early schooling?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well of course I went to the kindergarten here. I think they started me to kindergarten when I was four years old. And my teacher was a Miss Bullard. And we all just loved her. And it was in with the element, the Emerson School. Now Emerson School, that was the old Emerson School. And that building was torn down and Emerson School that we have today was rebuilt on the same spot, same place. And I, some people thought we didn't have a kindergarten in those early days, but we did. And I remember it as a very happy experience. I don't know, I remember this kindergarten so well and this teacher. And I liked all the little folk dances that we had, you know, and the singing. Then there's a a little later on, the lady in this town, maybe you've interviewed her, Flora Compton, played the piano. And at that time, all the children would stand in line, the first graders in one line; the second graders, third graders up to eighth grade, and then Flora, and if Flora didn't play the piano, But I remember her. And then somebody would beat a triangle to keep time to march to the music, and we marched into our classes, and I always enjoyed that, too. And ah, I liked my teachers. But after my mother passed away, I wanted to go to the training school at the old Normal. I had a little friend, Frances Kapanky(?), who was born at the Old Normal School (clears her throat). Well I'm sorry I seem to have a frog in my throat today.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: But she was born, her father was employed at the Normal School at that time. We were, Frances Kapanky(?) and I were very good friends and are to this day. She teaches, she did teach art in Phoenix Union High School, and then she went to <Laguna Beach> and was an art teacher there, but she's retired now. And ah, but we were very good friends, and so from about the third grade through the eighth grade I attended the Northern Arizona Normal School Training School, and Dr. Blome was my, Dr. Blome gave me- this is Dr. Nora Blome- was a very fine person, and she had travelled a great deal in <Italy> and in <Greece>. You know they didn't travel so very much then so it was quite a thing to have her tell us about her wonderful experiences in her travels. But President Blome, the President of the Normal School at that time, awarded me my eighth grade diploma. Then in 1920 I received my high school diploma from J.O. Kreiger(?), and that was also from the Normal School, because at that time they, they were just starting to give some high school work at Emerson School, but it wasn't really recognized work and most of the high school work was at the Normal School. And they had children from all over northern <Arizona> that stayed at the dormitory to receive their high school education. And so I received my high school diploma there and then I received my normal school diploma from J.O. Kreiger(?) who was president of the school. And then my next diploma was, as I said, the two years. No, J.O. Kreiger(?) presented me with my high school diploma, and Mr., ah, and President McMullen gave me my Normal School diploma in 1922. And then we were really ready to teach.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And then in 1935, Dr., President Dr. Tormey conferred the four year degree, the B A, and then President L. A. Eastburn gave me, or presented me, my Masters degree; my Masters degree in education in 1948. So I have a, I am a life member from Northern Arizona University. It was a, it was presented to me by the University when I retired.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh, uh huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And ah so I, my education, I was, always enjoyed school, always wanted to be a teacher. And sometimes I, so many of my friends did continue with Emerson School, but I enjoyed this little friend so I went to the Normal Training School. And then that's my, that's my, you might say my school experience. Of course I remember, I guess I always enjoyed you know the- we had drills at that time, the little quick drills, room drills, and I enjoyed the music and the, although I'm not, I don't play or sing, but I always enjoyed the daily activities.

Of course my mother passed away when I was eleven, ten I guess, and my sister, my other, well one sister married in about 1908, I think, and the other finished the Normal, Los Angeles Normal School, and she was a teacher and she married. And so my brother studied to be a- and it was kind of what you call on the job training, I think. You were at the local depot, he'd sweep the floors and what not to learn to be a telegraph operator, and then during World War I, he was a wireless operator in the Navy. And ah, so then my sister, two years older than I am, we decided that we could keep house if our father didn't need to hire someone to come in and clean. So, on Saturdays we'd get up in the morning and I would clean; she'd get breakfast and do the dishes. And at that time we'd carry the bedding once a week out on the line, and then we'd sweep and scrub and clean all day long. And then we'd do the washing; do the ironing, and after we'd do that we'd say, well what shall we cook? And we'd generally bake. My sister enjoyed the cooking; she'd make a pie or cakes or something and so we always kept house together, and that was quite a chore.

SUSAN ROGERS: You were quite young then, too. (laughs)

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: (laughs). Yes, uh huh. Yes we did and we, we enjoyed doing it, but of course we had time to go to church. We always went to Sunday School.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now what church did you go to?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And the, at first we were, we went to the Federated Church when they called it the Methodist Church at that time, it was Methodist Church. And I remember when they built the church when they were getting the stones ready, you know for the sandstone, the red native sandstone from <Flagstaff> here. And, before that I remember a little light gray church across from the bakery in <Flagstaff>, downtown. I think they call it Choi's Place now, but for years and years and years that was a bakery. It was Kellers' Bakery, then Knoles' bakery. And, I just remember going to this little church and sitting on a bench, you know, but mostly I remember the coming to the Federated, to the Methodist Church it was at that time. Then in 1911 they organized, or started the Episcopalian Church here. And at first the meetings were held in what we called the ah, well it was a hall up above the drug store where the Knowles Drug Store is now on the corner of Aspen and San Francisco downtown.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And there were some iron steps that went up the outside of the building, and upstairs they had the lodge hall for the Masons and the Elks and the Knights of Pythias and Rebeccas and different ones. And so my mother died in November 1911, but she had planned that we would be a part of the Episcopalian Church. So my sister and I started to go to the Episcopalian Church, and I, it is my church now. I go to the Episcopalian Church here in <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And, let me see. I, ah (clears throat) I haven't had trouble with my throat like this. I must be taking cold. I, my first year teaching was in <Winslow Arizona>, and I taught there with a friend of mine, Madeline Fairchild at that time. I was Bessie Kidd, and she was Madeline Fairchild. She's Mrs. Evans now; lives here in <Flagstaff>. And we went to <Winslow> to teach. But you know at that time the State Board of Education, or else it was the local boards of trustees decided that they would not employ married women. And it was agreed that if you married, that you'd just resign, or if they gave you a contract to teach, you resigned and gave up your contract. So I taught there one year, and then, in 1922 and 23, and then I married. I married a Mr. Hugh Best. My father was Justice of the Peace at that time, and he performed the wedding ceremony. And, but I had a contract to return to <Winslow> as a teacher, but I gave up the contract, because I thought it would be illegal. But that year in 1923, the Supreme Court of the state of <Arizona> passed a ruling that it was illegal, unconstitutional to say that a women, a woman could not teach because she was married...

(noise)

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Of course people more or less, teachers more or less accepted it. But during World War II we needed teachers throughout the state, and I imagine throughout the nation, and so they began and were very happy to have married teachers come in and teach. Before that they'd been teaching out in the small schools, the rural schools, the one and two and three teacher schools. There was no objection. But during World War II, they began hiring the married women, and that's been considered all right ever since that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And so I was married until 1930, and my son, Robert Best, was born September 5th, 1927, and he went to Emerson School here. He also went to Training School. Now you know at one time, before we had the underpass, it was quite dangerous crossing the railroad tracks here. It was also dangerous crossing, it was just a dirt road at that time, but the intersection, you know, where they have the light at the University, the five or six-

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well, so I remember Dr. Victor Kelly, from the University, was at college at that time, came in to the office. And he said you know I just don't know what we're going to do in order to get enough students for the Training School. And I said, well you have to bus. Just get a bus to pick up the children to go to the Training School. Well he came back a week or two later and he said, you know Dr. Tormey said he thought that was a good idea. So they have this college bus you know, elementary school bus, and, to pick up children. I don't know whether it's still necessary anymore, but they have it. And, so they, that's one reason, that's when they decided to have the bus for the elementary children. And my son, Robert, when we first moved up here, we were quite a ways from Emerson, and the bus did go past the house so he attended the Training School until the sixth grade, and he went to Emerson School, and then he finished high school here. And he started through at the college, and then during World War II, he served in the Army Airways Communication Service in the 926th Signal Battalion. And then when he returned from the service, he ah, well he was known as a cryptographer in service. He was trained to be a cryptographer. And that is the sending and deciphering of messages, secret messages. And then he went to school here for two years. And then he went to Berkley and attended the University of California, the school of forestry. Then when he returned to <Flagstaff> the, he has been working for the Arizona Transportation Department as a district permit supervisor.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh, uh huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And he's married and has a, we have this one, I have this grandson. He married Kathryn Kramer(?), the girl who was chosen as the, I think queen, the winter queen or festival queen that they used to have at the old normal school years ago. And ah, but she also served in World War II, and so she's ah, her name is Kathryn Kramer(?), and she worked for Mr. Dolan at the Saginaw Lumber Company for many years. And they live here in <Flagstaff> and have the one son. And my grandson is seventeen, be eighteen in May. And I expect will finish high school this year.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And, now let me see.

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Now shall I talk about the- my, I might go back to my sisters again. One, one sister, my oldest sister married a Mr. Earl W. Howe(?) in 1908, and they went, I know my family went to <Los Angeles> where she was married. And, and then she was divorced I think in nineteen, about 1910, which wasn't considered a very nice thing to do at that time. And then she re-married about 19 ah 19 I think or 20, and in the meantime, she studied, she was a teacher, and she taught at <Fredonia>, our little town of the northern part of our county. And she was married in <Kanab> and then they were married, went to <Salt Lake City> and were married again in the Episcopal Church up there. And then my other sister was, taught in Los Angeles schools, but she was married to a Dr. M.L. Davis, and- but during this flu epidemic that we had in 1918, 19, she was a victim of the flu and passed away in January, 1919. And then my oldest sister, Grace, Mrs. Cram(?) died of pneumonia in <Salt Lake City> in 1922, March, 1922. And so, and the sister that's two years older than I am, and she always, more or less, well she did always help me with home care with the house work and the cooking and helped me; and my father did, too, look after my son. My father passed away in 1938. And my sister in 1943. And so I(?), and my son married in 1947.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh, okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: We talked, I told you about some of the houses in the area.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, right.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I, ah, the downtown area of <Flagstaff> was always very interesting place, of course. Front Street we called it, that's Santa Fe, especially between Leroux and San Francisco Street, it was mostly saloons. And ah, but there were several Chinese restaurants. But most of the restaurants at that time, I believe, were nice, clean places, but they always had sawdust on the floor. And they all had big booths in them, you know, and if you went to eat there you always went into the booths and pulled the curtains.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, really?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: We laugh about that now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh goodness.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And of course the- <Flagstaff> was quite a busy place with the trains, and the railroad men used to stop and run over and get a cup of coffee or eggs, ham and eggs or something to eat. They always wore the striped, you know, engineers' uniform and caps, and so they did eat at these Chinese restaurants. And on Sundays it was quite a treat for us to eat at the Chinese restaurant and have a chicken dinner, twenty-five cents a meal. And ah, but we'd always go into the restaurant and the Chinese people were always so very nice to us, but we always went into one of the booths and pulled the curtains. (laughs) It was, it was quite interesting some of the things that we used to do. But really Front Street was kind of a forbidden street for little folks. You were never to go down Front Street. But it was an interesting street. And they had the hitching posts, you know, for the horses. And there were horses and wagons, you know.

It was rather late, I think <Flagstaff>, rather late having many automobiles here; a few. In fact when I was a little girl, we had our little birthday parties, and one treat that we'd get would be a- Mr. M. I. Powers that had a bank here, and he was also, I think, well, I'm not sure, but I think he had cattle or sheep. But, he would take his car, I think it was what we called a Big Olds (?), and it might have been a Cadillac. But anyway he would take us out on the east <Flagstaff> road, it's I-40 now. But it was a little winding dirt road at that time, and I don't think we went over two or three miles, but it was really exciting. (both laugh)

And then I remember the first automobile that ah, it was some special automobile, we were just little girls so, to come to <Flagstaff>, and we were all standing, you know, on Bledsoe's corner. And we had the Keller's Bakery there, and my sister and I were holding hands, and this car back fired, oh real loud, and we ran into Keller's Bakery as fast as we could go. (both laugh) Oh, that was quite an experience, some of these early automobiles.

And of course I'll have to tell you that Jack Benny always laughed and joked, you know, about the Maxwell car, well we had a Maxwell car. And I used to drive it. And, in fact, I started to drive when I was about fifteen. And this friend, Frances Kapanky(?) and I, in the summertime, would wear khaki coveralls. We washed them, and we ironed them, and we starched them, but we wore them, and we drove all over the country. Of course when I say that, if you went as far as <Walnut Canyon> or Lake Mary, that was quite a distance, you know. But we did. We, I don't know how my father happened to let us drive it so much, but we did and we thoroughly enjoyed it. And ah, but the downtown streets when we were little, little girls, of course I remember the board walks.

And we didn't have hospitals at that time, and if anybody became ill, and they thought they needed an operation, they put them on the train and sent them to <Los Angeles>, not to <Phoenix>, but to <Los Angeles>. And I remember my sister, Genevieve. My sisters' names were: Grace, Mary Genevieve, and Lucille. I thought they were very pretty names and I remember when my sister, Mary Genevieve had appendicitis at . My mother took her to <Los Angeles> to the hospital there. And so when we, as a little girl, we didn't have the hospital. Of course when my son was born, we had a hospital at that time called Mercy Hospital, over just, near the old Saginaw-

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, by the Dolan house.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: By the Dolan house, yes, that was it. And you know it said something here about cemeteries. We talked about cemeteries. Well when I was a little girl they had a cemetery, an old, old cemetery. It would be at the foot of observatory hill, and at the end of west Santa Fe, it's part of the park, city park that they have up there. And, as girls we used to go around and read the tombstones. I remember one was for a little girl or little boy, child anyway, and it said, "Blossomed on earth to bloom in heaven". And we'd go and look at that and think how sad it was and everything. But they moved these graves over to the cemetery that we have today. And of course the city park was the place that the children played. We took our lunches up there, especially in the summertime. They had swings with the rope swings, you know. And then I ah, I- it was a place where I’ve enjoyed playing and climbing trees, and swings, but mostly just the swings. I think we had a teeter-totter up there, too.

And, it was a place, of course <Flagstaff> was a happy place, I thought. At least I think my childhood was very, very happy. And I was the youngest one in the family. I think they were a little bit too good to me, maybe. But I loved them all very much, and I think they loved me, too, a great deal.

Ah, you know in talking about, you know, celebrations, well we've always had pioneer celebrations more or less as I remember as a little girl. They have the merry-go-rounds come in of course, and then people would dress in the old, old long dresses and bonnets, you know, for pioneer days. And that was really before they started the Pow Wow.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And then, we of course, had our Pow Wow for many years, and we were always very happy to have friends come and take them to the Pow Wow. And Governor Pyle of course, was the announcer up there for years, and we were very proud to have people come and go up there year after year.

And of course, when they started to have the Easter service at the rim of the <Grand Canyon> under Dr. Ardrey from the University, that was the place that we would plan to go, often, nearly every year to <Grand Canyon>. And of course at Christmas time, Christmas time was always ah, well we just didn't think too much about Christmas until after Thanksgiving. You know they didn't advertise Christmas so much until then, and then right after Thanksgiving they would. And we practiced at schools the same as they do now for Christmas programs. And we practiced at church. Some of the ladies, a Mrs. Samyra(?) Wilson, who's passed away now, but her son, Paul Wilson works for Babbitts here, but Samyra Wilson could sing beautifully, and she at church, you know, at church, would teach us the Christmas songs and the Easter songs. And she was an- and so, Christmas, and we always had Christmas Eve programs, and generally we would say pieces, sing little songs and have a big Christmas tree at church. And then, of course, seemed to me in our family, when I was a little girl, the Christmas tree was put up Christmas Eve. And then it was quite a nice surprise early Christmas morning. My father used to enjoy teasing all of us, you know. He'd get up and say, "My goodness but it's cold in here. Old Santy Claus came and left the doors open." (Both laugh). So we always had a lot of fun about everything. Of course we didn't have too many oranges at that time at Christmas time. We had the oranges, and the tangerines, and we called them the nigger toes. You know, Brazil nuts. (laughs)

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And, but they were delicious, something we looked forward to, you know. And then we had, ah-

Well we, I always enjoyed my neighbors. Of course I knew the, I had a little friend we called Betty Rice and her parents were sheep people; had sheep ranches. But they would take the sheep, you know, around the <Phoenix> area in the winter. So she was up here as a rule just for summertime. And they had burros with little saddles. If the burros would just go, we would have had so much fun. But you know how stubborn little burros were, so we spent most of our time trying to pull them. But anyway they bought little saddles for them. And that was quite a thing in the summertime. And I had many little friends that I enjoyed when I was small. As people grew up.

And, then personalities it says. Well I remember a Dr. Douglass, of course. Dr. Douglass discovered the counting of the tree rings, you know, for the age of the trees and for determining whether we had a dry year or a wet year. And Dr. Douglass came here to work for Dr. Percival Lowell at the observatory. But he was also interested in politics, and he was a, he was a probate judge, I'm quite sure, and ex-officio county school superintendent. I think he had held several offices in the court house. And- but he, in the summertime, he had friends with the sheep and cattle people, and when they had their meetings in the summer in the courthouse, he would come up and come in the office and talk about the schools of many years ago. And then I knew Dr. Percival Lowell. We looked forward to them as children, and Lowells generally came out from <Boston> in the summertime, and they had a huge red automobile with brass lamps on it, and we'd stand and wait for them to come down, drive down observatory hill. Not the road that they have now- farther north. And Mrs. Lowell wore a, one of the pretty hats, but she always had one of these big veils, you know you've seen them tied?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: So we- but Percival Lowell I think was an Episcopalian. I think he helped the little church some. But anyway at Christmas time the observatory, if the weather'd permit, they gave little parties for children. And, but I remember, of course, little girls going up to the city park, we'd pick wild flowers, you know. And Dr. Percival Lowell came by one time, he walked back and forth up the hill often, and we'd often see him, and he stoped, and he very nicely explained to us that if we picked the flowers they couldn't go to seed, and soon we wouldn't have any flowers. So after that we were very careful not to pick the flowers. Well I do know- and then there was the Lamplands, Dr. Lampland and his wife at the observatory, and the Sliphers, Dr. Earl Slipher, and Dr., and his brother. Then I knew most of the presidents of the Uni- the old Normal School, and the college, and now the University, President Walkup. But, I heard of Dr. Taylor and heard my sisters talk about, you know, the first president of the old normal school. And, but I knew most of them, because I went to the training school when Dr. Blome, and his daughter was my teacher, and I just adored her. I thought she was just a wonderful teacher. I have also known all the governors since statehood, from Governor Hunt to the present time. I have worked with them in my, through the office of county school superintendent. And I knew the, I've known the governors. And then the state school superintendents, from C.O. Case down to the present time. I have known the state school superintendents and many of the senators and representatives, because in the position I have. One thing we have to do is be- keep interested in laws or keep up to date with school laws, especially.

I think World, I remember, jumping around here, but I remember World War I. Of course we were in the, was high school department then that I was attending at the old normal school, and so many, most of the young men left at that time, went into service. It was just mostly the girls that were left. And I remember when the armistice was signed, November eleventh, that, I'm sure it was the old Maxwell car, everybody got in the cars and drove around the blocks and around the blocks, and the whistles blew, and the train whistles blew, and the mill whistles blew, and the bells rang, the church bells, and we had a bell at Emerson school that would ring at 8:30 every morning. My what a celebration it was. I remember what a celebration when the war was over.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And then of course, during the prohibition days, I was in office then, and we had some interesting experiences with the prohibition. Little schools that we had out in the area in Anderson Pass and different places where they said they had the- made the bootleg whiskey, you know.

And then the Depression. Of course, that all comes in that I think of course with my office work. And the flu epidemic. I remember how we had to close the schools. I didn't live at the dormitories. I always lived downtown and walked back and forth to school. But I had many friends who stayed, and they just, well everybody, so many of them were ill, and they took care of one another. And the matrons of the dormitories helped out. And we lost, many people died of the flu here at that time. And ah, but I know the girls at the university, at the old normal school, did do so much to pitch in and help.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I remember also some of the floods, you know. Every, every year we had floods in what we call the River de Flag going through town here. And we'd have, seemed as if we'd have those terrible thunderstorms at that time. And then we'd say,"Oh the river's coming down," and we'd hear it just roaring and roaring and roaring, and it'd take out the little wooden bridges and everything through town here. And it rolled down. And you know where it went? In to the bottomless pits. And several times the bottomless pits became, well they just couldn't take it all at once, and there was a big lake out there. And then it'd be a big whirlpool and all the water'd be gone in a couple of hours. But ah, and that's how it started, they said years ago, if you look in the, they have a book at the University called Place Names, and it tells about the bottomless pits in there. That a sheepherder had watered some sheep there one evening and heard this terrible roar and noise in the middle of the night. And the next day, the water was practically all drained away. There was a lake there; it was all drained away. That's one reason I haven't talked about developing much. I'm afraid somebody'd get caught down there. But anyway we had, we did have floods. And you know I think they must have diverted the water some way, because every year we expected it. And that's the only time that my father really spanked me. Because he always said, "Now never go down to the River de Flag there and play." 'Cause they had wonderful sand down there, and we loved to play in that sand. He said, "I don't ever want to hear of you going down there. It's too dangerous." But one day when it was bright and sunny and everything, we thought we'd go down and play. And my father was coming home for lunch. Well he did, he spanked me. And you know what my older sisters did? They sang a little song. They said, "Papa raised a blister on my little sister." (both laugh). Well it wasn't bad; he didn't spank me very hard, but I didn't go back, it hurt my feelings. (both laugh). But it was, oh but I remember the floods, you know. and they, over at the University where some of the dormitories are now, they'd had regular lakes. And in the bottom of the Weatherford Hotel here. That seemed to be, that you wouldn't believe it, but it's the low part of town in there, and- but we haven't had those floods for years.

I remember as a little girl when we lived in this Vandevier house I told you about; was a two-story house with one large upstairs bedroom we called the girls' room. And I remember my father would wake us up four or five o'clock in the morning, and he'd say, "I want you to go to the window here." And he'd take us to the window and we'd look at Halley's Comet. And he'd say, "Now look at it and don't forget it. You'll probably never see it again." And it was quite a sight. And I can see it just as plain now because he had us. But one night, he called us. I was up early and the neighbors' house, it was about two houses from us. It was a brand new house, wasn't quite completed. And it was burned. And it was quite, it was terrible. And you know they had a little house they called a, well, they called a fire house. And it was placed about where the underpass is now, where the roads fork there, you know?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And they had a little cart in there, a hose cart, and the men would get up and run up there and pull the hose cart. And we could, heavens, before we really had a good, a good fire truck here at that time. These are early days that I'm telling you about. I remember the- I don't remember. 'Course they had some early years ago, many years ago, they had, the town really burned, I guess.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: In <Flagstaff>, you know they've told you about it, I guess.

SUSAN ROGERS: 1880’s. Yeah.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: After they- I- can you go back? I was just thinking of, you know of travelling. And we'd go to <Oak Creek>. We had in our family a surrey with the fringe on top. We had, I remember two of our horses or three of our horses. One was called Raven because he was just jet black, a beautiful horse. We had another one, was a dappled gray. And he was called Diamond. And then we had another nice old horse called Teddy. And Teddy was a chestnut brown. And Teddy was quite a movie horse. Every now and then he'd get stubborn and his ears'd go back, and he'd start to back up, you know. He was- but we did go in this in this little surrey, they called it, with the fringe on top. And we would go out to the ice caves at Sunset Crater. And we'd make ice cream out there sometimes. They had ice out there. Then we went to <Walnut Canyon>. Our family, even from when we had horses and buggies, we liked to go. We'd take a picnic lunch and go places.

Then I remember ah when I was a little girl, relatives came out from the east to visit. And my father would go to the livery stable and rent a wagon and horses. And my brother generally would ride a horse, rent a saddle horse for him. And then we'd go to the Canyon. We did go out the same, practically the same road as 180. Well when we did get there on the other side of the peaks, there was a road straight over to the canyon.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mm mmm.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: A prettier road; it was beautiful, you know, going around the peaks. And then we didn't, and then it was a beautiful road going into the canyon from there. And, I several times when relatives came up, we, my father would rent the horses. And <Walnut Canyon>, you know, we often went to <Walnut Canyon> for picnics.

And as a little girl, when we lived at this ranch that I told you about, Frances Kapanky, and several others, well we would hike to <Walnut Canyon> and walk almost from one end to the other. I remember one time we met a little bear. Whoof! The bear was frightened and so were we. But we were fortunate that we didn't have any bad experiences in all the hiking that we did. We used to hike up to the top of Elden Mountain about once a year. But we were told to stay on the trails and we did. Otherwise we might have had problems. And then when they opened the Weatherford road, I drove a car. There was, oh just a long string of cars went up the Weatherford Road, up the peaks. And we'd have to stop now and then you know and let the engines cool. And cars don't heat up as badly as they did then. 

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me about the Weatherford Road.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: That was quite an experience driving up the Weatherford Road.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you have to pay?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well, you know, if I did I don't remember.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don't remember?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: My father probably paid it, because he was in the car with me and my sister. And of course we, I did climb the San Francisco Peaks just once, just once. And, but this going up the Weatherford Road. And then of course I've gone up before they closed the road, what we called The Big Spring up here where we get the water. And that was a beautiful, beautiful trip. But then for awhile they wouldn't let people go. I don't know whether they will now or not. But that was always a very beautiful trip. Of course we always enjoyed camping out sometimes during the year, going some place to camp.

My father was- had many hobbies, I said, and he liked to hunt. Oh yes, and he was quite an artist. He painted these pictures when he was a young man.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: And one of my sisters was quite a painter. And so, he had quite a few hobbies, you know. And I, talking about, I remember, you know, most of the, well the house wives. We had these old fashioned telephones you know which would(?) ring. And they would call the grocery store and give an order and then the grocery man would deliver in horses, the horses and wagons, the grocery wagon. They would deliver the groceries. Later on, some of the stores did buy trucks, open trucks. But, then finally of course they stopped and people did their own shopping like they do today. But in the early days, most of the women ordered groceries over the phone. However, I remember my mother, before my mother passed away, she'd often send the little girls, as she called it. My father always called the two younger, the little girls and the others, older sisters, these older girls.

You know I do, I remember we had quite a noted artist here, Louis Aiken. And of course-

SUSAN ROGERS: How do you spell that name?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Ah-

SUSAN ROGERS: How do you spell it? A k i n, you think?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I think so.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I'm not sure, but Louis Aiken was his name. And you know the attorney general, Babbitt, Bruce Babbitt wrote some very interesting articles about him and knew him. And I, he had this- he's buried over here in this cemetery. But, they had some beautiful paintings of <Grand Canyon>. I think they had one in the Verkamp store at <Grand Canyon>. The Verkamps, you know, were from from <Cincinnati Ohio>, too.

And so, years ago the this old Emerson school, not the one we have now, but, ah had a small auditorium in it. And when I was a little girl, they had most of the plays and musical programs were there. And then the old normal school and the college sponsored chatauquas where we had people come, good to lecture and present very interesting programs and musical programs, too.

Of course the scientists, northern <Arizona> here is a scientific center. And this doctor I know, I watched this picture, Nova, the other day, and the picture of Dr. Shoemaker (pronounces ShoemOker). Of course they pronounced it ShoemAker, but I asked him once and he said it was ShoemOker. Spelled as if it's ShoemAker, but he says it's ShoemOker. But he was here you know. And at one of the county institutes that we plan through the office, he talked about this little "june buggy" or what ever they call it, you know that they had, that they sent to the moon? And I think he more or less planned and designed that. He's at <Pasadena> now. But ah, and of course the Sliphers, and Dr. Lowell, Dr. Douglass and ah (phone rings). The, I think our- we just have had so many noted scientists here.

And we've had many famous people, I think, visit <Flagstaff>. And well, I remember when Theodore Roosevelt went through <Flagstaff>. And, of course at that time, they'd stop the train, and they'd go to the observation car, they called it, I guess and give a short talk. The people'd all rush down to the depot. And of course, trains. I'll show you a picture after awhile.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Trains were always one of the interesting things for people in <Flagstaff>. Even the adults, you know, to go down when the passenger trains came in. They used to stop longer. People would get off and walk around. The Peaks always looked so close to them sometimes, you know, and you'd hear them say, "well if we'd just be here a half an hour, I believe I could walk over there," you know (laughs). But, and so people were interested. And that was one of the things, you know, they'd say, "Let's go down and watch the train come in," we’re interested in people. And once in awhile some of the celebrities would go through, even in later years. Truman, you know, always traveled in a heavy, spacial car. And this Tom Pollock I told you about. Of course, he was, I guess investor, and he had the, started the mill as you know at McNary. The Apache Railroad up there. He had his own personal railroad train. And he was very interesting person.

And well, I, now that, you think there's something else I should tell you about? I haven't told you anything about my office work of course, and I don't know whether you'd want me to do all that today or not?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes that'd be- maybe we ought to move into that a little bit. Tell me how you decided to run, and how you got involved in that, or if you have any other little notes there that you think that you haven't added.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I just, maybe you'll want to turn that off for a minute, and I'll glance through here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I would like to say in 1906 when I was a little girl, I guess I must have been five years old, and I was, as we called it "drumming on the piano". And there were a lot of sheets of music, you know, in front of me and on top of the piano. And we had part of the earthquake that they had in <San Francisco>. And I remember all the music came down on me and the dishes and the house rattled. It wasn't too bad, but they closed Emerson school, and ah- somebody is coming to the door. Is it for you?

SUSAN ROGERS: I don't think so. Want me to turn it off?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Oh no, he’s getting the .

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Ah, they closed Emerson school, sent all of the children home. And the walls were, some of the plaster cracked in some of the buildings and everything, so that was one of the exciting things that happened when I was a little girl. And also that we lived in <Los Angeles>, my mother and my two older sisters, my sister Lucile and myself. We lived in <Los Angeles> while my older sisters went to Los Angeles Normal. And then I lived over there for several winters when I wasn't teaching. But, so maybe, well if you want- (tape is turned off)

Of course being in the office of county school superintendent is a very interesting office. It's more involved, I think, than most people realize. But I was, well I wasn't working. I, and married women were not allowed to teach in the schools, and I was married. And so several people said, "Well, Bessie, why don't you run for county school superintendent?" Well actually I thought well I'll try it. And I did. I campaigned. And at that time, I of course I announced. And I had a Chevrolet car. It was one of the first, as we called them years ago, enclosed cars. (laughs). Most of the cars years ago were open, you know, and we'd have to put the side curtains on before rain or something. But this was, and so I traveled to <Williams> and <Grand Canyon> and <Tuba City> and these little communities out in the country, Garland Prairie, and <Parks> and Anderson Pass. And then I- and in those early days when there weren't so many people here, we generally campaigned as we said from house to house. We'd go and visit everybody and go through all the stores. And so I was really quite surprised when I was elected. But I was elected. Now I didn't go to <Fredonia> the first year because they were building the bridge across the Little Colorado. And the bridge and the <Lee's Ferry>, you see, had the ferry had gone out as they called it, and they hadn't replaced it. They, every time they had a flood, they had a difficult time with the ferry at <Lee's Ferry>.

And I did go across it once, though, but not while I was county school superintendent. That was supposed to have been one of our pleasure trips when we when we went in the car. And that was quite an interesting experience. I didn't in my school work, but in following along the Little Colorado when you know the <Colorado>, it wasn't the Little Colorado it was the regular Colorado River at <Lee's Ferry>. They had a place they called the dugway. And it was just a narrow road against(?) the side of this canyon wall, just wide enough for a car. But approaching this dugway there was a hog's back(?) they called it, a narrow road and on one side was the river and on the other side was this steep canyon. And I tell you if I've ever been frightened in driving a car that was the time. But then I started down to the ferry, and I heard them calling to me, "don't come down yet." Stop, well my father was with me, and we jumped out of the car and put rocks under the wheel. And we had to wait until they brought the ferry across. And then I put the brakes on, I put the car in low, as we said, and even then I zipped on to this ferry (both laugh), and so that was quite an experience.

But I, the first year, I didn't go to <Fredonia> to campaign. I sent letters because the bridge was not completed at that time. So I was really I was quite surprised, to tell the truth, that I was elected the first year.

And, but Mrs. Acker, county school superintendent, she was an older lady. We were always very good friends, and we were good friends after I was county school superintendent. And she went with me on many of my trips. And we both belonged to the, you know to different lodges. I belonged to the Order of the Eastern Star. I'm now a fifty-four year member. But we would go to the state meetings together, Mrs. Acker and myself. We would go to <Tucson> and <Phoenix>. And then she enjoyed going with me to some of her friends that were teaching in the smaller schools. So we were always very good friends, although we were opponents one time as candidates. So, I enjoyed her very much.

Well of course when I went, first went in office, the roads, we thought about, bad, narrow roads. And tires weren't very good at that time. And so I had to change tires very often in going to the schools. And I worked with the schools in <Flagstaff> and in <Williams>, <Grand Canyon>, but mostly in those early days, when we had so many little districts. And you see the map up here, the school districts of <Coconino County>. Well, so many of the little districts, we were summer schools because of our severe winters. We didn't have winters like we are having this winter. But on account of the snows and the cold weather, schools would begin in March or April and close in November or December. And they'd have two weeks vacation during July, and it worked out very well. And most of the people were either homesteaders or they were people that were really established and lived there a long time. And then, before, one by one we closed the schools. The roads were better and we got school buses. And we annexed and consolidated schools. But for many years, it was the, about the only way we could do to get children who lived in such scattered areas, a long distance from school, you know. And, well, out to the little schools we always tried to get the best teachers, and we generally had very dedicated teachers in the school. And I worked with the school trustees and with the teachers to improve the buildings. Always tried to watch for safety features; that the doors opened out. In small schools, they had tragic situations with burning to death because a door opened in and they'd, you know, stack up against the door. So I tried to make sure that always the doors opened out, and that there was a window that could escape easily. The way the buildings are built now, it's a little more difficult to get out a window than it was at that time. And the, our schools were in beautiful locations. And of course you know <Coconino County> is the second largest county in the <United States>. And I'm not sure about, when I say that, I'm not sure about <Hawaii>, and I'm not sure about <Alaska>.

SUSAN ROGERS: I think it still is.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: But it was and about eighteen thousand square miles, which was really larger than, I've forgotten how many of the eastern states, but <Connecticut> and <Rhode Island> and several of the other states. And then they were in such beautiful and interesting locations. Of course at <Grand Canyon>, and, oh we had a little school in <Oak Creek Canyon>. And of course our school at <Sedona>. But the scenery in both places of course, just beautiful. And of course at <Tuba City> it was the Painted Desert, but very interesting and scenic and beautiful when you go out there. And of course I would tell the children how beautiful it was, and it was true. And then someone else would come and visit them. I remember some man from the state department of education said, well when I told these children how, what a beautiful location it was, they always said, "Well Mrs. Best said so too." You know (laughs) Mrs. Best always said. But it was true, and <Fredonia> and <Tuba City>. And then we have our little school at <Chevelon Butte>, south of <Winslow>, just barely within <Coconino County>. And there was an interesting article in the paper about <Chevelon Butte> not long ago. And it is an interesting little school. When we first started school there was during World War II. And Mr. Whiting started the lumber mill there, and he said, now we'll build a school building if you'll get the teacher and the school books and everything. And I said, well we'll do that. So he built this school, and we hired the teacher. Well that little building was moved three times, but they're still using it. We had a young man from <Winslow> to teach there one time. And, oh, he was so delighted with it. And he was a very good teacher. And in teaching safety habits, and in teaching science, and he was quite an artist, and his wife could sing. So they were quite an asset to that little community. But he thought it would be so nice if they painted the school house red (laughs). It turned out to be more of a pink than a red. (laughs) So the next year they changed it. But the last time I visited the school, 'course we, you know it wasn't always easy to get money for these small schools. They didn't have the valuation sometimes to bond issue. And ah, but they were buying, saved the money to what they called a thirty cent levy and bought a nice mobile home for the teacher. And they had a new piano in school, a little small piano, but it was very nice. And they had a, they'd just carpeted the little school, but it was a blue, bright blue rug. I'm not carpeting. I'm not sure that would be so good. But you know they appreciated their school. As a rule they had about fifteen.

Then we’ve ah- most of our, some of our schools were what we called accommodation schools. Well I, to go back to the summer schools. Our little school about half way between <Flagstaff> and <Williams>, the Maine Consolidated School at Parks was the last one to change from a summer school to a winter school. And of course, one reason it was necessary because we had so many, we had quite a travelling public. And children moving into the district with really, they just didn't fit into that school, summer school program. And then the roads were better, and we had nice buses by that time.

That was one thing, getting the schools to buy good school buses, even in <Flagstaff> here. Years ago I went to the Board of Trustees and I said, "Now you have the responsible (sic) for the children because you have a large school district." So they just considered it more or less within the city limits. And I said, "No you have a large school district." I had to get the county attorney to really explain to them it was their responsibility. And so then they started paying some of the children to come in. High school was a problem, getting the children into high school. And then some man collected the ten dollars from different families, and he fixed a truck, and we called it "The Old Crate", for awhile, and that was dangerous. So finally <Flagstaff> decided that it was their responsibility. They'd just buy a nice bus and since then they have bought many, and they have this great fleet of buses now. But in the beginning, it came through the county school office, getting these people, getting the buses. And then to get them to put in the connection with either the Forest Service or with the sheriff's office. Ah, two-way communications, so if they had a problem in the bus, a wreck or stuck in the snow or something, they could call for help; so we have that. And then we tried to get new school buildings when it was necessary. I know at <Grand Canyon> we, they had school in a, well, it wasn't really a log schoolhouse, it was, kind of had slabs on the outside, you know. And <Grand Canyon> was growing, too, and they needed a new school. And they- it's all on government property, you know. So, Senator Carl Hayden, and he was a very fine senator and very considerate of schools where he, where the government had responsibilities. So, Senator Carl Hayden was campaigning one year, and he came in the office, and we were talking about school situations. And he said, "Well I'm on my way to <Grand Canyon>." So, I called the trustees at <Grand Canyon>, and I said, "Now Senator Hayden is going to be there." And we've written letters, the school trustees had written letters, and I had written letters; the Parent Teachers Association had written letters. The American Legion Auxiliary had written letters. You know we had. And I said, "You take him over to the old school house and show it to him." And so they called me at nine o'clock at night, and they said, "Senator Hayden sent a telegram to <Washington DC> to set thirty-five thousand dollars aside for a new school building at <Grand Canyon>." So do you know, that little building was built in three or four months. It just didn't take the time that it does now. And so, that was the first one.

And then of course after World War II we had what we called Public Law 89, 8910(?) I think. Anyway it was for building schools on the federal, they called it impact areas, where the federal people were there, and there wasn't enough money for bond issues and what not. So we, it was quite a, we used to say, just quite a fight we'd say to get the money to build some of the schools at <Grand Canyon>. But we did. And then they needed a high school. And Senator Hayden had a special bill passed in the Congress for this high school building at <Grand Canyon>. And, so we were just very proud of it and very grateful for what he did. And they've been able through these new government funds that we get now, we didn't have years ago, we're able to do more about building schools. And that was just one instance. And, well I always, I tried to arrange to take important people out to schools, to visit our schools to talk to the boys and girls. And then I arranged to arrange, just before World War II we started this, taking children from one school to another, from <Grand Canyon> to <Tuba City>, or the school children at <Tuba City>. We didn't have the big school that we have at <Tuba City> now. We had at first, when I was first county school superintendent at <Tuba City>. We had about ten children in the school. And now you know they have several thousand. And ah, but they, the schools visited, and that really meant a lot to them. And then we had some little children on the Indian reservation that had never talked on a telephone, and never seen a telephone, hadn't seen a train, and so we arranged for them to come to town and visit and see these things. But during World, you know World War II, we had to stop, you know, gasoline was scarce, and sugar was scarce, and in fact the county school offices had to have charge of the rationing of sugar and of gasoline. The first initiative, I mean we planned this, through the county school office and with the local school district, and then the teachers registered the people. And so many times the county school office would take over those important responsibilities. I just don't- so many things to tell about the schools. But we were quite proud of the buildings that we have in most of the schools now.

And the school districts- consolidation is a very difficult thing to do. People really resent giving up a school district. They, it's local control, local management, and I believe in it, and they hate to, but in most cases, they don't move far enough away from that you see. And so we had, well when I first- 

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: We had about thirty little schools. And ah then when I left office, we had about nine little school districts.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, I see, okay.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: School districts.

SUSAN ROGERS: I was expecting you to say more.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: No, school districts, because they were annexed and consolidated with <Flagstaff>, with <Williams> and <Grand Canyon>. We had Anita and Apex annex were consolidated with <Grand Canyon>. We had to have a change of boundaries there one time which was quite a misunderstood project, but it worked out very well and meant a great deal to <Grand Canyon>, because they need a financial base to have a bond issue, you know, or to collect enough money through taxes to run a school. And we had a little school at <Canyon Diablo>; it became a part of <Flagstaff>. We had a little school at <Winona>, at <Cosnino>, at <Leupp>. <Leupp> became a part of <Flagstaff>. At <Sedona> is a part of Flagstaff school system now. And, well it really worked out best, because <Flagstaff> could send their art teachers, and music teachers, and special reading teachers. And so, the only school left where it would really be feasible for them to annex or consolidate would be this little school at Parks. But neither <Flagstaff> or <Williams>, and they thought about it, and they had elections for it. It was defeated. But if they ever get quite a few children out there, more children, they won't have a financial base large enough to take care of them.

Ah, there’s so many things to tell. I noticed that you have here that maybe you'd like to hear something about the- says you know relations with the minorities.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well I think it's been very, as far as I know, quite pleasant here in <Flagstaff>. When I first went in office they had a new little school called Murdock School. You know over here. And Mrs-. that was Dunbar School, but Mrs. Murdock was the teacher there for a number of years. And she was an excellent teacher. And we were very good friends. And of course that was a, just like a rural school, from first to eighth grade. And then they sent, always the high school children went to high school, always the, but they started the school in the first place, because some of the parents over there wanted it. Because they wanted their little folks there, because it was so far to walk to Emerson, some places they thought, before we had school buses. And so there must, through the years and they send the, they sent the seventh and eighth grade you know over to junior high, and they’d sent the sixth. And then finally they closed down the school. Mrs. Murdock was, did so much for the children over there. And she helped them put on some very nice programs. And I know we arranged for one of the big buses to take these children to <Grand Canyon> and <Fredonia>, to <Parks>, to put on their programs, musical programs. And they enjoyed that. And of course Wilson Riles, who is the state superintendent of public instruction in <California>, was Principal over here. And he, when he was here a couple of years ago, and then I saw him in <Phoenix> about three years ago. He said, well he always had a lot of encouragement, you know, from us in the office.

And we always worked hard for the Indian boys and girls at <Tuba City> and at <Leupp>. Many improvements have been made, and they have nice schools. And, oh I've seen such a change you know in Indian boys and girls.

And also the Mexican people. Years ago when I first taught school in <Winslow> I taught little Mexican children, and most of them didn't speak English, even their parents didn't. And now there's about this second or third generation, you know, they didn't have that problem anymore, and they are fine citizens.

So we’re, I think there may have been some problems, but I, we really didn't need the problems out in our little schools, places where we had, they were always very happy I think in our little school. And I think integrating here in <Flagstaff> worked out very nicely the way the people wanted it.

And now we have the buses and everything so, I know some people have, when I was in office, interviewed me about school buses. I think they thought we, most of our school busing might have been done just for integration, but it wasn't. It was done, just the means of picking up these children that lived in such isolated places, to get them to school, you know, and get them to the best school that we could. And for many years when you- children finished schooling, finished the eighth grade in <Oak Creek> and even <Sedona>.

<Sedona> certainly is a changed community you know. They just didn't go on to high school. So that was one of our big problems, getting some arrangements made to get those children to high school. So finally when they annexed to <Flagstaff>. <Flagstaff>, well we closed, sometimes we lapsed school districts for lack of attendance. And that's what we did at <Oak Creek>. And the county school superintendent will suspend a district, will notify the board of supervisors, and the board of supervisors will lapse the district and annex it you know. So it was annexed to <Flagstaff>. <Sedona> annexed to <Flagstaff>. So then we had buses running picking up high school children. They do that today. Bring the high school children into <Flagstaff>. But just really having enough children down there to have a big bond issue and start a high school. So, there's a problem in <Sedona>, because part of the town is in <Yavapai County> and part is <Coconino County>. And there's a law whereby they could, one district annex, become part of one county or the other. But it hasn't worked out that way yet.

However it did at <Fredonia>. <Fredonia> annexed part of the territory in <Mohave County>, and it was worked out very agreeably. And so we paid tuition, or they paid Coconino County tuition, for years to teach their children from <Mohave County>, the high school children. Then they had their little school, and you just can't close a little school unless the people bring in a petition to annex that's approved by most of them. Or they vote to annex, consolidate, or if for lack of attendance, the county school superintendent could close it. But they've worked that problem out since I have not been county school superintendent. They have worked that problem out up there now. So all along from, I suppose from now on, great changes have been made.

And of course when I was first elected, went out to the schools, they all had the outdoor toilets. And it was a problem how to get the water to the schools. Sometimes the water was hauled in wooden barrels. And they had, they didn't have the buckets, they had containers with a little spigot and the paper cups. And then sometimes they had cisterns. But finally during the WPA days, you heard about them? We got water piped into the schools at <Oak Creek> and at <Sedona>. And we- <Fredonia>, even at <Fredonia>, quite a community, they had these outdoor toilet facilities. And then through another federal project that was not a part of the school work, but a community project, they piped the water from a spring, and so then we had the water piped in, and we had indoor toilet facilities. And so for a number of years now we haven't had any schools where we had any outdoor facilities. All the schools have running hot and cold water, and even some of the schools have showers out in these little districts. And so, then most of them had great big pot bellied stoves, huge stoves, and if you got up too close to them you know, you'd just roast, and you got too far away you'd freeze. But gradually we got the butane and or gas. And so most of the schools have _________ you see.

We annexed- we had so many schools. But <Grand Canyon> of course, they had the steam heat and the, always the steam heat and the indoor toilet facilities there. But out to Maine and out to <Sedona> and <Fredonia> and even <Tuba City>, but <Tuba City>, of course, was such a small school for awhile, and even at <Chevelon Butte>, we have hot and cold water, electricity. But it wasn't easy. You always had to go through channels and work with the Forest Service or with someone, and there was always some objection, you know. And so finally you accomplished those things. But you just- sometimes it's difficult.

And then, but <Chevelon Butte> was a very poor district as far as valuation concerned. And then they had this big Cholla Plant down at St., between <St. Johns> and, or Holbrook and <Winslow>, and their line goes through the <Chevelon Butte> district and the high valuation. Now they can have things.

And then <Page> was an interesting place for the county, while I was in office, because we started the school there. It is what we called the accommodation school. Wasn't anybody there to appoint school trustees, nobody lived there long enough. But there is a law that is called the, you can start a school with accommodation school money. And of course the federal government, when they were building, that was a federal project, so they gave us money. And at first we had school in Butler building while the other schools were being built. And of course we had strikes out there, slowed down the building of the schools, and we had a superintendent who had a problem out there, so he, when he quit in the middle of the year that re-created a problem. But always even though we were meeting problems, there was a loyalty with those children in school. And I've never seen- they just- that old Butler building, they didn't care. They just loved that old school. And they always were just proud of that little school. And finally we got the buildings. And since I've left office they were just planning some more bond issues when I left. And they've built a lovely new high school. And now that you see with the big plant that they have out there, the Navajo electric plant that they have out there, they have enough valuation. So that they built a nice high school, and they built another elementary school. And they always pay good teacher's salaries. But we didn't always have enough money to do some of the things we'd like to do. I had to, I made several trips to <Washington DC> to meet with Senator Hayden and the different government officials and Department of Public Health, Education and Welfare to get enough money to run this school. There was always- and so Senator Hayden had some special appropriations made for us to keep this school going. And now they just have so much, they have so much to do with now, so that's wonderful.

But all through the years- and then we always worked on getting the best, good teachers, good textbooks, good school equipment, tape recorders. Years ago, of course, they didn't have tape recorders or little motion picture machines or slides. But as those things were available, we would demonstrate them in the small schools, and see that they would get them. And running a small school is similar to a home. Any school is, I guess. But you can't buy everything in one year. I know when we, our Happy Jack school out here at the logging camp became part of <Flagstaff>. Mr. Cromer says, my goodness, that's where they get all those nice desks (laughs) and that nice motion picture machine and this and that and the other. And I said well you know they didn't buy it all at once. They've been buying it through the years and then they take care of it.

And, well you see we didn't have money to just go out and build a school at <Happy Jack>. So I went to the lumber company, and I said, "Will you build this school for us? We'll pay you rent." And he said, "Oh yes", and so we built a nice little school out there. We paid about six hundred dollars a year rent for a couple of years. And then they said you know that little school's paid for now. Don't pay us anymore rent. Take the money. So we put more windows in the school, it was kind of dark. And we had to put in some, when we, at first our first year there we didn't have the ah sanitary facilities. And then we fixed that up. And then we bought some nice equipment. We got nice desks and everything. But you, we didn't do it in a day, buy things. Something like a home. You buy things that you can. And school districts of course cannot overrun a budget. And that's part of the county school superintendent's responsibility. You keep an eye on the budgets for all the schools. The county school superintendent even keeps an eye on the <Flagstaff> budget, you know, to see that they stay within the budget. That the money- you audit all the bills. Make sure that they're bills that should be paid, that they've been signed properly. And the school office is quite a responsibility but- and we had our problems. We had legal cases and what not. You kind of forget the bad situation and remember the good ones. And it was a wonderful, wonderful experience.

I expect there are many more things to tell. Maybe sometime you could come back, and we'll just talk more about the schools.

This is something maybe you'd like to, I don't think you would. But I would like to say that I think this, I have considered it quite an honor and a privilege to have served eight years on the Arizona State Board of Education. And when I served, I received my appointment by the governor. Governor Pyle appointed me for four years, and Governor Fannin appointed me for four years. So I served four years. And then of course there were- I, a life member of the Arizona Education Association. I always belonged to the Association of, National Association of School Administrators and the state association. (Phone rings)

SUSAN ROGERS: That one article there about you- could you just give the date so that somebody could look those up if they want to see them? You know these different articles about you. The date and what newspaper they're in, and then somebody who goes through this interview can go look them up if they want to.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well I think most of these were in the Arizona Daily Sun. Some were in the Williams News, but they'd be the same article.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Is it running?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, it's running.

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: I always maintained a professional affiliation with the American Association of School Administrators. The Arizona Education Association, I belonged to Delta Kappa Gamma, Delta Gamma Kappa Gamma sorority, of which I am a past president of Gamma chapter. I belong to Delta Kappa Delta Phi. I'm a life member of the Parent Teacher Association. I had belonged to the American Legion Auxiliary for many years and the Daughters of the American Revolution, the Shakespeare Club. I did belong, but I don't at the present time belong to the American Association of University Women. I do belong to the Flagstaff Woman's Club. I am a past matron of the Order of the Eastern Star. And I have belonged for fifty-three years. I have belonged, I'm the past noble grand of the Flagstaff Rebeccas. I have been the state officer of the Pythian Sisters, the grand chief.

I would like to say that rural school consolidation has been accomplished through the years in <Coconino County>. And it didn't all happen at once, you know. But it did help to give the schools a broad, firm tax base and a more economical educational system. In the county school office you must keep abreast of school laws, school finance and innovations in curriculum. I have always credited teachers for the prime importance of good teaching in the classroom. I think we have had many teachers of excellence. I've always said, "Good schools do not happen. People working together build them." And I was always grateful for the opportunity to serve <Coconino County>. And always appreciated the support and the vote that I received during the elections.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you want to just give the date of that newspaper so that-

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Oh, let me get them over here. Do you want to turn that off and I'll give the Coconino Sun?

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what is it?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well there were many articles, but the one article that would briefly tell about my experiences in schoolwork would be Friday, August ninth, 1968. That was my last election.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. Is anything you want to add? Or think we've covered enough for today? Can you think of anything?

MRS. BESSIE KIDD BEST: Well I forgot to tell that they reorganized the Pioneer Historical Society, I think in 1953. And Mr. George Babbitt was the first president, and I was their secretary. And I served in the American Legion. You know that we used to have this; they don't have this anymore. The observance of what they call "I Am An American Day". But, ah, "I Am An American Day". And I, it's the, "I Am An American Day" was an annual celebration by a congressional action in 1940, and had as its purpose the honoring of newly naturalized citizens, and those native born citizens who had reached their majority during the past year and rededicate all Americans to the ideals of citizenship. And I planned the ceremony for that occasion for several years. And well, that's just part of the county school superintendent's work to plan county institutes, to work with educational organizations, and organizations for the benefit of the county schools. And it's been a very interesting and worthwhile experience.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mmm mmm.


