WILBURN W. "SKIPPER" DICK INTERVIEW



John Bury Collection



NAU.OH.30-3 A-C



Interview with W.W. "Skipper" Dick, <Arizona> educator, recorded on November 8, 1974. Interview is taking place in the Dick kitchen. Mrs. Barbara Dicks, narrator’s wife, is also present and makes a few comments from across the room, while working at the kitchen sink, frequently running water and appliances, which obscures not only her own comments, but those of the interviewer and narrator. Distance from the microphone also makes her difficult to decipher. Interview was transcribed 30 years after recording.



Tape 1, Side 1 

Wife's writing of a special education book. 

Birth in <Texas> on a ranch 

Move to <Arizona> at age of 10 

Most Outstanding Student at Phoenix Union High School 

Enrolling in Tempe Normal School (ASU) in 1927 

First marriage in 1929 

Wife's death from pneumonia 

Various business experiences 

Back to school during the Depression 

Becoming a confirmed Democrat 

Loyalty to the Democrats 

Teaching styles and metholds 

Teaching elementary school in <Tolleson> 

Tearcher's salaries, then and now 

Marriage again in 1939 

Son Michael, instructor in pharmaceutical science at the University of Arizona 

Need for vocational schools 

World travels 

Interviewer's experiences in <Alaska>

Tape 1, Side 2 

<Alaska> 

Daughter Susan 

Job at <Kasaan Alaska> 

Conflict with <Kasaan> man over the use of school water 

Religion and the schools 

Accepting position as school principal in <Scottsdale>, 1941 

Masters degree from ASU in 1944 

Position as a school superintendent in <Scottsdale>, 1944-1952 

Conflict with religious leaders over a high school play 

Conflict with president of the P. A.over best use for funds (cooler vs. pavement) 

Running a cotton farm on the Indian reservation, late 1940s 

Firing from job as superintendent in spring of 1953 

Reaction of the students to the firing 

Entering the hotel business

Tape 2, Side 1 

Election to the office of County School Superintendent, 1955 

Incorporation of school districts 

Conflict with El Paso Natural Gas Company over paying of school taxes 

State Superintendent of Public Instructions M.L. Brooks and his scandals 

Defeating Brooks in the Democratic Primary and subsequent election, 1958 

Opposition to Federal funding proposal from the Arizona Republic 

Accomplishments in office not publicized at all by the Arizona Republic 

Accomplishments for education while in office 

Increased state aid to schools 

Sarah Folsum and her supporters in <Paradise Valley> 

More accomplishments 

State junior college system 

Special programs for the retarded and physically handicapped 

State prison education system 

Data processing system 

Developing the curriculum 

Upgrading teacher's certification requirements 

Relation between elected Superintendent and appointed Board of Education 

Control of <Arizona> education by the extreme conservatives

Tape 2, Side 2 

[Blank]

Tape 3, Side 1 

Tuberculosis hospital in <Tempe> 

Valley of the Sun School 

More accomplishments 

Evaluation of small elementary schools 

Enlarging services and research department 

Establishing adult education 

Civil defense program 

Providing education for migrant students 

Sour relationship with Sarah Folsum , opponent in Superintendent race 

Two biggest issues in the campaign 

The "flower" fund 

Sending campaign literature to the school districts 

Accusation from Sarah Folsum that Mr. Dick was secretly running for governor 

The "politicalness" of appointed Superintendent of public instruction 

Lack of requirements for Superintendent, such as degree in education 

Hiring a Superintendent from out of State 

Relationship with the State Legislature and the Governor 

The need for kindergarten 

Unfairness of the Arizona Republic to the Skipper Dick admininstration 

The Arizona Republic monopoly 

Federal aid to education 

Proposal to teach about Communism 

Analogy to need for sex education 

Proposals for changes in State Board of Education 

Lack of desire to be a Superintendent with the present Board of Education

Tape 3, Side 2 

Problems of an appointed Board and an elected Superintendent 

Politics being controlled by a powerful few 

Proudest accomplishments: rewriting textbooks, eliminated teachers' register 

Improving special education 

Beliefs: America will survive if we work for it 

Education for all children 

The issue of racism during the Dick administration 

Problems of bussing 

Cultural pluralism vs. "melting pot" 

The role of the State Superintendent 

Availability of textbooks in <Arizona> 

Phonics 

Should the Superintendent be an administrator or an educator? 

Neighborhood Youth Corps 

Bernie Wynn of the Arizona Republic 

A news release on the NYC position in the U.S. Office of Education





JIM BURY: My wife just published a special ed book with a professor up there, on learning disabilities. She’ll be speaking down here at the ACLB conference next weekend—I guess the tenth. She’s getting pretty involved in special ed, and I was interested in your getting it going. 



SKIPPER DICK: It’s quit a deal. 



JIM BURY: Oh, it’s important. 



SKIPPER DICK: (inaudible) 



JIM BURY: Okay, we’re in business, we’re being taped, and I gave you a questionnaire there. Would you like another copy of it? I think you already have it (



SKIPPER DICK: I have it right over there.) [unclear, both talking at same time]. 



SKIPPER DICK: I figured you wanted my background first, and this type of thing. If you want to go through there and ask these questions, I’d be very happy to [unclear, both talking at same time]. 



JIM BURY: I want to start with your own background. I know, if I remember correct, you were born in <Texas>—right? 



SKIPPER DICK: I was born in <Eastland Texas>. 



JIM BURY: Yes, sir. 



SKIPPER DICK: That’s just outside of <Fort Worth> and <Dallas>, about a hundred and some odd miles. I came from off the farm. My father was a rancher there for forty years, in <Texas>. Just about then, they struck oil. He left and headed for <Arizona>. He’d heard about <Arizona>. (laughs) He came out here and he got him a farm, and raised a family of eight. I’m one of eight boys. My mother never had a girl, and I wore curls until I was five, six years old, and had a few fights about that. 



JIM BURY: I’ll bet you did. 



SKIPPER DICK: I still have curly hair, but I mop it down quite a bit. (laughs) I was born on March 20, 1907. That makes me sixty-eight years old at the present time. 



JIM BURY: Same year my dad was born. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. As I said, I came to <Arizona> when I was about ten years old. (unclear) south <Phoenix> (unclear) graduated there from elementary school. Went to Phoenix High School and graduated there in four years’ time. While I was at the Phoenix Union High School, I was given the Most Outstanding Student at the Phoenix High School. Now, I have a cup in there that I could show you—I still have it. 



JIM BURY: Phoenix Union High School was the only high school? 



SKIPPER DICK: That was the only high school we had there at that time. 



JIM BURY: Why did you get this outstanding student award—scholastically or sports? I know you were great in sports. 



SKIPPER DICK: All-around. I was an outstanding athlete, but they gave it as an all-around student. That’s what they put on it. That’s what I have on it at the present time. I think primarily I wasn’t a great student. I was a good average student—maybe a little better than average. But I was an all-around student, I guess. I was active in a lot of things: student body government—we had student body government (unclear). Bobby Goldwater was the president of my class at that time. Old Barry flunked out the first year, so he wasn’t there. 



JIM BURY: But he went back to <Virginia>, didn’t he? 



SKIPPER DICK: His folks sent him out of town. Old Barry just played around—he didn’t really study. Of course he’s made his mark in the thing now. But anyway, I grew up with the boys. But Bobby was a smart boy, and he’s still makin’ money, I think—this type of thing. He went into the banking industry.



Anyway, I graduated Phoenix High School in 1927, and went to Arizona State University. I might say that I was best all-around athlete in the state. 



JIM BURY: Let me ask you, did you go to Arizona State, or did you go to U. of A. at <Tucson>? 



SKIPPER DICK: Arizona State. It was Tempe College there at that time. 



JIM BURY: Tempe Normal, then? 



SKIPPER DICK: Tempe Normal, yes, at that time. It wasn’t a very big enrollment, and this type of thing. So I went over, and the Depression came on in 1929, I believe, and this type of thing. I guess I was successful over there—especially in athletics. I played four years—football and basketball, baseball. 



JIM BURY: Is this where you got the name "Skipper"? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, no, I got that in Phoenix High School. A fellow by the name of Harry Gray [phonetic] (unclear). And I was playin’ there one night, playin’ Glendale High School. Just before the game started, we were shootin’ long and short shots, shooting and kind of skippin’, get to where you could get the ball to make a short jump. Harry Gray said, "Look at him skip!” So next morning, I guess I was (unclear) they stuck that "Skipper" Dick on me, and (unclear). Nobody knows my name is Wilburn. 



JIM BURY: I do. 



SKIPPER DICK: But nobody calls me that but my folks, see. But anyway, that’s how it all came about. 



JIM BURY: I had wondered about that. 



SKIPPER DICK: But anyway…. (aside about coffee) I graduated from Arizona State University. I suppose you want the whole history, do you not, about life and all this type of thing? 



JIM BURY: Yeah, I’d like to get as much of your own background. I sort of like that. 



SKIPPER DICK: I married (



BARBARA DICK: Oh, do you have to go into all that?) 



SKIPPER DICK: a [child]hood sweetheart at that time. 



JIM BURY: When was this? 



SKIPPER DICK: This was about in 1929. About eight days later, she had pneumonia, and she passed away. 



JIM BURY: Gosh, that must have been a shock. I didn’t know this. 



SKIPPER DICK: Anyway, I went in business with my dad, ranchin’ and this type of thing; worked in cement and so forth and so on; and finally went into business in <Casa Grande> as a restaurant. I had the Minute Café in <Casa Grande> about 1929. 



JIM BURY: What was the name of that café? 



SKIPPER DICK: Minute Café. 



JIM BURY: Okay, now, you started at <Tempe> in 1927, and you went, what, two years? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I finished in ’27, yes. I finished my second year. I dropped out in the second year. [Recording in kitchen, wife doing dishes, sound of running water obscures comments.] 



JIM BURY: And then you went into business with your dad, and then down to <Casa Grande>. Okay. 



SKIPPER DICK: And then the Depression hit, and I lost everything I had at that time—all the equipment and everything. So I went back to school. 



JIM BURY: Where did you go back to school? 



SKIPPER DICK: Arizona State University. Well, <Tempe>. I went back to school over there. Let’s see, I think I went a semester the first time, and then dropped out again, and stayed out a semester, then went back again. But that’s all in the records somewhere. Went back again and finished. 



JIM BURY: This was the time, also, you became even more active in sports, if I remember. You got some sort of award for a southwestern conference? Is this correct? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, I was All Southwestern in football at that time. 



JIM BURY: And also baseball? 



SKIPPER DICK: I pitched on the baseball team. And I think I (unclear) three times (unclear) 1,200 people there, and about 800 were women, most of ‘em, teachers’ college at that time. 



JIM BURY: Did you take a teachers’ college course at that time? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, I did. 



JIM BURY: Preparing for teaching? 



SKIPPER DICK: Preparing to be a teacher, that’s correct. And the first year, my dad nicely paid my way the first year. The Depression hit, and I went to work in the dining hall (unclear). And when I got out, (unclear), I got a job in <Tolleson Arizona>, as a fourth-grade teacher. I started there the beginning of my (unclear). 



JIM BURY: This would be 1933? 



SKIPPER DICK: ’33, correct. 



JIM BURY: And I also remember in one of your biographies you said this was, of course, with the Roosevelt administration, and that’s when you became a confirmed Democrat. Is that true? 



SKIPPER DICK: (laughs) Well, yes. 



JIM BURY: Did FDR make you a Democrat? 



SKIPPER DICK: You see, I gave myself my middle name—Wilson. My folks only gave me—yes, after Woodrow Wilson—and I named myself. My dad was a Democrat, and he was a Democrat, because he said that every time the Republicans got into office, he made it tough on the farmers, and he was a farmer. 



JIM BURY: Every time the Republicans got into office? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. The Democrats seemed to be a little more favorable to the farmers and this type thing. I guess that’s the reason—I grew up in a Democratic family, just like other people grow up in families. As I grew up and began to find out what politics was all about, I thought the Democratic Party represented the common man, not necessarily the wealthy people of the country. Since then, I’ve learned that I suspect 300 families in the <United States>, probably, call the shots in the way this country is run now.



Anyway, these are my beliefs. It might be 500 families, but Rockefeller is a little bit of a—you start to see that a little bit, what you can do with money. And in politics, (unclear) money. I think they made a little study in <Arizona>—Wes Fogel [phonetic] did—75 percent of the time, the politicians [who] spent the most money won their office. I believe I got that from him. 



JIM BURY: I know they pointed out in this election it was particularly true that the best-financed campaigns were the ones that won nationwide. 



SKIPPER DICK: Anyway, you might be interested in knowing how I got my first job. 



JIM BURY: I would. I very much would. 



SKIPPER DICK: I was a pitcher on the college team for four years over there. This was 1933, in the middle of the Depression. No teachers wanted to give up a job then. Everybody was holding everything that they had. <Tolleson> had a little baseball team, town team, that played every Saturday. So the superintendent there, Harry Sams [phonetic], was interested in athletics and baseball, so they invited me to come out and pitch one time. So I was about eighteen (unclear). 



JIM BURY: One way of gettin’ a job! (laughs) 



SKIPPER DICK: And, when it was over, they said, "Would you like to have a job?” Well, I had applications everyplace. So I was hired as a fourth-grade teacher at Tolleson Elementary School. That’s when I started. 



JIM BURY: I want to ask you two questions. One—to get a little off the subject—but I don’t want to forget it later…. 



SKIPPER DICK: Perfectly all right. 



JIM BURY: And that’s your Democratic affiliation. You’ve been described by other people who have worked with you as sort of the politician, in the sense of being the party man, a loyal Democrat. I’m using these words in a positive, not a negative way: that you were very loyal to the party, that you identified your job, your philosophy, by your party affiliation. Now, do you think that is a correct statement today? 



SKIPPER DICK: Some things that happened just a little bit with the Democratic Party that I was not in favor of. I think maybe the last ten years the party was taken over by a group of people that I couldn’t go along with. I didn’t break with the party, because there are a lot of things that I stood for, and I thought that the party should stand for. These people took the party, and they hurt it. I think that’s one of the reasons why we lost out to the Republicans, because they went too far out on a lot of it. Now, this is my own belief. 



JIM BURY: I appreciate that. That’s what I want. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, up until then, I felt the Democratic Party represented most of the people. 



JIM BURY: Okay, now the other question I wanted to ask you is, What type of teacher were you? I’ve also taught in the lower grades. In fact, I taught in one-room schools in <Alaska>. That’s how I started teaching for five years. Could you describe your teaching experience? Do you consider yourself a schoolhouse individual? Can you relate to the teachers in a schoolhouse? What happened to you in your first teaching experiences?—particularly during the Depression. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, my first teaching experience, as I said, I started in, in the fourth grade. We had certain objectives at that time that the fourth grade should accomplish [by] the end of the year. One of ‘em was they were supposed to know the multiplication tables in the fourth grade, at that time. Now, of course, a lot of things have changed since then, and I won’t say that. But I was a strict disciplinarian. We had discipline in our day. It’s not like it is now. If we had to chastise a kid just a little bit sometime when he got too far out of line, we did. At that time and place, it was in line to do this. We felt we were the parents. When the kid came to school, we felt that we had the same right that a parent had at home, to teach the child, and teaching discipline along with it. Now, that was the old philosophy.



Now then, I might say to you, that something happened while I was there. I was there two or three years. The superintendent, myself, and one other fellow out of the school district, went to Stanford University for a summer session in 1935. We got Paul Hand [phonetic] and Dr. Hanna [phonetic] was the high school man, and Paul Hand…. Well, Hanna, I guess, was the elementary school man. He was just a new man himself, and quite a hotshot, probably wasn’t teaching. You would take a project and teach everything from one project. Just came into being in 1935, and this man got it, and we got saturated with it. My superintendent came home, real sold on this method of teaching, and I was sold on it. We took our desks, and we took ‘em off of those little strips they were on, straightened around. We made a big circle, and we started the project method of teaching. We were gonna teach mathematics, we were gonna teach multiplication tables, we were gonna teach language arts, we were gonna teach everything from a project. And I remember that I took a project, Indian project. And I built a tipi in the middle of the room. And we brought everything that we could think of, to school, with us. The kids brought every Indian stuff, and we tried to write about Indians, and we tried to work this thing all in. I was to have this project. We were havin’ a great time. I must have had it a couple of months. Finally, we about run out of Indian things.



The superintendent came in one day and said, "Skipper, how you gettin’ along with the multiplication tables?” Well, we just couldn’t teach multiplication tables with the Indian project like this. So we straightened our desks back up, we went to work on multiplication tables. I tried every way in the world that I knew to teach multiplication tables. You have to drill and drill and drill and drill, because it’s very difficult to learn. I feel today that many, many children are handicapped because they don’t know the multiplication tables after they finish even high school. But in our day and time, the superintendent said, "You see….” Now, all of ‘em didn’t learn it, but we did our best. We went into fractions, and we went into decimal points the next time out, and I worked right on through the grades, right on up. I taught the eighth grade. 



JIM BURY: In 1950, I would have been in fourth grade at Madison 1. We had to do the same thing. 



SKIPPER DICK: Okay. A lot of teachers don’t believe in drilling and this type of thing. They’ve got way off base and so forth and so on. I know there are a lot of fine methods of teaching, but what counts is the results at the end. 



JIM BURY: Well, you reflect what appears to me to be a pretty consistent point of view among the people I’ve talked to: those people who have represented Sarah Folsom [phonetic], who’s no longer with us. Now, I haven’t talked to Dr. Harkins yet. I will next week. And I know Dr. Shoftstall. I see earlier superintendents all feel that as the view from the bridge, when they can see everything, and when they look back at their own experience, we should get back to fundamentals. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah. I don’t think there’s any question about it. But somebody will come out with something new, and educators are too quick to grab off of it. Now, I don’t know where we ought to go back to here. You want to go back and get a little background, or do you just want to get this in? Doesn’t make any difference. 



JIM BURY: No, I want to keep going, because it’s very important to me to get a lot of biographical background, because I want to show the person. We left off about fourth grade, you’re in <Tolleson>. 



SKIPPER DICK: I taught through fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grades over there. I got a good foundation in the elementary schools of what we taught and what we believed in, and this type of thing. I know in physiology, I had those kids way up. I taught, maybe lookin’ back now, too far along. I required them to know all the bones in the head, and all this type of thing. And I had them drawin’ some stuff that I’d been given at college and so forth and so on, and thought I was doin’ just a real good, big, bang-up job.



But anyway, this <Tolleson> background that I had in the field of education (unclear). He’s dead now—was my superintendent. We just thought we were doin’ a great job. (unclear) 



Some of the people might think that the salaries are pretty low now, but I went to work at $1,100 a year. Of course it did buy more then. I feel that the teachers have gained, from the time that I first got my money, in purchasing power. I feel they have gained. They may lose back again—I don’t know. But I feel they have gained. If you just had a little money, it’s really difficult in this day and time, but you know, when I grew up at home….



This is going back a little bit, you can pick it up—but my folks taught me two things: honesty, and it wasn’t a sin to work hard. And I still like to work. These are two things that were taught to me. I went to Phoenix High School, I rode a bicycle six miles to school, and six miles back. When I went out for basketball, we practiced after school, I rode home sometimes in the night, and cold. And I carried paper routes, and so did my brothers, and everything, so forth and so on. Anyway, that’s just a little background.



But anyway, just when I went to college, and my wife’s a little touchy about this. And you understand—well, you heard her—I married a girl when I graduated, we went to school together. We lived together about a year, we built a home there in 1935, with money that we had. We hired people to come in and help build this home and so forth. One day I was playin’ baseball and she went to church—she was a Mormon girl—and on the way home, she had a wreck. Just about killed her dad. It was my loss. 



JIM BURY: You had your share! 



SKIPPER DICK: I lost two wives. But anyway…. 



JIM BURY: Wow. I appreciate knowing that. When you get the transcript, if you want it in…. 



SKIPPER DICK: You can do what you want to. 



JIM BURY: It’s important for me to show the person. 



SKIPPER DICK: I thought you wanted the whole thing. 



JIM BURY: I appreciate it. 



SKIPPER DICK: You’re the only one that ever has. Anyway, I kept teaching, I kept living right where I was, and I met my wife over at <Tempe>. She was a secretary to the placement service. 



JIM BURY: When would this be? 



SKIPPER DICK: This would be 1938, I guess. We were married in 1939, my present wife. I had no children by my former wives. We have four children now. We have a young man out to the University of Arizona who is a clinical instructor. He graduated with a pharmacy degree and he went to work in hospitals and this type of thing, and he ended up down at the University of Arizona. Did his master’s degree, and he made a study on medicines. He found out that about 15 percent of the medicine that patients took in hospitals were detrimental to ‘em, never should have been given to ‘em. 



JIM BURY: I believe it. 



SKIPPER DICK: He’s workin’ with doctors on the thing. So this year, he and another young fella, was hired by the University of Arizona to put in a hospital pharmacy class (unclear). 



JIM BURY: What is his name? 



SKIPPER DICK: His name is Michael. 



JIM BURY: And how old is Michael? 



SKIPPER DICK: Michael’s about twenty-seven. 



JIM BURY: And which one of your children: first, second, third, or fourth? 



SKIPPER DICK: He’s third—three boys and a girl. He calls himself Lawrence. His middle name was Michael Lawrence Dick, but he didn’t like Michael, so he calls himself Lawrence Dick. Anyway, that’s the third son.



My second son is a salesman. He went to <Flagstaff>, but he wouldn’t study at <Flagstaff>, and finally, after a year, year and a half, we gave up on it. He lives right here in <Tempe>. Two grandchildren. I sent him to vocational school. I’m very strong on vocation, and if you get my literature and stuff, you’ll find that out. We made some studies while we were in there. Jarculless [phonetic] was my vocational man. His studies show that we need about 15-20 percent college graduates to run this whole country, ideally. That’s what his study showed. And that we ought to have more vocational people trained to go out in the field and do the jobs that need to be done. And we have too many comin’ out of high school…. Now, at that time we had a tremendous charge on dropouts. 



JIM BURY: This was when you were superintendent, you had a dropout program. I read something (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: So we put this book out at that time. It got real hot, about dropouts. And so this is a book that we published at that time on dropouts. 



JIM BURY: Now, who does he work for as a salesman?—your son. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) It’s Tiers TBA. T-I-E-R-S. 



JIM BURY: And his name is? 



SKIPPER DICK: His name is Richard Dick. Now Richard, as I said, I sent him to Phoenix High School, to vocational school, and he took up automobile mechanics and he was a…. 



JIM BURY: [confirms spelling of Tiers] 



SKIPPER DICK: Now, this boy had all these other abilities that we didn’t find out ‘til he graduated from high school. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Also went to salesman school. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. Well, later on. Anyway, this boy went through high school at <Scottsdale> over here. 



JIM BURY: Right. When did he go to high school? 



SKIPPER DICK: Let’s see, when did he graduate, Barbara? 



BARBARA DICK: (inaudible) 



JIM BURY: That’s okay. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, anyway, he went to <Scottsdale>, and was short one credit when he got to senior year. And they told him, "Why don’t you take auto mechanics or one of these fields over in that deal?” Well, he made the only straight "A” or "1” grade he’d ever made in his life, in this field. 



JIM BURY: He found out something. 



SKIPPER DICK: He was a natural in that field. But he didn’t like the courses of study at <Flagstaff>. He just wouldn’t buckle down. He’d write in English and this type of thing. So I had people in my department give him some tests and exams, because I think everybody ought to know whether their child has a natural ability to take college courses. I’ve seen many people force their [children] into college without having…. 



JIM BURY: You were in the paper, accusing parents of that once. I have the article, "Dick Attacks Parents.” 



SKIPPER DICK: True. I got onto ‘em at Scottsdale High School. Anyway, finally I said, "Well, why don’t you just—if you’re not going to go to college and succeed and try to work, why don’t you just drop out and go in the service? Go in Uncle Sam’s army.” He came back down here and he went in to try to join the Marines. He had ear trouble. This boy couldn’t hear too good. So, you see, here our public schools…. And all the elementary schools, we had nurses check ‘em all out for this type of thing, and we had ‘em in high school. And this boy can’t hear high sounds, so they wouldn’t take him in the service.



So I sent him to vocational school, and he was a natural. He worked for Cadillac Motors for a while, and they tried to push him too hard, and he just quit. Then he worked in swimming pools. But then he got into the salesmanship thing—he’s a natural, very successful, very successful. The fact is, he sold so much stuff last year that we just made a trip to <Ireland>. He won their trip, and we went along and paid our way to go with. That’s a shillelagh right up there, that I brought back from <Ireland>. We’re travelers, my wife and I. 



JIM BURY: That’s what I gathered. 



SKIPPER DICK: These are from all over the world. Every one of these things, I can tell you what each one of ‘em means. This is a Russian bear. We’ve been in the Kremlin. That other’s in <Venice>. You see, that glass deal? <Venice>. That other’s from <Argentina>, that bolo deal where you throw the stuff. And the other one’s from <Portugal>. This other little base of a thing up there is quite a study. I was sent, along with twelve other chief state school officers, to West <Germany> to study their vocational system. 



JIM BURY: I remember that. 



SKIPPER DICK: I spent a year there. And one of those people over there, I admired this thing in his home one night, when he was having a little party. When I got ready to go, he said, "This is yours.” And I said, "Now, just a minute. You misunderstood me.” He forced me to take this with me. And anyway, we went to <South America>, that’s Inca. That’s pisca [phonetic]. That’s their drink in <South America>. That’s a shillelagh, and this other little deal, little Indian-lookin’ thing up there, is <Mexico>. And this other is <Canada>. And this is <Ethiopia>, that lion up there. I stood and watched Haile Selassie make his speech. We were there at the time he put him on his forty-third (unclear). And of course these two heads here are from <Egypt>. We flew to <Egypt>. Then we went to <Kenya>—three days through the forests, taking pictures of animals, elephants and all this type of thing. 



JIM BURY: Boy, I’d love that. 



SKIPPER DICK: Then went on and ended up in <Tanzania>. 



JIM BURY: Have you ever been to <Alaska>? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, we made that trip two years ago. There’s the <Alaska>, right there. See that guy over there? And see that there? 



JIM BURY: I see the walrus, yes. Soapstone carvings. Those are beautiful soapstone carvings. Wow. 



SKIPPER DICK: This is stuff that we gathered when we went through <Kenya>. They carve all kinds of things. This is one of the spears, practice spears. 



JIM BURY: It goes well on that fireplace. 



SKIPPER DICK: Thank you. 



JIM BURY: Did you put in that shelf up there? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, that shelf was there. 



JIM BURY: It’s so natural, it’s just like you planned for it. 



SKIPPER DICK: Perfect. Perfect. 



JIM BURY: I just wondered if you put it in there. 



SKIPPER DICK: No, we did not. But anyway, you see a lot of people buy a bunch of knickknacks that don’t mean anything, but these mean something. 



JIM BURY: Oh, sure they do, yeah. 



SKIPPER DICK: And I took pictures all over the world, every place I’ve been. I guess our first trip was in ’61, over to <Japan>—<Hawaii>, <Japan>, <Thailand>, and so forth and so on. 



JIM BURY: Well, we’re hopin’ to start traveling’ again, now that our little kids are finally growing. 



SKIPPER DICK: We started, and we like it. And of course we’re going now, down to—we’re going Christmastime. We’re taking my other son and his wife. He’s teaching in the Tempe Elementary District (unclear). 



JIM BURY: What’s his name? 



SKIPPER DICK: His name is Robert Dick. He teaches science (unclear). (to wife) Where are we goin’ on this trip, Barbara? 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Caribbean. 



SKIPPER DICK: Caribbean. I couldn’t think of Caribbean. We’re gonna make a Caribbean cruise on a boat. Did you say you’d been to <Alaska>? 



JIM BURY: Yeah, I lived there. My wife and I taught there for five years. 



SKIPPER DICK: Where did you live? 



JIM BURY: Well, we started in <Fairbanks>, and we also worked at the University of Alaska in <Fairbanks> for a while. We taught in southeastern <Alaska> on the islands, off of <Ketchikan> and off of <Juneau>, in the Tlingit Indian and logging (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: We were in <Ketchikan>. 



JIM BURY: Yeah. But then we were out on Admiralty Island, from <Ketchikan>. And then our last teaching assignment…. 



SKIPPER DICK: You worked for the Indian Service? 



JIM BURY: No, we were in the state-operated school service, which is the same thing now. See, in <Alaska>, the state-operated rural schools are taking over the BIA schools, which was something that (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: We took the Island Princess for five days on that inland deal. Stopped at <Ketchikan>, you know. Then you went….









SKIPPER DICK: …find worthless land. People who owned the land was forcin’ ‘em to pay more money. (laughs) 



JIM BURY: A lot of pipe. You mentioned three boys. I want to get your daughter in here, or she’ll be slighted. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah. Our daughter is named Susan, and is married to an army man by the name of Gray—her name is Susan Gray [phonetic]. And he now is in <New Jersey>, Fort Monmouth. He’s a general’s aide. He’s a young man of about twenty-five years old. He’s gone up very rapid in the service, and he’s a general’s aide. If you’ve ever known anything about the service, the general has somebody to kinda look after his business. 



JIM BURY: Administrative assistant. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. And this boy is a graduate of the University of Indiana in business administration. He’s been in the service, he’s got his master’s degree already, goin’ great guns. 



JIM BURY: Is she a housewife? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, she’s a housewife, has two children. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) She graduated, she has her teaching degree. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, she has her teaching degree—she never used it. 



JIM BURY: Now, where did Susan graduate from? 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) <Bloomington>. 



JIM BURY: <Illinois>? 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Uh-huh. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, that’s University of Indiana. 



JIM BURY: That’s right. <Bloomington Indiana>—not <Illinois>. Excuse me. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) And James’ wife’s got her teaching degree. And Robert’s wife’s got (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: We’ve got an educational family. 



JIM BURY: That’s good. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) I even had mine. Got a letter from Susie (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, did you?! Oh, fine. 



JIM BURY: Now, let’s see, we left you finishing up in <Tolleson>. We left you about 1938-39. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, yes, when we were married in 1939. 



JIM BURY: You were in <Tolleson> then still? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, just about that time, I took a job at <Cashion Arizona>. 



JIM BURY: That’s C-A-S-H-I-O-N? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. Well, let’s see, what do they call that school district? 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Littleton. 



JIM BURY: Okay, Littleton. That’s the way I’ve got it in your bio. 



SKIPPER DICK: But it’s Cashion. We called it. Anyway, I think there were eight teachers in that district. My boss told me, "I don’t know whether I’d advise you to go over there and take the job or not, because people don’t last there more than two years.” Just a very tiny little place, and was owned and operated by the farmers around there. Owned by the farmers, and they run that school. 



JIM BURY: County outfit? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah. And I was so ambitious that I would have taken anything. I’d been teaching eight years, and I was looking for something a little bit further up. So that was my first administrative job. There wasn’t an office, wasn’t anything like this. I was the boys’ coach, and I was the girls’ coach, softball coach, and I was everything, nearly, in the school. I had no secretary, no nothin’. I taught the eighth grade. And no office, no nothin’, just a run-down little tiny school there with eight teachers. It’s very interesting over there, the things that did happen to me. I got my teeth cut at <Cashion Arizona>.



The man next to the school district owned a bunch of cabins and things, and so he had tied-into the school district’s water system. 



JIM BURY: I see. What type cabins were these? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, these are cabins he rented out. 



JIM BURY: For tourists or farm workers? 



SKIPPER DICK: Anybody that wanted to rent ‘em. And I wasn’t forced to, but I knew that I had better live in one of his places. So I lived in one of his places. He wasn’t on the school board…. 



JIM BURY: But he might as well have been. 



SKIPPER DICK: His son-in-law was the janitor. (



JIM BURY:I’ve run into some of those.) 



SKIPPER DICK: So we got into a two-to-one proposition over there where we had two men on one side, and one on the other. And two men decided that it wasn’t right that this man should use the school water. So they tell Mr. Dick to cut that pipe off. Well, I cut the pipe off. This man got on the board, and one day one of the teachers said, "Skipper, you know that we were fired night before last, don’t you?” I said, "No, I didn’t know anything about it.” And he let us go! (laughs) 



JIM BURY: So he cut you off! 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. And I worked, I run everything, I worked twenty-four hours a day there, right on this deal. So they released me over there. 



JIM BURY: And this was about when? 



SKIPPER DICK: About 1941. Yeah, first of the season—oh, last, I guess. I might say, too, that wherever I go, I make wonderful friends, and I make real bad enemies ‘cause (unclear). But we had meetings, and people were just not gonna stand for this. They were gonna keep me there. So we had a big meeting, and the big farmers came in, which had the power, and they said to these people, "Now, look, we’ll probably reconsider this thing. Let’s don’t get too excited, and so forth and so on.” The next day, some fella came through, lookin’ for a job, and they hired him. (laughs) So anyway, I thought the world fell in on me. 



JIM BURY: I would, too. 



SKIPPER DICK: I might say this, that I never did know what’s best for me. I thought I knew at the time, but things worked for my best interest, all these times that things happened to me. 



JIM BURY: I’ve gotta throw somethin’ at you right now. 



SKIPPER DICK: Throw it! 



JIM BURY: Okay. Because of what you’re talking about, fate, or how things happened to you: There are two people that followed you in office, Sarah Folsom and W. P. Shoftstall, very religious individuals. Do you consider yourself a religious individual? Their religion, actually, had a lot to do with the way they ran their office, and run it today, in their approach to the office, the fact that they believe prayers should be reinstituted in schools, and what have you. How do you feel about your own religious commitment, if any (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: Prayers in school? 



JIM BURY: Well, that’s awfully specific. 



SKIPPER DICK: I know what you’re talkin’ about. You’re talking about Christmas and this type of thing. Do I believe that we ought to have Christmas and believe in God? You ask me do I believe in Jesus Christ and God, and I’m gonna tell you, yes, I do. But I’m not a person that goes to church every Sunday. But as I said, I was raised to be honest, and the Ten Commandments. And I’ve tried to live by them. I’ve tried to pattern my life more or less that way, but I’m not a person that goes to church every Sunday and this type of thing. We took our children to church when they were young, and so forth and so on, and I don’t go to church every Sunday. 



JIM BURY: Well, I appreciate it, because there’s a definite position that I think both of these two individuals have taken, as far as this is concerned—particularly, I think, in their office. 



SKIPPER DICK: I understand. 



JIM BURY: I don’t know if you’ve followed (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: I’ve followed (unclear), I’ve seen some of his speeches, and this type of thing. Yes, I’ve seen some of his speeches. But I think that the schools should—if the local district wants to offer a prayer, and the board’s in favor of it, and this type of thing, I think they should have a right to do it. 



JIM BURY: Sort of a local option. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, I think it’s a local option thing. I don’t think you ought to be forced to. And I think at Christmastime, if they want to have a Christmas ceremony in honor of Jesus Christ and our way of religion that we think this country was built on, I think they should have a right to do that, yes. I’m not against that. But I’m not over-religious. As I say, I live my religion. I don’t go to church and this type of thing.



While we’re talking about this, I want to bring this up. I might just pick it up, though, like this. I had made application for a position at <Scottsdale Arizona>. They had a position come open. They fired Worthy Ragsdale [phonetic] over there in the middle of the year, for some reason or other. I don’t know why, yet. But after I lost this job in <Kasaan>, my superintendent over in <Tolleson>, where I had taught eight years, said, "C’mon back and teach for me. I’ve got a job for you. I told you I’d have a job for you. I told you that this might happen to you.” So I went back and I started teachin’ for him. I taught about two months. They got ahold of me in <Scottsdale> and said, "We’d like to have you take this principalship in <Scottsdale Arizona>.” 



JIM BURY: And you started there in ’42? 



SKIPPER DICK: I think it was Thanksgiving Day (to wife) wasn’t it, in ’41, that we came over here? 



BARBARA DICK: (inaudible) 



SKIPPER DICK: 1941. We took this position in <Scottsdale> as an elementary principal. Now, the Scottsdale District is set up with a high school and elementary as one district. It’s not a union high school, if you know what I mean. It’s all one district, with a superintendent over the whole thing, at that time. Anyway, as I said, I came to <Scottsdale>. In 1944, I got my master’s degree from Arizona State University over here. 



JIM BURY: And what did you get your master’s in? 



SKIPPER DICK: On a historical thesis—one of the first written in the state. 



JIM BURY: About what? 



SKIPPER DICK: About the Scottsdale Public School System. And I wrote the only history, I guess, that <Scottsdale>’s really ever had—or real, authentic history. Now, there’s some fella came into town and wrote a little history about <Scottsdale>, but a lot of the local people are not happy about it. Now, the new people don’t know nothing about the old <Scottsdale>. This is a historical thesis, and one of the first written in 1944. 



JIM BURY: Now, this master’s would be in education? And administration, specifically, at this time? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. Well, it was a historical thesis. Yes, I was workin’ on my master’s degree because I had been offered a superintendent’s job at <Scottsdale>. 



JIM BURY: Right, so this was in preparation for that. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, we had a little eastern man came in there, and he didn’t know anything about high school kids. He wore a big hat, and they just run him out of <Scottsdale>. 



JIM BURY: That sounds like what happened in <Alaska> to a lot of people from <California>. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, they just run him out. But I’ve been told this many times, and I had an outstanding teacher tell me this: I never should have left high school. I should have stayed there, because I worked well with high school kids. I understood ‘em, I tried to understand ‘em, I tried to be fair and honest and this type of thing. And a small school, only about 500. I had a secretary, and that’s it. We didn’t have all the people that they have in schools now. And all of us ran the school. We’d have a teachers’ meeting and we made our decisions with the teachers. I never did think I was the smartest man that ever lived, because I had a lot of ways—I knew I had teachers in their fields, and all along, that knew a lot more than I did. I was supposed to be the administrator, and we worked together. And this followed with me on to the state department of education. I never could run that thing with an iron hand—none whatsoever. Now, some other people—one in particular I know, and he’s a good friend of mine—he felt that he had to do everything. I never felt that. I delegated my authority to people to do it. And I think you’ll get this if you ask some of the people that worked for me, that I did delegate it, and what they did, I gave them credit for. I didn’t try to take all the credit, except I had to take a certain amount so I could be re-elected (unclear). 



JIM BURY: You were principal then of Scottsdale Elementary. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. 



JIM BURY: How long were you in that before you became superintendent? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, from ’41 to ’44. I took it in ’44. 



JIM BURY: Superintendent? 



SKIPPER DICK: That’s right. 



JIM BURY: Of the elementary and high school. 



SKIPPER DICK: That’s correct. 



JIM BURY: The whole district. 



SKIPPER DICK: That’s correct. 



JIM BURY: And how many teachers did you have under you then, would you say, roughly? 



SKIPPER DICK: Not too many in the high school. Let’s see, we had about [500?] kids. I’m guessing eighteen or twenty. 



JIM BURY: So it grew quite a bit. I remember the controversy over you being fired, in 1953? 



SKIPPER DICK: ’52, I believe. 



JIM BURY: Yeah, I don’t want to touch on—well, we’re getting close to (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah, we’re getting pretty close to it. 



JIM BURY: There was how many—they said fifty out of fifty-one teachers signed a petition for you to stay on. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I just gave you the high school teachers. Now, in the elementary school system over there, I don’t know how many we had over there at the time. But out of eight grades, some of them were divided, two or three teachers and this type of thing. I suspect we had twenty-five or thirty over there. There might have been as many as, in the last year there, sixty teachers, maybe, in the whole system. See, it was very small at that particular time. 



JIM BURY: Now, you were in <Scottsdale>—I’m trying to get my dates correct here—from 1941 until ’52. So you were with them ten years. 



SKIPPER DICK: Unless somebody finds out differently, I was in the school district as superintendent and principal longer than anybody else that’s ever had it. 



JIM BURY: When did the problems start with you and the school board? And I see particularly this fellow named Messinger. (



SKIPPER DICK: Yes.) 



JIM BURY: When did this start? Was this something that slowly developed, or was it something that took you by surprise? 



SKIPPER DICK: No. I’ll give you a little background on that. 



JIM BURY: I’d appreciate it. 



SKIPPER DICK: I want to throw in one little other thing. You brought religion up, and this type of thing. I was a Baptist, I was brought up in the Baptist Church. I took my kids to church every Sunday to the Baptist church right there by the high school, right close to where I lived. And my oldest son was baptized in the Baptist Church. But I had an outstanding person in charge of school plays and this type of thing. He was a good one. He belonged to the Baptist Church. And he put on a play, and the insinuation in it was that one of the girls [i.e., a character in the play] had been runnin’ around, and thought she might have been pregnant. But it turned out she wasn’t. 



JIM BURY: Times have changed! 



SKIPPER DICK: Now, that’s all that was ever in that play. Now, this play that we put on was certified by the high school—they got a national organization (unclear). Well, it was certified by them as bein’ okay, and not anything risky or anything else. 



JIM BURY: I remember that play (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: We went over to—Camelback Inn invited us to put it on over there. They thought it would be good. So we put it on, and Monday morning, every preacher in town was in my office. 



JIM BURY: And they didn’t appreciate it. 



SKIPPER DICK: I was way off base. And I didn’t quibble about it, I just said that I thought the play was all right, and backed my people up who put it on, and I didn’t send my children back to the Baptists, ‘cause the Baptist minister was there, and he was one of the leaders of that. Some of the people stopped me from goin’ to church every Sunday. That might be the wrong way to look at it, but I felt if they were that narrow-minded, they weren’t workin’ in the best interest of the school or anybody else.



So anyway, you were talkin’ about our troubles. We had a P. A.president, and right now I can’t think of her name. And we had a little money to spend, and she wanted to put a cooler—we didn’t have any coolers at that time on this [platform?]. She wanted to put a couple of coolers—one on her son’s room—and she was a doctor’s wife, I think—and another one on the so forth and so on. And I said that I’d like to have it [i.e., the funds] do a little paving out here where our buses come in all the time. It was so dusty that it was pretty hard—many times there was much dust there. And I wanted to spend the $300 on trying to do something about that yard. And so we had a little run-in there, and I lost to her and her following in <Paradise Valley>, ‘cause she was similar to Mrs. Rubicom [phonetic]. She led the fight against me out there (unclear). 



JIM BURY: This confrontation with your P. A.president, and also the play. Now, this took place when, roughly?—in the early fifties? Would this be about ’51…. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, this was in the latter part of—this might have started in the latter part of the forties—in ’48, ’49, something like that. In the meantime, I was gettin’ the magnificent salary of $5,200 as the superintendent of schools of the whole system. And I had a family growin’ up, and this type of thing. I’m very ambitious, and I grew up on the farm. So I got an opportunity to go into business with a fella over on the Indian reservation here as a 50-50. My father-in-law was financing this program, and he said, "Why don’t you just join this young man over there and run this?” So I hired a foreman, and I started farming. I had a trailer with my name on it, so these farmers got incensed about that, because on Saturdays and Sundays and days, I’d go over there on the farm, and I’d run this farm. 



JIM BURY: How big a farm was it, and what were you farming? 



SKIPPER DICK: Farming cotton. My folks were cotton farmers, had been. It’s just right down the road here, is where it was—right down the street. Well, we had about 600 acres. 



JIM BURY: Did you lease this land? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah, leased from the Indians, on the Indian reservation. My partner and I didn’t get along too well on how to farm and this type of thing, so we divided the land the following year. And this is in the late forties. This might have led up to some of the stuff. Anyway, I made about $10,000 that year on the farm. I should have left education then, but all my life, being in education all my life, money wasn’t everything—but we didn’t have too much of it, either. And so we split up, I took mine, and the next year, why, we had the same thing up ‘til I said, "Okay, if that’s gonna cost me my job, I’ll just let somebody else take it over.” So I washed my hands of it and Messinger. 



JIM BURY: Now, during this time, you mentioned in the newspaper that you had received permission from the board to do this. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, if I mentioned that, I had. 



JIM BURY: I was just wondering—Messinger was using this against you. 



SKIPPER DICK: He was the minority man on there at that time. I had two other fellas that gave me permission: A fella by the name of Ridell [phonetic] was a farmer out there, and he stayed with me ‘til the bitter end. Anyway, I divested myself of that. They had already made up their minds at that time—Mr. Messinger did—and we had another fella who was running on the school board at that time, and he said he wasn’t going to make any changes in the school, so he double-crossed Mr. Ridell, because Ridell thought this fella was gonna run all over him. And we were very proud of our school. We were sending 65 percent of the kids to college out there. We just thought we were doing a great job. I feel now—I honestly feel that the educational end of it, that people didn’t pay any attention to that at all. Finally came down to personalities. Anyway, they had a school board election, and this other fella was elected, no opposition, I don’t think, much. And he got on. The next thing I knew, Mr. Messinger was a lawyer, and called me in and said, "How would you like to come in and have dinner with me?” I said, "Fine.” So this is March. 



JIM BURY: What year? 



SKIPPER DICK: This is 1952 or ’51. Let’s see…. ’54 to ’53. It had to be ’52 to ’53—I’ve got it right here. 1954. And this would be 1962. 



JIM BURY: And 1953 is when they fired you, in the spring, right? 



SKIPPER DICK: 1953, yeah. All right, you’ve got that. Anyway, he called me into his office—not office, he had me downtown, big club down there, (unclear). Had no idea what was comin’. And in the process of eating our dinner and everything, he said, "What are you going to do next year?” I said, "Oh, I guess (inaudible).” I made application over to <Tempe> for a job, and I (inaudible) I was gonna take a job a couple years ago. I said, "On the board members recommendations they gave me. Why would I want to leave a job like this?” Here’s three of the finest recommendations I saw over at <Tempe> over there. I was known over there pretty well. Wife used to be there. So I just withdrew my application over there. I had a good chance to get out of that just before then. I withdrew it. So anyway, he said, "What are you gonna do?” And this came out, just out of the clear sky. Me, I had no—and March, you understand. So that’s the time that they told me was one of the reasons why I bowed my neck on this thing, ‘cause superintendents are hired long before March. 



Superintendents of schools are usually hired January and February. People pick ‘em out and this stuff. Anyway, I said, (unclear). "Well,” he said, "I think that maybe you’d better look for another job.” I said, "It’s too late to look around for a job. If you were going to do this, why didn’t you tell me, and give me time to get out? Give me one more year. Give me a chance to get another job and everything, and I’ll resign.” (inaudible) "We’ll see about that.” Then the same thing happened out there. People, when they heard this, I did get along well with kids, and I did work well with high school kids, and teachers. I had most of the teachers backing out there. Anyway, they had a meeting, and decided to not renew my certificate. I guess they call that being fired. But they didn’t really…. 



JIM BURY: That’s the nice way. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, they didn’t renew it. So I wasn’t fired. Anyway, that’s the way it happened at <Scottsdale>. 



JIM BURY: Another charge he leveled at you was the fact that you hadn’t maintained your professional education, and you replied in the newspaper that you had. 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, I went to Arizona State. 



JIM BURY: You continued while you were superintendent? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, I went back over there and took courses in high school administration. And to be frank with you, I was very disappointed with what I got over there. Had a man there from <California>, his little boy is teaching school, and I knew more about the school law than he did. And he more or less said, "Well, you just work on your project over at <Scottsdale>.” So I took these courses, a couple of them, and I didn’t take any more. 



JIM BURY: Did you go pretty regularly? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, I did not. That could have been a legitimate…. I kept up on what’s goin’ on. 



JIM BURY: Now, they tried to recall him, and I couldn’t find out in the papers—did he get recalled finally, or did they let it drop? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, he did not. Let me tell you a little politics (unclear) ‘cause I didn???t know anything about it. The district divided, very severely. A lot of people just didn’t want me to leave there. And the kids put up big banners across the high school, the front of it. One of the school board members come down and said, "You’ve got to take that down.” I said, "I didn’t put it up there. I’m not gonna order ‘em to take it down.” And I might tell you this, the morning that the kids found out that I wasn’t going to be there the next year, I had to get on the P. A. system with tears in my eyes and keep ‘em in classes. (



JIM BURY: That’s what the paper said.) 



SKIPPER DICK: They were gonna leave those classrooms and just tear that town up. And they would have! So they stayed in ‘til lunchtime, and then they had their signs all made. They went downtown, and they had some pretty tough signs, "Kill the school board members,” and all this type thing. 



JIM BURY: Sure gave you good publicity for your next (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, that’s what made me county school superintendent. I’ll be frank with you. And anyway, in the meantime, I went downtown at lunchtime, and I started taking some of these real bad signs out. (inaudible) A little woman walked up to me, about half as high as I was, and said, "Mr. Dick, what are you doing?” I said, "I’m taking these signs down. Some of ‘em are pretty bad, and these are my kids. I’m takin’ ‘em down.” She said, "If I were you, I wouldn’t do that.” She said, "You didn’t put ‘em up there, and you ought not to take ‘em down.” So I just turned and walked away from this little lady. I couldn’t fight that type of thing. Anyway…. 



JIM BURY: Okay, and then the recall against Messinger was…. 



SKIPPER DICK: I got off the subject. Yes, they got petitions out. You’ve got to get petitions. The group not in favor of me being released had about 500 signatures on a petition. We had a lawyer in our gang. You might say he was a fifth column man. He’s a good lawyer out of <Phoenix>, and he went to all our meetings. Now, in looking back—and he had me fooled for a long time. So John Barry [phonetic] was county school superintendent. And they took these petitions in, presented them to him, which is the procedure. And because it didn’t have the <Scottsdale> School District 56 or 66, whatever it was—I forget the number now—he threw every one of those petitions out. And the people had been workin’ on these…. 



JIM BURY: Just because it wasn’t headed properly? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, because it didn’t have the number on it. You see, the districts all have numbers: Number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. "<Scottsdale> Public School System” is what it had on it. But it didn’t have the number on it. And he said, "This is illegal.” So John Barry threw ‘em all out. So this just immediately defeated anything that I think caused Messinger not to be recalled, ‘cause Madison School District had just recalled one of their board members out there, before this, on the same charges. 



JIM BURY: Well, it was Messinger and Barry—do you think that they were in cahoots together? Were they of like political persuasion? Did they know each other? 



SKIPPER DICK: I don’t know. I don’t know. It might have been a technicality, it might have been legitimate. But I felt this lawyer, a good lawyer, would know this type of thing. And we just felt that he left it all, to get it done. Now, this was taken back in…. Anyway, the people went out, and they tried it again, and we got (inaudible). Because by that time, everybody said, "Well, what’s to be gained?” by me stayin’ there. I was just as well to get the heck out of there and do something else. But I kinda felt the same way. 



JIM BURY: You left your position then, I assume, in the summer of ’53 sometime. What did you do the next year while you were preparing to run for county superintendent? Because that was an off year. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I might say, my father-in-law owned the Apache Hotel in <Phoenix>, and he had it leased out to a fella, and the lease came up about that time. 



JIM BURY: The Apache Hotel? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah, it’s right by the Westward Ho, about a hundred-room hotel there. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Across the street. 



SKIPPER DICK: It’s about a third- or fourth-class. Right behind. So my brother-in-law and I—we married half-sisters—Barbara’s half-sister. He put us in the hotel business. We took a lease on it, understand—he didn’t give it to us. We paid him, I think, $20,000 a year, lease on that hotel. And it was a business deal, it wasn’t a gift. And so we went in the hotel business. 



JIM BURY: Did you make money? 



SKIPPER DICK: About enough for two people. 



JIM BURY: That’s usually the case. 



SKIPPER DICK: I can do most anything, so I did the repair and maintenance and all this type of thing. My brother-in-law was the front man. We worked together there for…. ’53, ’54, ’55, I think, I ran for the county school superintendent’s office. 



JIM BURY: You ran in ’54. 



SKIPPER DICK: We didn’t lose any money there. It wasn’t big enough for us. 



JIM BURY: Tided you over, though? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah. I left him running it and paid him a salary. And so I was part cuttin’-in on the business. He run it. I didn’t have anything to do with the administration at that time. I was runnin’ for county school superintendent. 



JIM BURY: When did you start running for county superintendent, and why did you run? I mean, did you have this in the back of your mind? Or did someone approach you in ’54? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I’ll tell you, my father-in-law told me, he said….









SKIPPER DICK: I don’t know, a week, ten days’ time. I think early in July you got to sign petitions. So as I said, the hotel business wasn’t big enough, my background had been in education all this time, and I thought this was an opportunity to get back into education and fulfill my background and so forth and so on. So I paid ten cents a name for petition signatures. A few people helped me, not many. No money involved. My father-in-law didn’t give me any money. I spent, what few dollars I spent, the county school (unclear), worked night and day puttin’ my signs up, and this type thing. But I got the publicity out of <Scottsdale>, the people felt I got a dirty deal out there, and I was elected the county school superintendent. 



JIM BURY: Do you remember who you ran against? Was it Barry? 



SKIPPER DICK: Barry went to the Corporation Commission. Isn’t that funny? I can’t remember. 



JIM BURY: I don’t even think I’ve got it in here. No, I don’t. Well, it isn’t that important. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, anyway, I ran, and didn’t have any problem there. 



JIM BURY: During your tenure as county superintendent, which was from 1955 to the end of 1958, you were in that office for three years, right? 



SKIPPER DICK: Four years. 



JIM BURY: Four years total, yeah. Anything significant happen, as far as yourself or education, the county, any school district? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, if you know the duties of the county school superintendent, they don’t have any authority, really, to go out in the school system and tell anybody what to do. It’s primarily a financial watchdog on the school districts, is primarily what the county school superintendent is. All the warrants and everything have to come through our office. Every one of ‘em is gone over with a fine-toothed comb, and there’s certain rules and regulations and laws that they’ve got to go by, and we had to find out if they were going by the law, and so forth and so on. If we felt they weren’t, we would cut out different things in the district—whatever they were trying to purchase or do, that we didn’t think…. So we’d call ‘em on the telephone. We’re in charge of the financial situation. That’s primarily the county school superintendent’s job. Now, outside of that, they have little prestige. 



JIM BURY: What did you get paid back then? I mean, was it better than the <Scottsdale> superintendency? Did you get a raise? 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Oh, yes! (unclear) had a car. 



JIM BURY: Well, that’s always an improvement. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Didn’t you start something about ... 



SKIPPER DICK: Barbara, I’ve forgotten this stuff. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) … handicapped—education for handicapped children? 



SKIPPER DICK: Not there, in the high school. I mean, when I got the superintendency. I don’t think that…. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Oh, I know what you did. You got something on tax rolls, like railroads. 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, yes. 



JIM BURY: Oh, you tried to get some unorganized land? 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, I got it! Oh, yes. Let me give you this little history. John Barry had been in there as county school superintendent all this long time, and he had the authority vested in that department to take in unorganized territory. 



JIM BURY: Right. That’s correct. I remember. 



SKIPPER DICK: All right, let me tell you, when I found it, and Gus Hurl [phonetic] liked to fell out of his seat. He was John Barry’s assistant, (unclear). 



JIM BURY: Right. And he stayed on a little bit with you? 



SKIPPER DICK: He did. He tried to help me out. Anyway, I had found out that just south of the Kyrene [phonetic] School District, the gas company, El Paso Gas, had lines runnin’ all down (unclear), just outside of the district. Why John Barry didn’t take ‘em in, I’ll never know, but he didn’t. But I immediately just jumped right on ‘em. I incorporated ‘em, I took ‘em into the Avondale School District. I just caught ‘em all along, whatever school district they were next to, I incorporated the whole thing. 



JIM BURY: Okay, now explain to me what this means. You incorporated, you took their land in. Therefore, they were required to pay taxes? 



SKIPPER DICK: You’re darned right. 



JIM BURY: And how did they pay taxes? You assessed their pipeline, their equipment? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, everything. But anyway, this is what they told me later. This comes up in a while, I’ll give it to you a little later. Anyway, I went on down to <Avondale>, and I probably doubled the [assessed bound?] region in <Avondale>. And then there was a railroad. The railroad had either one mile or three miles down there someplace. It was outside of a school district, was right in…. 



JIM BURY: Now, what railroad?—Southern Pacific? 



SKIPPER DICK: Must have been. I can’t remember, whatever runs through there. I immediately put them in. All I had to do was just draw up some documents. 



JIM BURY: Now, did they fight you, or not? 



SKIPPER DICK: I’ll tell you what was goin’ on. The man that represented the gas lines was busy, fighting awfully hard out at the legislature. And this is all goin’ on, and he didn’t know anything about it, until it was in. And Gus Hurl…. 



JIM BURY: He just caught ‘em. 



SKIPPER DICK: When Gus Hurl found out what I had done, he came in there and said, "Skipper, don’t you know this is the most powerful man in the state of <Arizona>?” 



JIM BURY: I know, I had to fight <El Paso> and <Colorado>. Wow. 



SKIPPER DICK: I told ol’ Gus Hurl, "I don’t give a D-A-M. I don’t care how powerful he is.” This is where I was not a good politician. I said, "I don’t care how powerful he is, they ought to be paying their share of the taxes.” 



JIM BURY: The <El Paso> lawyer? 



SKIPPER DICK: That’s right. I was telling Gus Hurl this. Gus was just dumbfounded. 



JIM BURY: I wish I had you with me in <Colorado> (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: He was scared to death. Now let me tell you, then this man—and I can’t think of his name—but he represented them, and he was a powerful man—came into my office, sat down in front of me, said, "I understand you took our pipeline in out there.” I said, "Yes.” He said, "Do you know that we pay half the taxes in a school district when we’re in it?” I said, "Who are you talkin’ about, we pay half the taxes?! You’ve got your pipe stickin’ in everybody’s house, and you, El Paso Gas, is not payin’ the taxes on this school district. The people are paying you, and you’re making a profit.” I told this man that, and of course I never made any friends. I wasn’t good in politics, ‘cause he was powerful. I don’t know how much money he might have given to….” 



JIM BURY: I’m glad to hear you did that. I fought ‘em over, of all things, a little bookmobile. They tried to get rid of our county bookmobile, and I went in and fought ‘em, and by golly, it was like I was fighting the president of the <United States>. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) He’s been fightin’ everybody. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I fight people who I don’t think are right. 



JIM BURY: That’s good. 



SKIPPER DICK: I’ve done it all my life. Anyway, this was what I thought was right, and I did it. I guess that was the biggest thing I did. 



JIM BURY: What about the railroads? Did they give you a tough time? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, I don’t think I ever heard anything from the railroads. 



JIM BURY: You probably know this, but just for interest, you were elected in ’54, and during the same time, the lady that would later defeat you, Sarah Folsom, was doing this is <Yavapai County>. She was fighting the ranchers and the railroad for that unorganized territory. 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, was she? I didn’t know that. 



JIM BURY: And they did just about everything but lynch her. And that’s why I asked you how hard they fought you, because they really came after her very bitterly. 



SKIPPER DICK: I got it done before they knew it. 



JIM BURY: Well, she had to go out, and they knew what she was doing, and they fought her at the county level. But she was able to get the land in. The same thing you did. 



SKIPPER DICK: I did it before they knew it. I think that’s the reason why I was able to do it without too much of a fight. 



JIM BURY: The railroad, I guess, not only hired a full-time lawyer to fight her, but also paid the man to run against her, $15,000. 



SKIPPER DICK: I think there was only one or three miles—I think there were only about three miles down there that wasn’t in—all the rest of it was in. 



JIM BURY: That’s good. 



SKIPPER DICK: But they pay money when they go through a school district. You know that as well as I do. They pay lots of money. Anyway, I guess that’s the most outstanding thing we did, except just carry the office on. I was re-elected…. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Was that when you got rid of the registers? Or was that state? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, no, that was state superintendent. 



JIM BURY: Well, let’s get you up to state superintendent. (voice check) All right, so we’ve got you up to 1958. You’re the county superintendent of <Maricopa County>. And in that year you’d run for state superintendent. (



SKIPPER DICK: Correct.) 



JIM BURY: Now, again, why, for what reason, did someone talk you into it, or was it just (unclear), better salary? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, all those reasons. I felt we had a weak man out there as state superintendent—M. L. Brooks [phonetic]—I didn’t think was too strong a state superintendent. 



JIM BURY: Okay, I want to stop you right there, because I have very little information on M. L. Brooks. Gus Hurl helped me out a little bit there—he worked for him. Okay, why do you think he was a weak man? What do you know about the man, M. L. Brooks? He didn’t do much, obviously, because I can’t find much on him. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) He was a fifth-grade teacher. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I think that he was more a politician than he was an educator. I don’t think M. L. Brooks had education. I think he just wanted that office because it held some prestige and it paid more money. That’s what I thought. I don’t know that to be true, but according to what he accomplished in the office, I felt that he didn’t accomplish very much at all. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) He had some political rank. 



JIM BURY: But there were some comments about the fact that he had used the office for personal gain. I don’t mean financial, and I don’t mean illegal. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) He was trying to get his doctorate, and he was putting pressure on them. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, he tried all that. 



JIM BURY: He tried to get his doctorate while he was superintendent his last term. He never did get it. And then he was involved, of course, in some other scandals: oh, the war surplus thing, and then he was sued by his lawyers later because he wouldn’t pay their bill. Did you use any of this against him in the campaign? 



SKIPPER DICK: I don’t think so. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) We never even knew that before. 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, yes, I knew about the war surplus thing. Katie Kaywood [phonetic] got sent to prison on it. Kaywood was his chief deputy, and I knew Kaywood. 



JIM BURY: (unclear) Was Kaywood guilty completely, and Brooks didn’t know about it? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, I don’t know, I can’t give you the particulars. I wouldn’t want to say that Brooks knew all about it. It might have been that he turned it over to Kaywood completely and didn’t keep up with what was going on in the office. And Kaywood was cleaning up this surplus. 



JIM BURY: Okay, during the campaign, you ran against Brooks. You were both Democrats, right? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. 



JIM BURY: You defeated him in the primary? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. 



JIM BURY: And during this period, were the Republicans ever a threat? 



SKIPPER DICK: Not at that time. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) H. M. McHenry [phonetic], I think, ran against you. 



SKIPPER DICK: I believe it was McHenry. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) He was a good educator. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah, he was good. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Just the Republicans weren’t strong. 



SKIPPER DICK: It was the primary. He run on the Republicans. At that time, the Democrats held most of the offices. 



JIM BURY: Trying to get some information out of the stuff I put together. Okay, I’ve got some summary of material here. From now on I’ve got to really get you point-by-point on your superintendency. That’s what the book’s all about. 



SKIPPER DICK: Very good. Yes, you want to know what was accomplished. 



JIM BURY: Let’s take, on the campaign, first of all, I noticed that both you and Brooks came out for state school tax relief, that you felt at the time that the people in the state, the property owners, were being taxed too heavily for the support of school districts. And I think you supported an increased sales tax. Does this sound correct, do I have my facts reasonably correct, do you think? 



SKIPPER DICK: I don’t think so. I don’t think that—I never was too strong on sales taxes. I fought for money back from the government. 



JIM BURY: That’s going to be the crucial thing I want to talk to you [about]. 



SKIPPER DICK: Federal aid for education. The Arizona Republic fought me awful hard on this, with editorials. They put a picture in the paper, just before the election, of Uncle Sam standin’ there—I’ve got it someplace—with a curriculum in his hands. And he says to the teacher—the teacher’s sittin’ behind a desk—"Here’s the curriculum. This is gonna be it. If you get any federal money, this is gonna happen to you.” They fought me awfully hard on it. 



JIM BURY: I noticed then in response you wrote a letter to the editor, which stated, point by point, what federal funding could do, and what it could not do. 



SKIPPER DICK: Not only that, I went down—this is the beginning of the end with The Arizona Republic. They hadn’t fought me too strong ‘til this. But I went down and found out who wrote that article. They wrote a real tough editorial, and they gave me a lot of hell. In this federal aid for education, they have some safeguards in it, in the bill itself, that they would not control it. And it’s right in the bill. So I went down to see this man—I can’t think of his name now, he’s retired—and I said to him, "Did you write this article?” He said, "Yeah.” I said, "Have you read the law? Have you read the bill?” He said, "No.” "How in the name of God could you write an article like this, and say the things that you said, when they’re not true?! The safeguards are right in the law itself.” Buddy, I’m tellin’ you, that was the wrong…. My old Harry Broderick [phonetic] tried to keep me from goin’ down there, but I went down there anyways because I was not a good politician—let’s put it like that. I was an educator and I fought for education, whatever I thought benefited the kids in education. And my family is everything to me. I think the most important job we have to do today is to educate our children. This has been my whole life. I fought for what I thought was right, and that’s the reason I was called controversial. A lot of people say if you’re controversial, that’s something bad. But in my case, I don’t think it is. Now, I mighta been wrong sometimes. I’m not saying I was right every time, but what I thought was right, that’s…. 



JIM BURY: Well, how do you feel—you’re a statewide figure, you’re very controversial, everybody knows who you are during your superintendency. How do you feel generally the papers of the state treated you? You feel The Republic essentially turned against you. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. 



JIM BURY: You feel also the Gazette did, I assume, probably (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: They would go along together, but not quite as bad—they weren’t quite as bad as The Arizona Republic. Now, all the time that I was state superintendent of public instruction, I did not get a page or a half a page or anything telling the people what my accomplishments had been for education—and I have ‘em all right here. 



JIM BURY: Great! Okay, good. 



SKIPPER DICK: And I can read ‘em to you, if you want me to read ‘em and put ‘em on here. 



JIM BURY: Go ahead. 



SKIPPER DICK: All right, I didn’t write this. This was written probably by Gus Hurl. This was done when I was makin’ some speeches. This was a speech given. And these were put together by Gus Hurl and the state department. Here are the things he said we accomplished. 



JIM BURY: And this would be during, probably, the next campaign or something? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, yes, this would be the next campaign. "Some of the other accomplishments are increased state aid to schools from 127 to 170.” We didn’t do that ourselves, but we were instrumental in recommending to the state board—and our state board at that time was partly elected—not elected, but appointed. Had to be a teacher here, and had to be a superintendent (unclear) professional board, so professional people could understand what we were talking about. And most of the time our recommendations were accepted by this board. 



JIM BURY: I hate to interrupt, but that’s important. I don’t want to lose trains of thought here. Some of the superintendents—well, let’s say the two that followed you—had great trouble with that new board. Both Sarah Folsom and Dr. Shoftstall have not gotten along with their board. Now, I think it was Mr. Herald, who I interviewed about you, he said you got along well with the board. He felt that you had a…. 



SKIPPER DICK: Not this new board. [unclear, both talking at same time] 



JIM BURY: You weren’t with them then. 



SKIPPER DICK: No. 



JIM BURY: You had a good working relationship. 



SKIPPER DICK: We had a good working…. 



JIM BURY: Why? Do you think it was because it was the old board teachers. 



SKIPPER DICK: Because these people were teachers and educators, and they knew what the problems were in the field of education, and we were striving to try to improve, and they could understand what we were talking about. 



JIM BURY: Did the governor listen to you when you made recommendations for appointments to this board? Did he take (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, Paul [Ben?] and I were pretty close, and I could always walk into his office at any time. He’s a Republican, I was a Democrat. 



JIM BURY: But you had a good working relationship? 



SKIPPER DICK: I had very good—I can show you pictures, I showed you some already. 



JIM BURY: It’s interesting, because then later Sarah Folsom, who was a Republican, did not have a good working relationship…. 



SKIPPER DICK: I don’t know. I guess you’ve gotten Sarah Folsom’s background and everything. But I might say to you that the people who put Sarah Folsom in, and some of the things she said when she was running…. It was the people in <Paradise Valley>, which sometimes I’ve called John Birch Society, or people who had a different viewpoint than the public schools’ interest, I thought. And she represented these people, and they put up $30,000 for her to run. 



JIM BURY: It seemed, reading the newspaper articles, that somebody must have fed her a lot of information about you regarding your termination in <Scottsdale>, particularly. 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, the Arizona Republic, every time they’d write an article, they’d always put this being fired at <Kasaan> and fired at <Scottsdale>. They kept hangin’ that onto me continually. 



JIM BURY: It seems one other thing, after she got in office, however, the same newspapers that supported her against you so strongly, The Republic and The Gazette particularly, came out to attack her, and viciously attacked her. 



SKIPPER DICK: Now, wait a minute—not first. 



JIM BURY: I mean later. 



SKIPPER DICK: Because they run full pages on her. She had big articles. But she turned on these people, and walked out of one of their meetings out there one time. These are the people who supported her and put the money up and put her in there—Mrs. Rubicon [phonetic]. She turned and walked right out of the meeting ‘cause she finally found out that these people…. 



JIM BURY: And this was precipitated by federal aid, again, wasn’t it? Wasn’t that what sort of started the whole argument again? 



SKIPPER DICK: I really don’t know. I wasn’t that close to it. I think that might have been some, but she campaigned against me against federal aid, "No federal aid.” And I’m fightin’ for federal aid, and then she took this $11 million or $15 million, or whatever it was, and (snaps fingers). Shoftstall, now he fought me awfully hard, and he wasn’t runnin’ against me or anything, but he made some very derogatory remarks against me and so forth. Federal aid was an awful thing. 



JIM BURY: (unclear) 



SKIPPER DICK: (unclear) So they used Sarah to get in the office, adopted these people’s viewpoints—that is, made ‘em think that. And when she found out, really, what they stood for, she did turn on ‘em for her own deal. She knew that they didn’t really have the right (unclear). 



JIM BURY: Then they fought her. 



SKIPPER DICK: Then they fought her, yes, and she had an awful time. I said "increased state aid,” and "instituted a state junior college system.” I didn’t do that again, but this happened, and I was instrumental in helping to do it. "Provided special education programs for mentally retarded and physically handicapped for the entire state.” Now, at that time we set up a program, the legislature gave you some money to do it, and we brought a man in by the name of Baraboo [phonetic] from—not Massachusetts, but…. 



JIM BURY: <Michigan>? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah, I believe <Michigan>—someplace up there. Had an outstanding record back there. And he set our department up, and I think he did a good job. As I said, I delegate. I’m not a special education man, but I did keep up with what was goin’ on. And Baraboo did get out, and he worked, and he had some trouble down at <Fort Huachuca> that cost me an awful lot of votes in that area when I ran next time, because he felt that they weren’t carrying on the proper program for their handicapped children. That was his job, and he had set the whole thing up, so he did have some trouble down at <Fort Huachuca>.



Anyway, this is one of the things that we did that we were proud of. I went around over the state and I met with a lot of the retarded groups. Being an educator, I understood about retarded children and about their handicaps.



"Established educational programs at state prison,” which we’ve already talked about.



"Instituted machine data processing for pupil accounting.” Now, as we used to know it, and I guess you used to keep the school register, didn’t you? 



JIM BURY: Yeah. 



SKIPPER DICK: We thought we were doing a great thing for the teachers, that if we could just get rid of that school register, where at the end of the year, if they didn’t have to keep this thing every day, and the Bible and all this type of thing, that we would have it sent in by the month, ADA, average daily attendance, and all this type of thing—which we did. And at the end of the year, we knew how much state aid and this type of thing that…. 



JIM BURY: Was this computer processing that you were doing? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, we’re comin’ to that. And I guess "instituted machine data processing for pupil accounting.” Yeah, that’s it. But we put on (unclear).



Now, one of the biggest things we did, and I don’t think it’s been done since I left that office, was to write the courses of study. 



JIM BURY: I wanted to ask you about that. 



SKIPPER DICK: There they are. 



JIM BURY: Okay. You know, the course of study has quite a history in <Arizona> education, starting in 1871. Some superintendents would write these up and enforce them in the school districts. Could you enforce this in the school districts (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: We had the authority to enforce it. 



JIM BURY: Did you? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, sir. 



JIM BURY: Did you suggest (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: No, sir. These are suggested guides. Now, this hadn’t been done. We didn’t have any. This old stuff that they had, I don’t know when they wrote ‘em before. 



JIM BURY: 1936, I think you said when you came (unclear). 



SKIPPER DICK: All right, okay. Did you find out how we did this? 



JIM BURY: No. I would be interested in knowing. 



SKIPPER DICK: We asked school districts scattered over the state. We said, "We want the best teachers you have: one from your district, one from your district, one from Phoenix High, one from <Flagstaff>, and one from <Nogales>.” We covered the whole state. "Would you release this teacher to come to the state department of education when we get ready to write our reader’s guide for elementary schools, because we think you people know more about how to write courses of study, and what ought to be in this course of study, than the state department.”



And we got this done, free of charge. They released the teachers, they came to our department under our jurisdiction, but nothing was dictated. These people wrote the courses of study for the state of <Arizona>. 



JIM BURY: Do you think you then had a good working relationship with the school districts? Some school districts don’t like the superintendent’s office. Did they then, did you guys work together well? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. 



JIM BURY: Did you have any problem with any particular school districts over this sort of thing? 



SKIPPER DICK: Not this sort of thing. They got me involved in the school district down south. I guess I shouldn’t have been down there. They were trying to fire a superintendent, and they asked us to come down and look the situation over and find out whether this man was doing a good job or not. I sent a man down, and he looked the whole situation over, and we found out it was a personality clash and so forth and so on—something that I’d been through before. So they had a meeting one night, and just insisted that I come to the meeting. So I sat through the whole meeting, and I heard words yelled at one another for an hour and a half, and the district was up in turmoil. At the end, they asked me to make a recommendation. I said, "Now, you people asked me to have someone come into your district and study your educational system and what kind of job you’re doing, whether you’re successful or not. I’ve done this, and my report is that this school district is doing a good job educating the children that it’s supposed to be educating. And I recommend that you people go home and sleep on it and forget about all the animosities, the hard feelings and everything you’ve had.” But I lost a lot of friends that way. 



JIM BURY: Sounds like a reasonable solution. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, anyway, that’s what happened. And I did the same thing out here, (unclear) place out here by <Mesa>—<Apache Junction>. Same thing happened. Sent a man out there—same thing. Went out and made the same recommendation. But I lost friends. I was not a good politician, see. I never would have—if I’d have been a stricter politician, I never would have attended any of those meetings. 



JIM BURY: Why don’t you go ahead and read off those, but I’ve got to ask you a question that’s on my mind as soon as you’re done. 



SKIPPER DICK: "State courses of study rewritten.” Here they are, I showed ‘em to you. And they haven’t been done—other names have been put on ‘em besides mine, but we did it in our department.



"Publication of a monthly editorial brief.” Nothing had ever gone out to the schools until we started to put a little brief, and we sent a newsletter out to all the districts. This is new. "Updated teachers’ certification standards.” 



JIM BURY: What do you mean by that? I’ve seen that mentioned in your newspaper articles. In what way were they upgraded? 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, we were crying "five years for teachers’ certificates.” It was four years at that time. Now, as I remember it, you could graduate from college with a teacher’s certificate in four years. But you had five years to get that other year. 



JIM BURY: Yes, a five-year program. 



SKIPPER DICK: I believe so. 



JIM BURY: So this was something you were responsible for. I didn’t realize that. 



SKIPPER DICK: We put this in. 



JIM BURY: Okay, I want to ask you a question on that specifically. Teacher certification means working with universities and colleges, with the college of education, with deans. How did you get along with these people? How was the relationship of your office to the universities? 



SKIPPER DICK: Very good. The fact is, we delegated to the universities themselves, the authority to graduate their people and give them their teachers’ certificates. 



JIM BURY: How do you feel about the argument that took place in the state the last couple of years, concerning going back to the four-year certificate; and also requiring a discipline major in a specific field, instead of in education? This was something that Doc Shoftstall’s [phonetic] been particular interested in. 



SKIPPER DICK: I don’t know too much about that. I don’t know that I’d be able to…. ‘Cause I haven’t, you see, been as close as I should to education, being that I’m retired now, and I have a few apartments over here I work on, and I play some golf. I dropped out of…. 



JIM BURY: Looks like you’re enjoying yourself. 



SKIPPER DICK: I dropped out of everything that I belonged to, and I belonged to, oh, I guess eight or ten different organizations. Used to be very active in ‘em, but I’m not active any more. 



JIM BURY: Well, now that I’ve sidetracked you, I’ll ask that question before I forget it. You were talking about visiting school districts, becoming involved in their own problems. Did you have any authority as state superintendent, to exercise over anything, actually. Or is it an office primarily due to personality, and how strong your personality is? Now, I know there’s no legislation that gives you specific responsibility. Were you able to accrue some? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, through our board working with us, we were able to go out. We are given the authority—the state board is—and we represent…. 



JIM BURY: What if the board contradicted you? 



SKIPPER DICK: All right, then the board has all the say. 



JIM BURY: Okay, but however, the board is appointed, and you’re elected. What if you would come to a situation that as an elected representative of the people, you felt bound, morally bound…. 



SKIPPER DICK: But you have the school board, that they can countermand anything that you do. 



JIM BURY: And now, this is the way it is stated in the legislation, right? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. But if you got a good working relation with your state board, as we had, why, they gave us authority to carry out (unclear). 



JIM BURY: You worked then as their executive officers? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. 



JIM BURY: And not as your own, say, separate power base. 



SKIPPER DICK: No, we didn’t have the power. I want to leave this with you. It’ll be in here. State board has all the authority. I’ve often said the state superintendent can do nothing that the state board doesn’t want you to do. 



JIM BURY: Okay, do you feel it’s inconsistent to have an appointed state board and an elected superintendent? This is one of the big questions of the office now. In fact, it has been for a hundred years. There’ve been government reports made…. 



SKIPPER DICK: May I say this? At the time that I was state superintendent of public instruction, The Arizona Republic and at the town hall meeting we held at the <Grand Canyon>, they all came out with the idea that they ought to appoint the state superintendent of public instruction. I believe they wanted a state board to appoint the state superintendent of public instruction. 



JIM BURY: Right, that’s correct. 



SKIPPER DICK: I was against that. I gave these arguments: I said, "If you’re going to appoint the state superintendent of public instruction, why don’t you appoint the attorney general? Why don’t you let the governor appoint everything else? And then Mr. Pulliam can run the whole thing. He’ll get the governor appointed, then he’ll appoint everybody, and let….” 



JIM BURY: (unclear) 



SKIPPER DICK: But anyway, I said, "This is my arguments.” I was fightin’ the newspaper. Now, if I was in politics, I’d never fight The Arizona Republic. But I couldn’t be in politics now, see, ‘cause I’ve just not made that kind of a—I was never made like that. 



JIM BURY: Do you feel if the office became appointive then, that the governor would have pretty much complete control over statewide education? 



SKIPPER DICK: They have it now. They have control over the state education now, with….









JIM BURY: Let me see, let me get my other tape changed. I’m gonna have tapes layin’ all over. Do you know what I did with Tape 1? Ah, there they are. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) I’m gonna be startin’ a stew for supper. Did you want to come? 



SKIPPER DICK: Could you excuse me? 



JIM BURY: I sure would. Maybe it’s time I gave you a break. I’ll turn off the tape machine. (tape turned off and on) 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) I know you did something in handicapped schools. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, we had Baraboo, Barbara. Of course we did. I attended a lot of handicapped meetings and this type of thing as a representative. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) No, they weren’t having—the hospitals or something. 



SKIPPER DICK: Oh, yes, yes, yes. 



JIM BURY: Explain that, then, what she means. What is she talking about? 



SKIPPER DICK: She’s talking about the hospital out here by <Tempe>, where the tuberculosis hospital—they used to have a tuberculosis hospital out here. And they had people out there, and children and things, and they weren’t having any education. I went out on the line, and I’m not sure whether it’s legal or not. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Were you state or county? 



SKIPPER DICK: I was county. This goes back to county. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) How about pregnant women? 



SKIPPER DICK: Just a minute now. 



JIM BURY: (laughs) That’s a leading statement! 



BARBARA DICK: (unclear) 



SKIPPER DICK: I sent a teacher and paid it out of the county funds, out to this tuberculosis hospital. 



JIM BURY: This is when you were county superintendent. 



SKIPPER DICK: To educate the people out there, the children and what not, didn’t have an opportunity to get an education. 



JIM BURY: This is within the county? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yeah. Now then, the crippled children’s hospital in <Phoenix>, they had a crippled children’s hospital out there, I went out and visited. They had no—children in there layin’ with their legs busted sometimes, and they’re there six months, three months, eight months. I did the same thing out there for this crippled children’s hospital. And I put a teacher out there to teach those children. And I also put out the Valley of the Sun School out west of <Phoenix>, where they have the handicapped. You know about that Valley of the Sun? 



JIM BURY: Yeah. Is that the one Cliff Harkin’s [phonetic] with? 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes. Gosh, I don’t know how many teachers I put out there. The kids out there didn’t have an opportunity to get an education, and they couldn’t afford it out there, and I figured they were taxpayers’ children, and they had a right to an education, and I sent teachers out there, to the Valley of the Sun. These are the things my wife is referring to, that was done during the county administration. I’m sorry to have to go back. 



JIM BURY: That’s okay, don’t worry about it. 



SKIPPER DICK: It’s been a long time, see, so (unclear). 



JIM BURY: We’ll put it all together. 



SKIPPER DICK: Okay, let’s see, "Updated certification standards. Evaluation of small elementary schools, and have brought them up to a par with our larger city schools.” Now, this might be braggin’ a little bit, but the Ford Foundation had a small school study. 



JIM BURY: I remember that, yes. 



SKIPPER DICK: They had <Colorado>, they had <New Mexico>, they had <Arizona>. 



JIM BURY: I worked for it in <Alaska>. 



SKIPPER DICK: (unclear) You know what I’m talkin’ about. Well, we made the study, and we tried to use the information we received from this study to do something in our schools and try to enlighten and help the smaller schools—high schools and grade schools—kind of come up to what was happening in the bigger schools. This might be a little bit deal, but make ‘em as good as the larger schools, but we did try to help.



"Enlarged the services and research departments.” We put on some additional people to do more research, and to help the department.



"Established an adult education civil defense program.” And you know who headed that up? 



JIM BURY: Cliff Harkins. Was that right, Dr. Harkins did? 



SKIPPER DICK: Dr. Harkins was in <Washington>, DICK, after he got his doctor’s degree at <Tempe>, and anyway, I was on the platform the night he got that. I was on of the board of regents at that time. Anyway, he went back, and I think they sent him overseas, <South America>, and so forth and so on. He wanted to come back to <Arizona> very badly, and he just—no positions that he could get. He’s so far away and all this type thing. So I put him in charge of that, and he did a tremendous job. Biff [phonetic] Harkins is quite a competent person. He did a tremendous job.



"Provided small school projects through the Ford Foundation.” I’ve already—I think this is somebody’s—give that twice.



"Provided migratory education for children.” Yes, we had the camps out in <Avondale>, where there’s a lot of kids out there, and so forth and so on. We did something in that field. And right now, I don’t know just exactly what was done, but we did do something.



"We have in force at the present time all National Defense Education Act Title for the enrichment of the school curriculum.”



Now, I’m going to let you take a little of this information with you, and you can drop it back by, because…. And here’s some of my philosophy—this gives my philosophy in the field of education. Here’s another one. And here’s one on the state board of education. You probably know all about this now. 



JIM BURY: No, this helps. 



SKIPPER DICK: You might look at it. You can’t tell, you might get a new slant out of that. 



JIM BURY: What I’d like to do with you is ask some specific questions on this questionnaire, because this will give all my interviews a degree of consistency. You’ve answered most of ‘em, by the way, which I really appreciate. 



SKIPPER DICK: I’ll be very happy to. 



JIM BURY: And then, of course, I’ve got a few loaded questions from your file I’ve got to ask you about. 



SKIPPER DICK: You know, I never dodge a question. 



JIM BURY: And I appreciate it. 



SKIPPER DICK: I didn’t dodge ‘em when I was runnin’ for office, and I won’t dodge ‘em now. 



JIM BURY: Let me ask you one, before I get to my questionnaire. In your campaign against Mrs. Folsom, I noticed that after she was elected, there was a degree of problem between, shall we say, concerning your relationship with her in the transition. 



SKIPPER DICK: Yes, we had a very bitter campaign, because she was running on a platform that I thought was a John Birch platform against federal aid for education, and I thought—I might have been wrong—but I thought she was running under that platform so she could get elected for state superintendent. Wasn’t any other way she could get this kind of money. 



JIM BURY: How do you feel about the campaign itself? Was it a below-the-belt campaign? Were you attacked as much personally, or were you more attacked professionally, as far as she was concerned? Was it bitter because it was mud slinging? 



SKIPPER DICK: No. 



JIM BURY: You don’t harbor any particular grudge? 



SKIPPER DICK: No. We were in disagreement on what the state department of education should do, and support and so forth and so on. As I said, she represented a group that I very much had been fought against for four years, and I thought they were wrong. That was it. And we met face-to-face in <Tucson> on programs—any number of ‘em—and we were not on good speaking relations. Very tough, bitter campaign. 



JIM BURY: I’ll probably ask you the two most difficult questions. 



SKIPPER DICK: All right. You can ask me any question. 



JIM BURY: This is the campaign, and you were attacked by Sarah Folsom over two issues—well, there were many issues, but two particular ones she used against you. One was your so-called flower fund. Two was the situation where the school district had received your campaign material. And I gather that Mr. Broderick was involved in that, where the campaign material had been mailed out to school superintendents. And The Republic made a big thing of this. 



SKIPPER DICK: He might have. 



JIM BURY: So what I’d like to do, is just in your own words—as I said, I don’t try to interrogate—I just want your point of view as far as the election, the flower fund particularly, and these school administrators, what you say about it. 



SKIPPER DICK: I told The Arizona Republic this, and I’d tell it to anybody that wanted to say it. Everybody that worked in our office had a little political fund. It was not a flower fund as such. People who called it flower fund tried to dodge the idea. 



JIM BURY: What was the term, where does that come from? The flower fund. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, just trying to dodge the fact that people who work for you put in some money for the election. That’s all it boils down to. And everybody that took a job in there agreed to put three percent, including myself, and everybody else. 



JIM BURY: How much percent was that now? 



SKIPPER DICK: Three percent. I think it was three percent. And we didn’t enforce this down to the deal. If some lady worked in our office, I know she had some hospital bills and this type of thing, and said, "That’s all right.” We never fired anybody because they didn’t pay their three percent. But this was something that had been done in this field—not only in education—but all other county…. Everybody did this type of thing. It was a goin’ type of thing. 



JIM BURY: Now, in regards to this, did the people that were paying the three percent, did they pay this after they received their checks? It wasn’t taken out of their check, or any bookkeeping type situation? 



SKIPPER DICK: No, it was not. Gus Earl [phonetic] had charge of this one. I did not have anything to do with this fund. I did not manipulate it, I did not take anything out of it. It was done by Gus Earl—all the bills and everything. And the political situation, Harry Broderick was my chief deputy, and he was more or less in charge of the campaign. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) (unclear) Committee for Education, Skipper. Didn’t call it a flower fund. (unclear) 



SKIPPER DICK: I didn’t say we called it that. I believe it’s the Committee for Education. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) Or some name like that. 



SKIPPER DICK: But I didn’t dodge this when the newspaper asked me, either. 



JIM BURY: Right. Were these contributions then used exclusively for your campaign, or were they used for other people’s campaigns in the party? 



SKIPPER DICK: Exclusive for our campaign. 



BARBARA DICK: (far from microphone) And it also bought—people like Honey List [phonetic] gave him luggage. And (unclear), they gave him stuff out of the fund—like flowers and stuff. 



SKIPPER DICK: Well, there was some of that. But that wasn’t the primary reason for this fund. 



JIM BURY: I appreciate your directness. (unclear)

