S.I., C.D., and HUBERT RICHARDSON INTERVIEW

March 5, 1950

George Babbitt Collection, 57-5



[Tr.'s note: Sounds like recording was made in a restaurant. Accordion playing, people singing. In addition to the three Richardsons named above, a nephew, Tony (last name not given) is also present.]



[BEGIN SIDE A]



Babbitt: This is the evening of March 5, 1950. We have a good portion tonight. We have three of the pioneer gentlemen of the Indian country with us, members of the same family. We have S.I. Richardson, C.D. Richardson, and Hubert Richardson. These gentlemen have all been traders, have contributed largely to the economy of Northern <Arizona>, and to the state in general. They're very reticent, as a general rule. We're going to try and ask them several questions that I'm sure would be of interest to the people of <Arizona>. S.I., when did you come to <Arizona>, please? 



S.I.: 1898 



Babbitt: 1898 



S.I.: On the third of July. 



Babbitt: And what did you do when you first came to <Arizona>? 



S.I.: Well, the first thing I did was (unclear) me on the city (unclear). 



Babbitt: How did you happen to come to <Arizona>, S.I.? 



S.I.: Well, Uncle George McKendall [phonetic] come to <Texas>, and I came back with him. 



Babbitt: And you were the first of the Richardsons to some to <Arizona>, is that right? 



S.I.: I think so. 



Babbitt: Did you go out to the Indian country, too? 



S.I.: Yeah. Uncle George McKendall (unclear). He was (unclear). 



Babbitt: Where was that, S.I.? 



S.I.: (inaudible) 



Babbitt: We'll just have a roundtable discussion between the members of the Richardson family. There's nothing formal about this, we're just going to talk over the old early days. So anything that comes to your mind that's of interest to you, why, please express yourself. Let's go now. Hubert, I know that you've got a lot of cattle (unclear) and made a lot of friends. You came in, as I understand, later, after S.I. When did you come here, Bert? 



Hubert: I came in 1908. S.I. had been out here. Well, an older brother, (unclear) was out here earlier than any of us, wasn't he? 



S.I.: I came here before he did. 



Hubert: He came out with the railroad at <Winslow>. 



S.I.: (inaudible) 



Hubert: (unclear), then you came, (unclear) went back home, and I came out here, and neither one of 'em were here when I came here. And I came out to <Gallup>. I lived in <Gallup> (unclear), (unclear) Marty there, at the Gallup Mercantile told me. I rode out on the stage, out to (unclear) Canyon with Charlie Hubbell. And Charlie was drunk, and I had to hold him in the buckboard all the way out. He had one of those big-brim hats on, you know. And (unclear) lose his damn hat, and I'd have to get out and go back and pick it up. 



Babbitt: Well, what do you mean "a buckboard"? Did you have a couple of mules or what? 



Hubert: (unclear) a couple of horses and (unclear) buckboard, and the mail. 



Babbitt: Where were you going, Hubert? 



Hubert: Well, I was trying to get to <Sunrise Springs> (unclear) and St. Michael- they're right close together. And Charlie run out of liquor when we got to (unclear) Canyon, so he went down to the (unclear) down there at St. Michael and tried to bum some wine off 'em. They didn't have any, they were out. So Charlie had quite a time. And finally a fellah by the name of Joe Foley [phonetic] rode in with two quarts of whiskey that night. They put me all in the cabin down there about 300 yards from where they were, and I guess they really threw a party that night. So we went on to <Ganado> the next morning on the buckboard. 



Babbitt: What did you do when you got out to <Ganado> then, [Hugh?]. 



Hubert: Well, I met the couple, Melinda Hubbell. There was an old Navajo there from <Sunrise Springs>, carrying the mail and [eggs?], and I (unclear) trading post at <Sunrise Springs>, which is about thirteen miles. And he told me that if I could get me a saddle horse, I could follow this Indian down to <Sunrise Springs>. And I remember before I left I (unclear) brought one of these black overcoats. 



Babbitt: What did you do that for? 



Hubert: Well, it was wintertime, cold, you know. And I got on this horse with this overcoat on, and this Indian liked to rode me to death. And I got so hot, I was afraid to stop and take the coat off, I was afraid I'd never find the Navajo again. (laughter) I rode the thirteen miles with the overcoat on. 



Babbitt: Well, this fellah, Charlie Hubbell you're talking about, was he related to the famous Lorenzo Hubbell? 



Hubert: Yeah, his brother. 



Babbitt: (unclear) S.I. or 



C.D.: Wasn't Charlie an uncle? 



Hubert: No, he was a brother of Old Man Lorenzo, grand old guy. Later on (unclear) and Charlie would get in a Ford car and start over to (unclear). He'd get about two-thirds or three-fourths or four-fifths of the way, and he'd have to walk in, and we'd have to take him home. He'd always break down and (unclear) with a Navajo or somethin'. We'd always have to take Charlie back to [<Oraibi>?]. He never could get (unclear) back home. 



Babbitt: Well, I guess in those days they didn't have very good roads--(unclear) anyway. (no clear response) What about that, C.D.? 



C.D.: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Now, where did you first begin on the reservation? 



C.D.: Well, I started at Blue Canyons (unclear). Then I went from there to <Kaibito>. Stayed at <Kaibito> several years and then (unclear) <Tuba City>. From <Tuba City>, I went back to <Winslow> and (unclear). 



Babbitt: Well, I guess there's no more famous family of Indian traders in existence, probably, outside of the Hubbells, than perhaps the Richardsons. I imagine that you gentlemen could tell us a lot about the development of the Indian rug. I remember probably when you first came out onto the reservation, they didn't make Indian rugs as they do now, did they? 



?: (unclear) C.D. said, "Well, if I can find that place, I'd sure (unclear)." (laughter) (unclear) want somethin' to eat, you know, (unclear). (several unclear comments) 



Babbitt: What does "kimsadi" [phonetic] mean? Kimsadi means it's a long way from food or something? 



?: "Long ways off." 



Babbitt: "Long ways off." 



?: (unclear) 



?: (unclear) put in the store at <Kaibito>. 



?: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Was your answer to kimsadi (unclear)? (unclear) kidding about kimsadi, 



?: (unclear) give him somethin' to eat, he was hungry. 



Babbitt: Sounds like (unclear) kiddin' you a little bit. What you got to say about that? (several talking at same time, none discernable) 



?: (unclear) 



Babbitt: How about that, Dick? Will you tell us about <Kaibito> a little? 



C.D.: Well, I was running (unclear) uprising. (unclear) came by my place and went up there (unclear, being drowned out by singers). 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



C.D.: Well, he would send his children to school, is about all. They were trying to arrest him to bring him down to <Tuba> to talk to (unclear). 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



C.D.: (unclear) <Colorado> and the <San Juan River>. (unclear) hired these fellahs to go out and get him, and they went up to get him, but he didn't want to come, so they killed him, I guess, and brought him in. That's the reason Walter Ronkey [phonetic] lost his job (unclear). 



Babbitt: Was this Indian particularly a bad actor, or tough character? 



C.D.: I guess he was. They claim he used to come into <Tuba City> there to [Preston?] and tried to take what he wanted from the store. I guess Preston picked up a two-by-four and broke his arm or something there one time-laid him up in the hospital for a while. That's about all I know about that. 



Babbitt: Well, in the early days, did you have any other Indians that gave you trouble like this man you were just talking about? Were there any dangerous men in particular? 



C.D.: Personally, as far as I can say, is just a bunch of kids (unclear) bunch of kids. You know, whatever one kid [does] the rest of 'em do. About like a bunch of children. 



Babbitt: From your experience, do you think that the Indians are more or less irresponsible and need a little guidance? In other words, maybe you think the Indians might be a little bit off their base sometimes, givin' the Indians too much responsibility? 



C.D.: Well, I don't think the Indians were as treacherous in the early days as they are today, on account of the drinking and whiskey. They do a lot of things that they wouldn't do otherwise. I think a trader is in more danger now in a trading post than he was in the early days, from the Indians. 



Babbitt: Do you think it's because of the whiskey? 



C.D.: The whiskey, yes. 



Babbitt: Learnin' the white man's ways, is that the idea? 



C.D.: Yes, sir. Don't you figure that? Hubert



?: I would think so. It's always the younger, educated ones that get into trouble. It's not the old Indians that give any trouble whatever. 



?: (inaudible, too far from mic) 



Babbitt: We've got a nephew of the Richardson family here who knows a lot of angles on the Richardson family. Come over here, Tony, and sit down here. 



Tony: I don't know anything about it. He went up there and (unclear), (recording turned off and on) 



Babbitt: Sorry here. You were going to tell us about the Wolf Post fight, is that it? 



?: The fight at Wolf Post. I'll tell you what happened. 



Babbitt: Where was this place? 



?: It was down below <Canyon Diablo> down there in this canyon, south of [Y- No?]. What do you call that canyon, Jones Canyon? 



?: There's that one canyon there we call Canyon Padre. It isn't that one, is it? 



?: I don't believe it was. 



Babbitt: Anyway, it's west of.... 



?: What happened, Dan Hogan [phonetic] and them guys came out there and stayed all night (unclear). And they went down there huntin' for those Indians the next day, and they found 'em. But they were camped in this canyon, killin' these deer and hangin' 'em up there. Dan Hogan, Billy Roden, Walter Durham, (unclear) tied the horses up on top of the canyon, walked down in there, left their guns there, except their six-shooters. When they got out there, these Indians out in front of this little ol' house made out of ties. And it seemed as though--none of 'em could talk Navajo, see--and they would set down there and began to talk to 'em, said, "You guys are under arrest (unclear)." Navajo didn't know (unclear), so Dan Hogan, "Well, get their guns." The Navajos had the guns (unclear). But [Fred?] didn't do the killin'. There was a guy back there in this house [shootin1 through a crack?] (unclear). 



?: (unclear) 



?: (accordion obscures comment) 



Babbitt: Bowatin [phonetic] was the old Indian chief, wasn't he, or old Navajo chief? 



?: That's right. Called him Bo-bo-wetin. That means "man that ain't got no teeth." And that old man lived over there, and his son lived over too. (accordion obscures comment) And Walter Durham, they shot him through the (unclear) hip, I guess. And Dan Hogan, they (unclear) shot him, flesh wound, (unclear). 



Babbitt: How many Indians were there out there? 



?: I think it was seven. (unclear) 



Babbitt: The posse made the trip out there thinking that they were, what, killing deer? Is that what (unclear)? 



?: No, (unclear) they killed him (unclear). 



?: He was the one (unclear). 



Babbitt: In other words, Billy Roden was probably thinking these horses.... 



?: (unclear) Billy Roden (unclear) Colorado River, past <Canyon Diablo> and (unclear), Lake Mary and <Mormon Lake>. He (unclear). 



Babbitt: Billy Roden? 



?: Billy Roden did. 



Babbitt: But he didn't have any real right to that whole country, did he? 



S.I.: Well, he held it (unclear). He finally give (unclear). You know what he did? (unclear) wagon (unclear). 



Babbitt: Who did that, Billy Roden? 



S.I.: Yup. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



S.I.: (unclear) 



Babbitt: What was the idea of doing that, S.I.? Well, he claimed that they were crossin' the river. (unclear) did. They crossed the river and got on this side, see, and Billy Roden claimed all this side of the Colorado River. (unclear) he claimed <Mormon Lake> and Lake Mary (unclear). 



Babbitt: Well, he claimed it because he had a lot of nerve, wasn't that it? 



S.I.: (unclear) them Indians would have killed him (unclear). And he give Jack Diamond and them fellers that Roden Springs (unclear). You possibly don't know Jack (unclear). 



Babbitt: No, I don't. 



S.I.: Your dad did, he knew him real well. 



Babbitt: Well, this Roden, the story about putting arsenic in the baking powder cans--what would he do, leave the cans.... 



S.I.: Leave 'em at the camp where they would go, when they were gelding cattle or brandin', why, he'd just leave the can there, and the Indians got it and used it to make bread out of and killed the whole darned (unclear). 



Babbitt: Many Indians were killed that way? 



S.I.: Lots of em. (unclear) 



Babbitt: What was the idea, to keep them off his range? 



S.I.: Keep 'em off this side of the river. 



Babbitt: Those were mostly Navajos, I guess, that were coming? 



S.I.: All Navajos. 



Babbitt: He didn't care particularly what they were or what they were doin', just as long as he got rid of 'em, kept 'em off his side of the range, huh? 



S.I.: Well, Indians was [dirty?]. They'd go down and catch a cow (unclear) damned river, and get it on there, and cut off what hide they wanted, by God, for their moccasins and didn't ever kill the cow (unclear). 



?: Never pulled it out of the river. 



S.I.: Never pulled it out, just cut off the hide, just cut off what they wanted and (unclear) and go right on. That's the way they did (unclear). 



Babbitt: About when was that, S.I.? 



S.I.: I think that was about 1900. 



Babbitt: Is that right?! 



S.I.: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: They just didn't have much regard for man, animal, or flesh, or anything? 



S.I.: I don't think so. And I don't think Billy Roden did either. (laughter) I don't think so. 



Babbitt: My gosh, I guess you had to fight fire with fire, didn't you? 



S.I.: I guess so! 



Babbitt: Well, it looked like Billy kinda wore 'em out, didn't he, in a way? He came out with a lot of money and a big outfit. 



S.I.: Well, what happened to him, you see, he came in here, his daddy and his brother drove them damned cattle from Whitesburg Texas, into this goddam country. Just like Billy and C.J., they drove their goddam cattle out of <Kansas> into this country. You knew that, didn't you? 



Babbitt: No, I didn't. 



S.I.: Oh, yes you did too. (laughter) By God, they did. 



?: (unclear) 



S.I.: C.J. and Billy Babbitt drove (unclear) out of <Kansas> into this country. You ask C. J., he'll tell ya'. He said they were the only men that could drive bulls that fur. You know, a bull is heavy on his feet, and they usually get tenderfooted, you know, and they give up. But Billy and C.J. Babbitt drove them goddam cattle from <Kansas> into this country. And they camped south of <Canyon Diablo>, (unclear) and all they had was a little ol' shack. And C.J. says when they come back, they had some old cow that was [gentle?] and broke in there and scattered flour all over the house. When they got in there, they had no flour to make up. 



(laughs) 



Babbitt: That was an old <Kansas> cow? 



S.I.: Old, gentle cow. 



Babbitt: These old <Arizona> cattle wouldn't do that, would they? 



S.I.: I don't think so. 



Babbitt: Boy, that must have been quite a little chore, though, to drive cattle in from <Kansas>. 



S.I.: Billy and CJ. drove them cattle, by God, from <Kansas>. 



Hubert?: They went back there and bought 'em. 



S.I.: No, listen. The Babbitt brothers bought up a whole bunch of (unclear) in there around [Antangious?]. <Dodge City Kansas>, them boys bought a whole bunch of (unclear). They'd sell off a bunch of land, but they drove them cattle out of there. You ask C.J., he'll tell you. 



Babbitt: You mean to say that the first cattle the Babbitts had then.... 



S.I.: They drove 'em into this goddam country, yes they did. 



Babbitt: From <Kansas>, and were part of the original "C" "O" Bar [CO] outfit that's so famous now, right? It was? 



S.I.: I don't know what they ran 'em as after they come. But they drove their first cattle out of <Kansas> into this country. Hubert



?: Did Billy Babbitt have a hand in it? 



S.I.: Billy and CJ. is the men that drove the cattle. 



Babbitt: My gosh. 



S.I.: Old Man Dave was [farther?]. I don't think he ever messed with (unclear). 



Babbitt: When would you say that was, S.I.? What year? 



S.I.: Oh, they must have come here in '75, 76. 



Babbitt: (unclear) trouble with the Indians, gettin' through, didn't they? Or they could have had. 



S.I.: I don't know what year they came in here, but I know that's where they got their cattle. They drove them goddam cattle, (unclear) 



Babbitt: You know, by golly.... 



S.I.: You ask CJ. Babbitt, and he'll tell you they did. 



Babbitt: I've heard about a little bull goin' a long way, but I didn't think it ever came this far from <Kansas>, by gosh. 



?: (unclear) 



S.I.: Sometimes C J. said him and Billy was the only men could drive bulls that fur without (unclear). They drove their bulls, yes they did. You ask C.J., he'll tell you. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



S.I.: You ask C J., he can tell you. They drove 'em down here and wintered south of <Canyon Diablo>. 



Babbitt: Is that right? (recording turned off and on) Hubert, you made the first exploration trip into Navajo Mountain in 1923--you and Billy Borham [phonetic] and someone else I don't remember. 



Hubert: J.D. Dunn [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: J.D. Dunn. 



Hubert: And Curry and Bert Sol [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: And Curry and Bert Sol. Now, that was the first exploration trip in there beyond Bernheimer and Weatherall [phonetic spellings]? 



Hubert: That's right. 



Babbitt: And from then on, you opened up the country in that area. You just go ahead and tell us about it. 



Hubert: Well, we went into <Kaibito> and got these Indians and saddle horses and what have you, and we went around the mountain. There was no trail on this side of the mountain at that time. 



Babbitt: Was that Navajo Mountain? 



Hubert: Yes. We went around the mountain, and where Al and Curly's [phonetic] store is now, we camped there and went around the mountain through what's called [Five?] Valley, and through that-a-way, and Rainbow Bridge, and came back out that-a-way, and back to <Kaibito>. Of course at <Kaibito> we got our [car?] and came on into Cameron and Flagstaff. Then we decided that there was a possibility in some way of building a road up there. So I got Old Man John Dahl [phonetic], and went into <Red Lake> there and got into (unclear) with some other Indians. And Old Man Welch (unclear). You remember Dad Welch? He was the powder man. And I forget who was with us. Were you with us that time when we went in there? 



?: (unclear) 



Hubert: We were three weeks gettin' (unclear) and some (unclear) and stuff, into Navajo Mountain. And we went in [Jeff?] Spring, and at the present site where Rainbow Lodge is today. We were about three weeks getting there from <Red Lake>. 



Babbitt: (unclear) and cause some trouble there? 



Hubert: No, I don't think so, not on the way out. S.I.



?: He come back, (unclear) But there was Indians (unclear) [And he had a cedar club about twelve foot long. (?)] He took the bark off it. I said, "Why you takin' the bark off?" "Why," he said, "that bark's too soft, it won't hurt." (unclear) He said that bark was too soft. 



Babbitt: The Indians (unclear) your camp (unclear). 



?: They used to do that every night for three or four nights here. (unclear) Hubert



?: Well, maybe they have, but they did that lots of times and didn't leave much meat. Like a bunch of kids (unclear). 



Babbitt: (unclear) Banano Kizzi [phonetic] and Banano Kizzi said okay, that they wanted to go in. It was okay with you then, huh? And you sort of talked them out of it and smoothed things over? Hubert



?: I suppose so, but the only thing that I remember about going in Rainbow Lodge: We didn't want to go up there at the foot of the mountain where the springs are--it was too rough up there. And they didn't want it down in the valley there, on the level country there. And they told us they were going in there and going up to where the springs are. And there's three springs up there, and they said, "You can have one of the springs for your town, but you can't use the other two springs," as I remembered it. After we got in there and got located, (unclear) came up there and said he would help us pipe the springs down to the lodge and down below. And the government was going to have to pipe those springs out of there and get 'em down on the flat where the Indians could get the water. But they got it down, oh, about where the corral is today. They never did get the water beyond that. 



Babbitt: Corral is where, at what point, Hubert? 



Hubert: At Rainbow Lodge. 



?: (unclear) all of it. 



Hubert: Well, the last I stayed up there, for how long, I stayed about 1927.... 



?: Three years (unclear). (laughs) 



Hubert: Then Sam Borham [phonetic] went up there and stayed for a while. Then Bill Wilson went up there and I sold my interest in it to Barry Goldwater in 1942. Well, I didn't sell it to Barry, I sold it to his wife. His wife bought it and gave it to Barry as a Christmas present. 



?: (unclear) (laughter) 



?: (unclear) interesting and rather, we'll say unique or (unclear) Northern <Arizona> history. 



Hubert: Well, it's a beautiful spot, there's no question about it. And you can lose the Grand Canyon up there and not even find it, if you didn't know where to look for it, as far as that part's concerned. But it is a hard trip, it's a long ways up there, and you have to find people. (unclear) ability to withstand the trip in there. People (unclear) willing or have the money to pay their way in and out of there. 



Babbitt: Well, Hubert, about what year was it that you and your associates built that road in through there, and that trail into there? 



Hubert: The spring of '24. 



?: Hubert, there were two (unclear) phenomena there, (unclear) mysterious light that appears there, and also the fact that the state line doesn't run straight across there--there's a jog there, and it put you in <Arizona>, rather than <Utah>. 



Hubert: Well, I don't know about.... 



?: What about the light? 



Babbitt: Yeah, what about that mysterious light, Hubert? 



Hubert: I don't know anything about that either. I never heard of that before, either. I'm sorry, Tony, but I've never heard of it before. Tony



?: I hope you got that on the wire, George, because (unclear). 



Babbitt: What about this mysterious light that you're talking about, Tony? 



Tony: That is a light that is seen between.... [END TAPE 57-5, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Tony: ... the light. There's been sites taken on it with compasses and what not, and yet it's.... 





