MYRNA HILLYARD INTERVIEW

Northern Arizona University Indian Oral History Project

NAU.OH.36.16

Mrs. Hillyard is the Whiteriver Elementary School Principal. Interviewed by Margery Clark on November 26, 1980. One tape, approximately 55 minutes.

Subjects covered in interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born 1934 in <Whiteriver> 

    Parents background and education 

    Own early education and classmates 

    Advanced education 

    Teaching experiences with minorities 

    Past job experiences 

    Other work with other tribes 

    Description of school facilities 

    Description of teachers and colleagues 

    Comments on class loads 

    Comments on public school versus the B.I.A. 

    Goals of Indian education 

    Effects of early education on the Apaches 

    Feelings toward bi-lingual and bi-cultural education 

    Effects of federal programs 

    Success with other tribes and children 

    Feelings towards paternalism 

    Comments on termination

Tape 1, Side 2

    Comments on participation 

    Comments on bi-cultural and cross-cultural programs 

    Comments on first encounter with a Native American teacher 

    Development of Red Power 

    Comments about the Red Power's positive effects 

    Comments on career choice 

    Realistic view about teaching as a career 

    Feelings towards living on the reservation 

    Relationships with former students 

    Relationship with the B.I.A. 

    Effects of the B.I.A. 

    Concerns about education today 

    Goals for the future education of the Apaches

[Transcriptionist’s note: Extremely low volume, lots of air roar.]

[BEGIN SIDE A]

Margery Clark: My name is Margery Clark [phonetic]. This taped oral history is being made for deposit in the Northern Arizona University Special Collections Room. It is a part of a research project directed by Dr. Philip Rulon, associate professor of history at NAU. The purpose of this study is twofold: first, to obtain historical information on the education of Native Americans in the Southwest; and second, to obtain insight into the effectiveness of bicultural and cross-cultural programs for Indian Americans. The project is funded by the Institute of Southwestern Studies of Northern Arizona University. Today, November 26, 1980, we’re talking with Myrna Hillyard, Whiteriver Elementary School principal.

Mrs. Hillyard, could you give me some biographical data about yourself: your birth, birth place, your parents, their occupations, nationalities, and education?

Myrna Hillyard: Okay. Well, let’s see, I was born in <Whiteriver Arizona>, on the Indian reservation in 1934. My parents were of German and Dutch extraction, and they came to the reservation in 1910. My father was a Lutheran missionary. As far as education is concerned, my father was an educated college graduate, and a graduate of a seminary. My education took place--my early education took place on the Indian reservation, in a two-room school, which was considered a public school at that time, as opposed to a BIA [Bureau of Indian Affairs] school or an Indian boarding school. And it was composed of youngsters who were Anglo youngsters who were from the BIA, most of them, or trading post families. But we also had Indian youngsters in the school. We went to school here in <Whiteriver> from grade one through eight, and then of course we had to go away to boarding school because there was no secondary school for Anglos. So instead of the Indians going away to boarding school here, the Anglos went away to boarding school. So we went away to boarding school in New Ulm, Minnesota--took that long train ride--and went there to Dr. Martin Luther College and High School, for high school. Then I returned home to <Arizona> and came to the University of Arizona, where I got my bachelor’s and master’s and creative specialist [unclear].

Margery Clark: Could you tell me when and how you got into educating Native Americans? Did you have any specialized training for this? And what other type of work have you done?

Myrna Hillyard: Okay. Well, I started teaching in the <Tucson> public schools in 1955, and most all of my teaching experience was with minority groups. Most of it was Mexican American and black children, and then later, when I moved into supervisory roles, also Native American youngsters such as Yaquis on the south and west side of <Tucson>. As far as other work that I’ve done, let’s see, classroom teaching at all grade levels, special education teaching here on the reservation in <Whiteriver>. I taught primary age special education children in special [unclear] programs in Whiteriver Elementary School. Then I was on supervisory staff, supervising classroom teachers. I was a demonstrating teacher, and I was a television teacher. That was in social studies and science. Then I taught at the University of Arizona, methodology courses for teachers. Then I went into the federal project as a program assistant to Dr. Marie Hughes [phonetic], at the University of Arizona. And eventually took over as director of the [unclear] project in <Tucson>, and then came here.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, what other tribes have you worked with?

Myrna Hillyard: I served as a consultant to the Native American Head Start Program, and I worked with the project in <Supai>, San Carlos, <Sacaton>, <Blackwater>, Gilson [phonetic], <Sells>--I’m forgetting some reservations--Hopi--just about every reservation I’ve worked with, both contact schools and BIA schools and Head Start. And this is on a consultant basis, usually working on things like child development, programs for young children, parent involvement, reading, that sort of thing. So I think I’ve hit at least a majority of the [unclear] in <Arizona>.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, can you tell me something about Whiteriver Elementary School: when was it built, how many teachers do you have, what are your [unclear], what are the facilities like, about how many students are here in the school in the classrooms, and how do the BIA and public schools compare?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, [unclear] Whiteriver Elementary School, I believe, was built in 1953. I’m not sure that it was built just as an elementary school. I think it was just the total school facility for <Whiteriver> at that time, before there was such a thing as a junior high and a high school. So it’s a very old building. You asked what are the facilities like. Well, I would have to say in my humble opinion that some of the facilities are very poor. I think the school needs renovation. In fact, if I had my way, we would bulldoze it and start over. It has some redeeming features, but as far as the classrooms are concerned, the facilities for play and so forth, in my opinion it’s substandard, but the day may come.

How many teachers? I think now we’re running something around thirty-six teachers. That’s including special ed classes and ancillary personnel and so forth. Regular classrooms, K through 6, we have twenty-five people. In the special ed classrooms, the speech therapist, the P.E. teachers, and music teacher, the specialists.

What are my colleagues like? Let’s look at the teachers in the building first. I may be a bit prejudiced, but I feel that here in Whiteriver Elementary we have overall probably the finest bunch of young teachers that you’d find anywhere gathered together. It’s just kind of amazing. We have married couples in our school. We have many young teachers who have come here from other places because they were interested in working on the reservation. But we don’t have rejects. When I was growing up, sometimes we felt like we got rejects in some of the reservation schools. Young people who teach in this school are not rejects. I think that they care deeply about the kids. I think they are committed to what they do. And I feel quite strongly that they’re not here because they love the Indians. You know, [unclear], "I just love the Indians.-- They’re here because they care about education, they care about children. So I can’t say enough positive things about the teachers.

As far as my colleagues are concerned, I work with three men principals: the other elementary school, the junior high, and the high school. I think that we have a very fine professional relationship. I don’t think that we always agree on philosophy, [unclear] philosophy, or methodology, but we manage to work together in a very professional way, even though I’m sure that we have some differences.

How many students do you have in the classrooms? Well, I think that we’re running heavy in some areas--much heavier than I think we should run. We’re running from about twenty-two youngsters up to thirty per classroom. Although the research will tell you that classroom size doesn’t make a difference, anybody that’s ever been a teacher knows that that’s [unclear]. And so really, in our facility, and with our youngsters who need so much language development and individualization of instruction, I’d like to see us running about twenty per classroom, which is a pipe dream.

Let’s see, how do we compare with BIA schools? Well, of course, that’s an individual thing. I think you have to take school by school. BIA pays their teachers more. Then, of course, BIA also has different requirements. Until this year, I think, they haven’t even been required to have certification. And all those certifications don’t assure you of having a fine teacher. I think it’s [unclear]. The public school concept, of course, naturally appeals to me because I think [unclear] that when youngsters leave us, they have the same kind of preparation that any youngster in <Arizona> does. If they’re going on to college, if they’re going to seek some kind of vocational training, and so forth, we have been able to offer them what they need to go on and do this. And I think that the public school concept offers reservation youngsters something that I think [unclear]. So it depends upon the school. I’m certainly not down on BIA schools, because I think some of them have served a really positive purpose on reservations. I just prefer the public school concept.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, what were some of the goals of Indian education when you first came to the reservation as an administrator on the reservation? And could you talk a little bit about assimilation: what were the strengths and drawbacks of this approach? Can you give me any examples or personal illustrations of the effects of this type of approach?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, of course, I’m looking back a little farther than when I started here. I’m looking back to what things were like when I was a student, you know, here. And I think that many of the things that we did in the name of education, at that time, were extremely damaging to youngsters. For example, when I went to school here, we had signs in the classroom that said Don’t Speak Apache, same sort of things. You know, [unclear] like in <Tucson> and so forth, Don’t Speak Spanish. I do not think that there was any attention given to the youngsters’ language or culture. I don’t think that was considered important. But, of course, then it wasn’t considered that important anyway--not just on the reservation. That concept had not come into being yet. And I think thusly we made a lot of mistakes--I mean, they did, those educators--made a lot of mistakes with youngsters because in my view, like Liechtenstein [phonetic] says, the child’s language is the mirror of the soul. And when he comes to school, this very excited little six-year-old--at that time, there were no kindergartens--and we say to him--we may not say it this bluntly, but we say it in everything that we do--"Hey, there’s something wrong with your language.-- I think we said, "There’s something wrong with you.-- And you can’t do that with youngsters. Language reflects what is going on inside of us. Language is probably the biggest reflection of culture, and so we made some really gross errors in judgment. And I think it’s one of the reasons why we now do not have a great many educators who are Apache. We don’t have a lot of administrators who have gone through higher education and come back into important jobs like superintendents and principals and all this kind of stuff, because in some sense of the word, in my view, education failed these youngsters. I remember some of the things that happened with the public school youngsters, and yet I can’t make a judgment there because, in a sense, the crème de la crème came through the public school, of the Apache youngsters. The other youngsters were in the boarding school and at Fort Apache and so forth.

All I know is that we had some very, very fine teachers in the public school, but I, as a youngster, a sensitive youngster looking at some of the teachers that I met and saw from the boarding school, I had negative vibes about. And probably they’re not people I'd hire in my school today.

I think that when we came to the point in education where we began to realize that we must value what a child brings to us, because it’s our greatest natural resource. I mean, whatever he brings us is where we should start. And I think we were very dumb to go on for a hundred years not realizing that. But then, you know, we learned too.

But I think that idea is coming of age. We’ve also made some mistakes. We talk about bilingual bicultural education, and I think we’re still learning a great deal about that. But it seems to me that we’ve got to give more than lip service to this idea that a child’s environment, the milieu in which he lived before he came to us, and the five years before he came to us--five of the most important years of his life--we can’t just cut that off and shut the door and say, "Okay, forget about that. Now we’re going to do school.-- What does school mean? If we say we’re going to educate the whole child, then that first five years should be more precious to us than all those textbooks that we have in the classroom. That’s what we draw on: what the little guy tells us about himself through his language, through the kind of conversations that he has with other youngsters, with other adults, in both Apache and in English, we should have our antennae up and listening to that, and then draw on that. And that’s hard to do. I mean, I’m not a dreamer. When you’ve got twenty-seven little first-graders in a classroom, that’s not easy to do. But I still think it’s our biggest job.

And, you see, at that time we were not interested, in the early days, in building any kind of conceptual experience or background for kids in their own language. We were interested in as quickly as possible assimilating them into both our culture and in what we called education, which I call middle-class values: Gotta learn to read in first grade. And that is very prevalent, next to mother, apple pie, and the flag. And a lot of kids couldn’t, and they failed miserably, and they dropped out, [unclear]. And I think now, if--we’ve [unclear] under such constraints by the State of <Arizona> who wants to test everybody on everything--if we could pull back, relax, enjoy these youngsters and say, "What you bring to me is very important and it’s very precious to me and precious to you. You bring something important, I have something important to give to you.-- And sort of make a blending-together of those two things, cherishing what that child has, in every way building a sense of pride in him about his "Indianness,-- his language, and so forth; and yet saying, "I can open a broader world to you.-- You know, "What you have is very important and very precious, and I can open doors to you to the bigger world.-- That’s education in my humble view. It’s very difficult to do in the public education concept, because we are so cotton pickin’ concerned about meeting somebody else’s standards. We???re going to compare apples and oranges; we’re going to compare children in <Whiteriver> with children in <Scottsdale>, because we’ve all got to give the same test. And we’re going to compare children in south side <Tucson> with children in <Paradise Valley> in <Phoenix>, which is a joke! Children are too unique. You can’t put them in little boxes like that. But hopefully creative teachers and creative administrators across the state of <Arizona> will hold forth some kind of bastion of what we know is good for youngsters--and for Indian youngsters particularly. We’ve got to find people on reservations who will do just what I said, who will not only accept the differentness, but value it. You know, there’s a difference between accepting something and valuing it. All that has made a difference. "Oh, well, I think it’s nice that he speaks Apache.-- No! I think it’s a value [unclear]. "Hey this is special. You speak two languages! You teach me yours and I’ll teach you mine.-- That sort of thing.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, what other teaching assignments or administrative assignments have you had in schools that are predominantly Indian? And do these differ with your first school? Do you feel that you’ve had more success with one tribe or another?

Myrna Hillyard: Okay. Well, that’s a little hard to answer. Let’s see, I’ve had teaching experiences in <Tucson> with youngsters from the Yaqui Tribe and the Pima and Papago Tribes. Then of course my teaching experience here in <Whiteriver> in special education, with youngsters that had severe learning difficulties and emotional problems. And then, of course, I came into administration. I think it’s a difference maybe in time, looking back to when I started, I don’t think any credence at all was given in education to the importance of involving parents. I think that’s one of the biggest changes that I’ve seen. And I think some of us still don’t give any credence to it. But then, you now, [unclear]. But I think that’s a major change. And I think that’s in part as a result of federal projects. We like to brag about federal programs and so forth. However, federal programs forced us, whether we wanted to or not, they forced us to involve the home. And if they didn’t do anything else, my hat is off to them for that. It said, "You are not going to have all these things going on in your school without involving parents.-- A very positive thing. I see that as a big difference.

Again, as I said previously, I see the difference here in that we have been forced, or hopefully we have become enlightened, in that there is this acceptance of youngsters’ cultural milieu. If not acceptance, at least we’re having to take a hard look at it. I see that as a big difference.

As far as success with one tribe or another, I’ve been fortunate, I’ve had success with kids whatever race they were, just because kids are pretty easy to have success with. I don???t think I could compare that. The Apache youngsters, of course, are very special to me because this is my home, I was born here. My, my, my, we had good times--little Pagagos and Pimas and Yaquis, Spanish-speaking children, and Chicanos. Children are children. You make your own successes.

The kids can’t make or break that.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, what effect does paternalism have on the education of Native Americans? When and where did you first encounter the idea of termination--that is, the eventual withdrawal of the BIA and other agencies from the administration of Indian affairs. And do you think this is affecting the administrative [unclear].

Myrna Hillyard: Okay, let’s talk about paternalism first. The whole of history--and let’s just look at Apache people, because that’s who we’re dealing with here--the whole history of the Apache Nation, in my view, since the coming of the white man, has been a history of encroachment--and I call it that with impunity--of paternalism. To me, it’s a degrading concept, because it’s almost saying to a whole group of people, "You do not have the mental, the societal, the cultural wherewithal to do anything about yourselves, so we are going to have to take care of you.-- When we do this to youngsters, when we do this to family members, when we do it to a race of people, we have destroyed something more precious than almost any gift that they have. And that is to say to the people, "You cannot stand on your own two feet.-- And I think we see the results of it every single day. I see the results of it every day in my school. I have seen the results of it growing up here, the friends that I went to school with, that I come home now, and they are dead or in a state of alcoholism, a state of despair. I think it’s so all-pervasive that I cannot pick out one thing and say to you, "This is what paternalism has done,-- because I think it’s had an umbrella effect. It’s rained down on every aspect of Apache life. My father came in 1910. He talked to us as youngsters about the pride of the Apache people--their great pride in their family life, in their sense of self-sufficiency, in their native religion--what I would call the life way. Okay? What we did was, we took--"we-- collectively--speaking again of not just the BIA, but the whole concept of federal paternalism. We said, "Well, you know, we need to carry you.-- And people cannot be carried. People have to walk on their own. And the Apache people walked on their own for many, many centuries. It’s affected a valuing of themselves. And when you cease to value yourself, then everything [ceases to have value], and education most of all. Because education depends on a people saying, "We can do better, we can rise above, we can take care of ourselves. We care deeply about our future, and deeply about our past.-- And paternalism took a slap at both of those things. On this tape--I could talk about that for months, but I won’t.

Okay, when did [I] first encounter the context of termination? Oh, heavens, I think we’ve been talking about termination for years. I think right now, I think with the coming of the Red Power movement, I think that was kind of an impetus to it, in some ways a very negative one. I think with the coming of tribal councils, as opposed to a chief, [unclear]. Tribal councils bringing the concept of representation by the people--all of this sort of thing. Oh! the permanent industries, the tribal enterprises--on all reservations, not just in <Whiteriver>--but Navajo particularly also, where we began to have various things crop up on reservations that said, "Hey, we’ve got something to offer the rest of the state of <Arizona>.-- Tourism. Our industries here, like the sawmill. Sunrise Ski Resort. All of these things were pointing the way for people saying, "We want to be self-sufficient, we want to be . . .----I’m going to use that word that some of the tribal leaders use--" . . . sovereign.-- We talk about the Navajo Nation, talk about the Papago Nation. Okay, some of this is so positive, it’s a building of pride. It’s a feeling, "We are the people.-- Almost all tribes, the name that they use means "the people.-- Well, now we’re really getting some pride. However, I think there’s also some great inherent dangers.

When I speak with people on reservations, I like to say, "When we talk about sovereignty, then let’s balance that by talking about interdependence." No reservation is an island. And any tribal leader who says it is, is simply deluding the people. Our reservations are within the construct of the State of <Arizona>. And the State of <Arizona> is within the construct of the <United States of America>. And to say, "We can stand absolutely alone," is not only foolish, but it’s negative. That’s not something we want to do. "We have something to offer the state of <Arizona>. The state of <Arizona> has a lot to offer us.-- Sovereignty has to be balanced with interdependence.

Self-sufficiency. That’s another. I don’t think that any of us, in any walk of life, are totally self-sufficient. I don’t want the kids in my school to learn those two concepts, sovereignty and self-sufficiency, without learning interdependence and brotherhood. Red people, for many years, have felt that they were discriminated against. I think we’re getting a backlash. I think red people are, in some senses--and this happens in every movement, it’s a natural part of the movement. It’s historical, you can see it in the Chicano movement, and in the black movement. But I think it’s something we have to guard against. I would like to have us, in our quest for termination and so forth, look for cultural pluralism--not simply for this business of "we the people, sovereign. Close off our roads. We sit on this reservation like an island in the middle of a cultural sea.-- That’s not realistic. And I don’t want the children in my school to learn that. I want the children in my school to have a sense of pride, a sense of language, a sense of selfness, a sense of culture. But I want them to also understand that they have an obligation to other people of other tribes, of other races; they have an obligation to the larger community and family that we live in within the state of <Arizona>, our neighbors to the south in <Mexico>, our country, and so forth.

I’ll sum it up just by saying this. I hope that we can, when we look at this business of paternalism and termination, be eclectic enough in our thinking to pick the good things, the positive things. Those are the things I want the youngsters in my rebellion to have. And to be careful about the negative things, and the things that are not realistic in 1980. Okay?

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, when and how did you learn of the concept of participation? That is, the right of the Indians to help form the decisions that shape and color their lives. In the same vein, when and how did you hear of bicultural or cross-cultural educational [unclear]? Can you tell me some changes that took place in the curriculum as a result of this idea? And can you give me some examples of success and failure?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, your first question about the concept of participation, when and how did I learn of it, is a difficult one to answer, because it’s simply something that we lived with here, as Apache Indians began to have more and more say about what took place on the reservation, and the tribal council became more powerful as the federal government began to address itself more and more to the rights of Indians. And so I really can’t say when and how--it’s just something that we saw grow and emerge as we lived here.

Now, in talking about when and how did you hear about bicultural cross-cultural educational approaches, well, I would say that that did not come along in my career, which is about twenty-six years standing, until approximately the last decade, because I don’t think that we saw that as of great importance when I started out. We never heard about bicultural programs [unclear] federal projects at that time. I think this is something that partially has come about through federal programs, I think through litigations like Lao versus Nichols, this kind of thing, where attention has been focused on one ethnic group, and the ripple effect has caused all ethnic groups to be affected by this, and how we treat an ethnic group in public education. And so I would say it’s probably within the last decade. I think that we have seen changes in the curriculum in terms of--I think making the curriculum more relevant has been one of the major changes, and that’s been a very positive change. For example, I can remember us talking about is it a wonderful thing to talk about ancient <Greece> in South <Tucson>, before you’ve talked about <Mexico> and Mexican Americans? You know, this sort of thing. And so I think, yes, I think it’s focused, particularly in the area of social studies, reading, the language arts in general, that the kinds of materials that we use have not always been relevant to youngsters. I think it’s made us take a look at materials that might be racist in nature, even sexist in nature--that sort of thing. And also helped in the development of new material. We look at the materials now on Chicano culture--it’s fantastic. And materials written in other languages. So, yeah, I think that there’s been a big spin off. Sometimes it takes us a while to catch up with these changes in public education. And there have been some failures, too. I think there’s been some abominable failures in the area of bilingual education. We all hopped on the bandwagon, and everybody wanted to be sure that they had a bilingual program, and we made some monumental booboos. I think that maybe that’s how we learn. It’s unfortunate that we do learn that way, but I think that now there’s a more sensible view of what is realistic in bilingual education, and hopefully....

Instead of saying bicultural, I wish we could take that out of our vocabulary and talk about multicultural. Somehow we got hooked on this idea of bicultural, and I always say to people, which two cultures are you talking about when you talk about bicultural? If you’re on a reservation, are you talking about Apache and ... what? The dominant society? The Anglo society? Well, what part of the Anglo society? What about the other tribes? So I wish that we could just drop that from our vocabulary and talk about multicultural programs. This would, of course--you know, my goal is cultural pluralism. And so I’d like it if we could drop that. So one of your questions, drop that one. (laughs)

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, who is the first college-trained Native American teacher that you’ve been in contact with? And did you feel that this person was effective in his or her position?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, let’s see, the first college-trained Native American teacher was in <Tucson> public schools, and was a Navajo lady from <Kayenta>, teaching in the Tucson Unified District. She was extremely effective. She was well-trained. I can remember thinking how wonderful it would be if they had teachers like her on her reservation. She happened to be teaching in <Tucson> because of her husband’s work. And of course in our own building here we have Native American teachers. And of course effectiveness is something that you judge individually. I’ve known very fine Native American teachers, I’ve known mediocre ones, and I’ve known abominably bad ones--just as I have any other strata of teachers. Hopefully one of the most important concepts that we should be working on in all of the many Indian education classrooms that we have, is how can we upgrade training programs for Native American teachers. I personally am not in favor of the hothouse variety, where we send somebody off for six months’ intensive training and pour boiling water on them, and they become a teacher. I don’t think that that’s helpful to those people, and I don’t think it’s helpful to the tribes, and I certainly do not think it’s helpful to the schools. Those people need to have the same kind of training, the same intensity of training, with perhaps some special help--just as any teacher needs who’s going to teach in special situations. I think it’s an emphasis that needs to be looked at.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, when and how did you learn of the concept "Red Power,-- and was this an idea that you feel was developed outside the reservation? What kind of impact did it have on your classroom, and can you possibly provide an illustration?

Myrna Hillyard: Hm, interesting. I’m not sure that I can date when I began hearing about Red Power. Because at the time the Red Power movement started, I was more involved with Black Power and brown berets and so forth in my work in <Tucson>. I’m not sure when, really, I became aware of this. As to where it was developed, I don’t think there’s any question that at least the very militant strand of Red Power developed in urban Indian leaders, not reservation Indians. And I think that I can prove that. I think that’s historically true. Not to say that it certainly didn’t have an impact on reservations. But I think we should be honest and realistic that many of the Red Power leaders were urban Indians who had never lived on a reservation, and who did not have--were unable, in my view, to empathize with what reservation life was really like. I [unclear] negative things about the Red Power movement, but I think there’s been [three?] negative things in the movement. Sometimes maybe there has to be a certain amount of negativism to wake us up and make us take a look. That’s unfortunate, but that seems to be the way it is. But I do think, also, that there have been some positive things, because I think it’s caused a national interest in Native Americans. And I hope that it helps focus on the realities of being a Native American, rather than on the mythical things that people have seen.

I can remember in <Tucson>, each year I was asked to come to classrooms and give talks about [unclear] one of the few people [unclear] that had grown up on a reservation. And I can remember having a teacher, a college graduate with a master’s degree, call me and ask me to come and talk to her class about the Apache Indians and the first Thanksgiving. And so I said, "How about me either coming and talking about the first Thanksgiving, or talking about Apaches, because there’s no connection.-- I’m using that to illustrate my point that I think that one of the things that Red Power did was, it made us take a look.

The black movement, more than anything else, helped us look at the positive things, the positive contributions that blacks have made. Made us look at the beautiful poetry of Langston Hughes. It made us understand there had been black cavalrymen, the Buffalo Soldiers--all the things that the history books had conveniently sort of passed over or did not see as important. This is a positive result of the Red Power movement. Suddenly you begin to see textbooks coming out with a more realistic view of Native Americans, not just the tomahawk and breechcloth variety of information for youngsters. I think it’s easy for us to concentrate on the negative things, because of the things like [unclear] and all this business. I think that the important thing is to see that there were positive things, and those of us that work on reservations cherish those positive things and go on, because the negative things are--as far as my school, my town, my reservation is concerned, I don’t think that those things are affecting me directly day after day.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, in retrospect, are you happy with the career choice you made, and do you feel your children and family enjoy living on the reservation?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, as far as being happy with the career choice, I’m not a real good person to ask that question, because I’m sort of a fanatic. I think that sometimes we forget. I had a teacher talk to me today about teacher burnout. And I try to be very sympathetic, and yet a tiny part of me can never be sympathetic with that. I think we are so fortunate, because if you love children, we are the only people that I know that have the same vocation and avocation. How lucky we are. You look at the people who go out and are executives and make a ton of money. That’s their vocation, certainly not their avocation. That’s not their [unclear] love of live, unless they’re a workaholic. But for those of us whose whole life has been centered around youngsters, who see them as a constant challenge and a joy, how lucky we are. And as far as career choices, I cannot think of anything in the world that I would rather do. I think there’s other things I could do, because I’m intelligent and I have a fine education, I think, but it’s nice to go home at night, thinking that maybe in some small way you made a difference for somebody. And I think that’s anyway the way my family was raised. That’s the important thing for us. And I think that if I were in some other kind of business, then I would have to be doing this on my free time. I’m very lucky. I do during the day what I would be doing anyway. So absolutely.

And young people coming into it, I hope that we can help young people to be realistic about what going into teaching is all about. I don’t want starry-eyed idealists that are going to be disappointed at the first crack of the bat it isn’t what they thought it was going to be. But on the other hand, I would hope that in my school there will be young people that say, "This is the best of all possible worlds.--

As far as my family is concerned, I came back to the reservation primarily because of my husband--not because it was my home--because he wanted to paint and he wanted to live in a small place, and wanted to live in a place with four seasons. And I think the Apache Reservation probably better than any place in <Arizona>, offers this. I cannot think of one area in <Arizona> that is more blessed than this one. And so for me, and for my family, it’s ideal. The fact that my mother is here, the fact that my brother is here, the fact that my heart was always here, helped.

And as far as raising my children here is concerned, my youngsters love it here. Some people have said, "Don’t you worry about your own children? Are they getting the best education? Are they getting a realistic view of life?-- I think that a lot of those things come from home anyway. The schools can’t do for my children, the values and attitudes that my husband and I can. Those we can instill anywhere, whether it’s <Whiteriver> or downtown <Phoenix>. But my children have friends. Their friends are mostly Apache or Navajo here. They’re happy, they’re growing. I can’t think of a better place to raise them right now.

Margery Clark: Speaking with students and children, Mrs. Hillyard, do you have lasting friendships with your students? Do Native American former students, or former Apache students call on you for counsel?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, [unclear] come around on Friday afternoon when all the junior high kids come by, and the high school freshmen tell us everything that’s going on at the schools, and who’s dating who, and who’s having problems, and who’s having family problems. I hope that the youngsters always feel--not just myself, but the teachers in this school--we tell them, in fact, that when they graduate from sixth grade, "This is always your school. Always know that when you come back here, that it’s special for us that you come.-- And I think that any teacher that doesn’t have former students keeping in touch with them, I’d be concerned about them. I started in 1955 and I still correspond with students that I had then, some twenty-six years ago. Some of them have children older than mine, got into various walks of life. And I think that probably they shared as much as me, and did as much for me as a young teacher and so forth, as hopefully I did for them. And I hope that the youngsters in <Whiteriver>, as they get older and go about making a different life for themselves, will always feel that Mrs. Hillyard loves them and cares about them.

Margery Clark: Mrs. Hillyard, what type of relationship have you had with the Bureau of Indian Affairs? Do you feel the criticism of this organization today is justified? Are there any pieces of legislation passed by the national Congress that you think are particularly good or particularly bad?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, hm, hm, hm. This goes back to your question again about paternalism. I think the Bureau of Indian Affairs has become a whipping boy for an awful lot of things. I think we have to be honest, and we have to be realistic. It’s very easy to [blame] the Bureau of Indian Affairs as the cause of every problem that’s ever happened on a reservation. Well, that’s just ridiculous. They aren’t. A lot of things contributed to this: the westward movement itself, industrialization, population growth, the various wars. I mean, historically speaking, there’s a hundred things that have impacted on Indian reservations, on Indian people, on their culture, on their youngsters, on their way of living. It’s so simplistic and naïve to stand and throw stones at the Bureau of Indian Affairs, because the Bureau of Indian Affairs is a piece of the fabric of how America looks at itself, and how it’s looked at its growth and development. So, you know, it’s just really one little piece in a big jigsaw puzzle of how the <United States> has viewed itself over the years: some of it very positive, and some of it extremely negative. So I try to be realistic about it.

I feel that in my view, Bureau of Indian Affairs schools were abominably bad. And I say that, because of the fact that I can look back now at the things that I saw, now that I’m a teacher and an educator, and [unclear] and I think that a lot of things that they did in the name of education were indefensible. On the other hand, they were what there was at that time. I’m sure the Bureau of Indian Affairs schools are as good and as bad as the people administering them. They’re as good and as bad as the teachers in them. As good and as bad as the support that they get from the community. It’s like any other school.

Again, my major concern has been the paternalism. We do not help people build pride through babysitting them. And most people--especially the people that I live with and love, the Apache people--didn’t need that. They do now, in many respects, but they didn’t then. I feel the same way, it’s like raising your own children. You don’t show care and concern and love through simply giving and giving and giving. You show those things through helping a child, a person, a tribe, a people, a nation, to grow self-sufficient and independent and proud. And if there’s any one thing that I have against the hundred years of the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ activity, it is that one.

But I think also that they have come under criticism many times for things that were only symptomatic of the whole larger philosophical way of looking at people and their differences in our country. And so they became a convenient whipping boy. And by whipping the Bureau of Indian Affairs, it kept us from looking too deeply into how we ourselves felt. Maybe this served a purpose there, for people [unclear]. "Well, it must be the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ fault.-- Well, we put our head in the sand. All of us that work on reservations, surely we would like to see reservations grow in independence and self-sufficiency and understanding of themselves and others, in sending more youngsters off to college who can come back and take over important positions on the reservation. That’s a goal. And I would imagine that there are many, many fine people in the Bureau of Indian Affairs who have that same goal. Perhaps it’s in how we’re trying to reach it that we might differ.

Margery Clark: In conclusion, Mrs. Hillyard, will you summarize for me where you think Indian education is at the present, and possibly where it might head for the future?

Myrna Hillyard: Well, I have a lot of concerns about it. I think that when we have [unclear] I think we really have to be very honest with ourselves in looking at where we are, and what our expectations are. It’s always heartbreaking to me when papers feel that it’s a really wonderful thing to publish what school districts came out poorly on standardized tests, and you will notice that every time this is done, all those districts that came out the lowest are on Indian reservations. Okay, what does this say to us, or what should it say to us, as educators? I think that the easy way out is to say, "Well, we’re on the reservations, we’re fine educators, we’ve got fine schools, we’ve got federal money, and we’re doing the best we can, and obviously there’s something wrong with the Indian youngsters that they can’t profit from this.-- Okay, that makes us feel good and we can sleep at night, and so forth. But I think we’ve got to be honest with ourselves that we must not be answering the needs of Native American youngsters if this continues to happen over and over. Because nobody is ever going to convince me that we do not have as many smart youngsters, as many natively intelligent youngsters, as we have any place else. I think that we have got to recognize certain things. I think we’ve got to recognize language differences--and I make a distinction between language differences and language deficits. Some youngsters have both, but many simply have language differences. I think we also look closely at Indian education and experiential differences, and cherish the experiences the kids have had. Some of our kids are super survivors. We’ve got kids on the east side of <Tucson> that couldn’t live through what some of our kids have lived though, and we don’t appreciate that. We keep wondering why they don’t read, and some of them have been shopping for their families, they have been taking care of younger brothers and sisters. They have been tending alcoholic parents for years. They’ve been doing things that some of our pampered middle-class children could never do. And yet that isn’t something that we cherish because it isn’t tested on the California Achievement Test.

And I look at curriculum, and I get concerned about curriculum, because I think there’s a trend that says we must teach only Native American culture--I mean, they’re practically saying that with such a concentration that I worry that we will not be broadening our kids’ world. We’ve got to find that magic amalgamation between the two. "I value, I cherish what you are. I cherish your roots, your language, your culture, but I also want you to learn about everybody else’s culture, because I want the doors wide open to you.-- And I know that that’s idealistic, no question. But if we aren’t a little bit idealistic, then we’ve lost something precious, and I don’t think that you could stay on the reservation if you weren’t somewhat idealistic. I don’t think you’d be in education if you weren’t somewhat idealistic.

I hope I’m pragmatic enough to kind of know when to be realistic and when to be idealistic, and when to be a dreamer and when to face reality. But in curriculum, we do not have all the answers for Indian youngsters. I think we have less answers for Indian youngsters than we do for [unclear]. We’ve made light years of progress in looking at inner-city youngsters of the black origin and Chicano origin, of poverty, white youngsters. And some of what we’ve learned is applicable to what we do with Native American youngsters, and some of it is not. And I think too many educators have felt that we could just take that lump of information that we’ve learned about blacks and Chicanos, and just sort of impose it on the programs for Native Americans, and it’s not working. It’s not working. But we keep doing these things.

Hopefully we’ve got some young people coming up who are going to research this thing, who are going to study it, who are going to live among Native American people, who are going to record what they see, look at the whole broad spectrum of what we call education, and say, "This is one of the answers for Native American youngsters.-- And then hopefully it won’t be twenty years ‘til we put it in practice. It’s like everything else in education: we knew about Piagian [phonetic] theories at least ten years before anybody even thought of doing something about them in school. So sometimes we’re a little bit slow about picking up on what we know. But hopefully....

I???m not pessimistic at all. I know the social problems we’re facing. And those affect the schools. But I hope we don’t get to the point where we use those social problems as a copout for not improving what we do. It’s so easy to say, "Well, my God, the alcohol rate on our reservation is just terrible! No wonder those kids can’t learn!-- And you know, the broken families and all. Well, we know that, and it’s time to know it and it’s time to face it, and then we say, "What am I, as a trained educator that cares deeply about kids, going to do about it?-- And that’s what I want for Whiteriver Elementary. It’s what I’d like to see for all reservation schools. And hopefully, with young people coming--not just Native American people--I hope that day never comes when we say, "If they’re teaching Apache children, they must be Apaches. If they’re teaching Navajo children, they must be Navajo.-- I want the kids in my school to have experiences with teachers from every race and every walk of life and every different experience. I’ve got teachers from <Michigan>, and teachers from <Whiteriver>. [unclear] brought into the world. And maybe one of those [unclear] young teachers is going to come up with some answers that some of us haven’t found yet. But hopefully our antennae will be up enough to hear these ideas and to assimilate them to make things better for youngsters, and that’s our goal.

Margery Clark: Thank you.



