NAU.OH.74.2.3

Kathleen Anderson, Lois Quick, Karen O’Brien, Martha Hayes and Etheline Whittle

Interviews in English

1974

<Tuba City Arizona>

Transcribed by Bahe Katenay





KATHLEEN ANDERSON INTERVIEW

KATHLEEN ANDERSON: I think what’s most important about these, their way of life is to study why they react to certain ways, study their history and know why they are the people they are --and to just understand them. 

Number two: ‘how is the Navajo/Hopi way different from the Anglo way of life?’ Well, it’s completely different culture it is just as much as if you went into Russia. The people are completely different. They are their own types. 

Number three, okay: ‘changes that have occurred in the school system in the last ten years?’ There has been a lot of changes especially in the education. I think the kids are learning much more, much faster, and they’re coming out with a better education in the long run. Even though like with the new math, I can’t even understand what my First Grader is doing. [chuckles] ‘Which changes have made me happy?’ Well, the fact that they do come out knowing more and that they’re much farther ahead in life to make life easier, more comfortable for everybody --more content. ‘What changes have made me sad and angry?’ Fact that they are trying to get sex education in the schools, I am one-hundred-percent against it! I feel that should be taught in the home and no-place-else! Because, there is a lot of morals and love that needs to be taught, and the schools cannot give it. 

Okay,’ picture of a hogan.’ I don’t know that much about what goes on in the hogan because I have never, once in my life, been in a hogan. I like to but I never been invited into one. I heard what they’re about dirt floors and all, but I haven’t had the opportunity, yet. I wouldn’t know how people feel inside or what goes on except I can image some kind of family life, because I’ve heard a whole family maybe ten or 15 will live in one hogan. 

And now, ‘picture of two people.’ Well, to me, it looks like the Indian is looking off to the side and of course, I mean it’s typical an Indian not to completely look in your eye if he doesn’t know you. There is a communication barrier, and I’d take them looking at these two: they just met. After they get to know each other, those barriers will be broken down and communication will be possible between these two. I just know that from experience living here for three years. My husband also says he can communicate with his students at school tremendously well, now. The first year was extremely hard. 

Off-Microphone Female Voice: Good.

Unknown Male Voice: She cited the fact that they never came to the Chapter House meeting after the election, only before, period. Communication between parents and the school: she felt was the most pressing problem in the local school district, and the school alienating the children from their parents she perceived as the outcome of this lack of communication, period. 

In <Kayenta>, the dismissed school one day a week on a Friday to allow the classroom teacher for visitation to the Hogan. A lot of times this does not work out because when the students are dismissed from the classroom, the parents take off on a holiday and nobody is home when the teacher comes out there. 



LOIS QUICK INTERVIEW

LOIS QUICK: Do you want me to start all over again? 

Interviewer: Yeah, why don’t you start.

 LOIS QUICK: Okay, ‘What in the Navajo-Hopi way of life do you think is most important for your child to know?’ There aren’t too many things that I think that are important for them to know except the backgrounds, the different cultural backgrounds, the reasons why they behave the way they do. One thing that they need to know is the difference in the moral attack that we have toward life, particularly along the sexual lines. An Anglo student thrown in with Navajos and Hopis who have an entirely different attitude towards sex than the Anglo culture. I’ve got to be aware of this, and have to learn to cope with it. 

‘How’s the Navajo -- Hopi way of life different from the Anglo way of life?’ 

[A loud background humming noise stops.] 

Voice: Yeah, this isn’t electric is it?

Voice: Yeah, it’s plugged in.

LOIS QUICK: Oh, okay. Well, it’s so different in every way. Their basic goals are different. Their time concept is different. Their state assembles are different. They lack of real Anglo competition-type of living. Their behavior codes, their dress codes. To me, they’re so alien to what my girls have known. I think it’s interesting for them to see them and to be aware of them, and to appreciate them, but I certainly would be terribly disappointed if they adopted them as part of their lifestyle because this is not what we intended. We have raised our children always to appreciate the differences and to always try to maintain their own identity among all differences. And I would be very disappointed if they did differently. 

Okay, number three. ‘..Think of any changes in the school system in the last ten years.’ We’ve only been here three years so I haven’t seen too many changes. I’ve seen a complete change of administration which I thought was much for the better. I’ve seen an improvement in keeping some kind of a disciplinary attack in the school by the administration which I think is pretty important because if the school gives up then, where are we going to go from there? And particularly, as I was talking about before, my child has learned her behavior patterns at home. She knows how she is expected to act in public, and this is a carry over. I don’t think the Navajo or the Hopi families have the same type of attitude that we have toward this --in public. I think that in every new situation that the Navajo moves into or the Hopi moves into, they have to learn the rules of the game just like we do when we move into a Negro society or into the Hopi dance time, or something like that. And there has to be somebody there to show the guidelines and if the administration doesn’t do it then we’re out of luck. 

Academically, I haven’t seen any particular change and of course, I have absolutely no quarrel. Mrs. Geisel was my older daughter’s science teacher, and I don’t think there is another teacher in the <United States> that could have been any better for her. As remote as we are, I feel my children have the advantages of extremely fine teachers. Mrs. Sykes is another one, just outstanding, and this is a comment I’ll put in here that, I have found on the reservation in the BIA schools and in the public schools. I been teaching for I think this is my eighteenth year. All but three have been in the Denver school and I have seen a lot of teacher in them. But down here, I’ve seen either extremely fine teachers or extremely poor teachers where in <Denver>, I’ve saw many in the middle row. There were high and low, there also, but many middle row. Here, I see very few middle row teachers. 

I think this speaks well of the school system and as they get rid of the ‘chad’ [uncertain of this word] which they’re bound --they have to do. This school will continue to improve. Of course, if it is funded by the government and continues to get good funds and continue to pay good prices why we’re going to get teachers who really do have a dedication to moving into this part of the world. I would hope that those teachers coming in would have concern for all people not just the Indian or just Hopis or this type of thing because this is a multicultural school that these kids go to. 

[Brief pause]

‘What do I think about life in a hogan?’ [added chuckle and laughter] Ooh, grim! I come from a long-long line of educators, and I come from a long-long line of snobs. Where we live now I enjoy very much, I like the house and so, and so forth. But we sold a beautiful home to come down here. I’ve always lived in the finest of conveniences, and the thought of living in a hogan is more than my imagination can even encompass. I have never been in one. I should go in one. I’m certain that I think probably it be better if I didn’t [In background reaction is loud laughter] because I might have even worst conception than I do. Now, I think life in a hogan would be so difficult because of the lack of privacy! Everyone has his living space and if it’s invaded, his whole personality is distorted. 

Background Voice: This is true. 

LOIS QUICK: And I cannot imagine: 12, 10, 14 people living in a hogan and having any kind of a stable personality come out of this. 

Interviewer: They do well don’t they?

LOIS QUICK: They --they do a hell of a lot better than I would. What’s happening inside, too many things are happening inside as far as I’m concern in a hogan that are personal to each person that’s involved, and this is wrong. Particular, and I get back to this moral, ethical code of our children who come to us at school very young age are very knowledgeable in the physical act of sex and know practically nothing and are --and it’s very difficult to even teach them about the moral ramifications involved about love instead of it being just an animal act. This I think probably will disturb me more than anything when I think about a hogan, young children and a married couple. 

‘And how do I think people inside feel?’ I couldn’t even begin to guess how they would feel or how they might verbalize it. I’m sure they feel --to me, they would have to feel ---less than they should be as a human being. They are not given enough personal living space to even having real identity. Of course, this is one of the reasons why I am so in favor of what I see in a boarding school,  and particularly in the new boarding schools where they are having two to a room and giving them some personal-living space: clean sheets, three meals a day. If you don’t have these things, I don’t care whether you are purple creature from Africa you don’t have these things that are basic to self worth, I don’t see how a person can rise above the pressure that must be in it. 

Of course then on the other hand, you also have to look at the fact there is a great deal of family identity that the Anglo culture has moved away from, and I think this is a very good thing. So there are --I have ambivalences in this type of thing because I came from a family where we had plenty of personal living space and not much family cohesiveness. So, I do see a family cohesiveness that I think is good. Also, I see in this family cohesiveness, a dependence, which pulls the others down rather than one that will let others up in the family. 

Interviewer: Okay, we have the picture of two men.

 LOIS QUICK: Okay. I look at the face of the Anglo man, the drawn down mouth, the sad eyes, and I feel what this man maybe feeling: ‘What can I do to help this person, the more of what he wants to be?’ Inside of his head, I can see the wheels going around saying: ‘Where can I reach him? How can I reach him? Where can we set up communication? Where can I help this person to be more of what he’s intended to be?’

And on the part of the Indian, I see an attitude of: ‘I don’t see you standing there, Buddy. Here I am. You’re going to have to put up with me pretty much the way I am because here I am carrying a culture of hundreds of years with me. You give me plenty of money and feed my stomach and get me what --take care of my whiskey needs. Give me my welfare money. I’m getting along real well, don’t bother me!’ And the desperation on the Anglo person’s face, ‘I want to help. What can I do?’

[There is laughter throughout from the background as reactions to certain responses made by Narrator.]

LOIS QUICK: ‘What will happen to each of them?’ Well, lets hope that the Anglo person has perseverance and stays with it until he can set up communication and can help. But too often, this just doesn’t happen. He becomes frustrated, and we all have to meet certain personal goals and if you’re constantly being frustrated in what you do, you finally say, ‘well, what’s the use? I’ve done all I can do. I’ll move on.’ When this happens, the Navajo says, ‘well, told you so.’ 

Even if it’s ten years, I think there’s an attitude in the Indian’s mind, of the Navajo’s mind. Well, for instance when birth control is discussed with the Navajo people and I’m sure with the Hopi people also, they become in many cases very, very irritated because they feel that the white man is trying to cut down their birth rate and wipe them out. And I feel this whole attitude of ‘Yankee, go home’ type of thing. I think this is totally, absolutely wrong! I have very strong feeling about this. I don’t feel if this Navajo considers himself as a U.S. Citizen, and I don’t care how you cut it this is what he is first! I think this is our responsibility as teachers, as educators, as Navajo leaders, as Anglo leaders to make this very well known that they are part of the population of the United States, a very minimal part of the United States. They have a responsibility as well as the privileges. I think that the Navajo attitude is, ‘I’ll take -- I’ll take -- I’ll take because you owe -- owe -- owe -- owe.’ I don’t owe one thing to the Navajo, to the Hopi, to the Zuni, to the Mohawk or anything else for what my parents and grandparents did. I owe something to the children that I work with because I feel like this is my responsibility. But the whole attitude that I see is, ‘give me -- give me -- give me you owe it to me.’ And somewhere along the line this got to be, some way, annihilated. And that is it.

Interviewer: ...On this school situation, which changes have made you sad or angry?

LOIS QUICK: I am extremely sad and angry that our school board, after petitions and pleads from members of the community, decided to keep corporal punishment, a means by which to control the children in the school. I think this is barbaric! It has been abused terribly! And I could name the names easily and the names were named in the school board hearings about this. And the brutality that has gone on, and yet, when they tabled it and when it came to a vote after the election, when Mr. Hayes, who was an  Anglo,  was defeated by a Hopi on the school board, they took the vote after he was instated and corporal punishment is the rule of the day. Hadley [?] Thomas got up at the hearing and intimidated everyone about it saying, ‘this was the way it was going to be.’ Which I thought was very much out of line on his part. I do not feel it’s necessary except in extreme cases to use corporal punishment and then only with the parents’ consent or presence. And I think that a vote like that shows this state is twenty years behind in dealing with children because: you do not teach a beaten child anything. And I violently opposed to corporal punishment, indiscriminant corporal punishment, and it made me sad and it made me angry. 

I am so disappointed to think that this is, first of all, on the statues of the Arizona law and then, to be reinforced by the board and an interesting side-light of this is that the Hopi man that was elected to the board, his daughter was in an automobile accident. She was taken in at the hospital and was in pretty bad shape. She had been drinking and the father came running in at the hospital and said, ‘just let me get my hands on her and I’m going to beat her black and blue!’ This is the man representing the school board and he is going to beat up his daughter. He is one of the ones that voted for corporal punishment. I do not feel that men like this have any business in the schools and having any kind of policy concerning children. They do not have enough education nor intelligences, and do I feel. This makes very angry. 

Interviewer: Ah, okay, thank you.

 KAREN O’BRIEN INTERVIEW 

Interviewer: What in the Navajo/Hopi way of life do you think is most important for your child to know? 

KAREN O’BRIEN: Their general cultural beliefs in why they or what they believe is different than we do. And there again, that answers number two, ‘how is it different from the Anglo way of life?’ It is different from the basic background culture between the two or three groups. In fact, the Navajo / Hopi are different in many ways. 

Interviewer: Number three. Here is a picture of a school, can you think of any changes that have occurred in the school system in the last ten years? 

KAREN O’BRIEN: What, this school?

Interviewer: Any school system.

KAREN O’BRIEN: Oh yes, tremendous changes. The way you have the classrooms and what you teach the kids, and how the kids get there and what they eat when they get there. 

Interviewer: What changes have made you happy?

KAREN O’BRIEN: Well, the increased interest in the individual training of the child instead of the whole group.

Interviewer: Which changes have made you sad or angry?

KAREN O’BRIEN: Oh, I can’t really comment on that one, --take three days to think about it. 

Interviewer: [After a short laughter] Hold on. Here is picture of a hogan, please, tell me about life in a hogan.  

KAREN O’BRIEN:I really don’t know about life in a hogan. 

Interviewer: What’s happening inside? 

KAREN O’BRIEN: They cook and eat and sleep and visit. 

Interviewer:  How do the people inside feel? 

KAREN O’BRIEN: I would image just like families everywhere would feel especially when they are crowded together. 

[Pause]

KAREN O’BRIEN: It looks like they are fighting or having crosswords with each other. I really don’t know what about. Whether they are arguing or whether someone is trying to sell something to someone else. I really --could be either way. Yes, I do think they can communicate. I think anybody can communicate if they want to whether they can talk the same language or not and since most Navajos know at least some English. You can always draw pictures and get together, and I think they probably know --I’d say the Anglo is probably trying to figure out how to say something so that the Navajo will really understand what he is saying instead of only partly. And I think that the Navajo is probably trying very hard to put the English words together so that it makes sense to him, too. If they work at it long enough and hard enough, they will manage to communicate adequately so they fairly well understand what the other one is trying to say or answer. And then they probably will go their own way like most people do.      



MARTHA HAYES INTERVIEW 

MARTHA HAYES: ...Everything. I mean they need to know how the Navajo and the Hopi feel. They need to know a little about their culture, some of their customs, or acts of their religions which we can’t know, but they need to know this to understand them. 

Interviewer: Now, in the Navajo -- Hopi way. How is the Navajo -- Hopi way of life different from the Anglo way of life?

MARTHA HAYES: To me, the Navajos are kind of --unfriendly type people. They have to know you before they become your friend. They have to know that you are not going to harm them. They are not really very friendly. The Hopis are quite the other way. They are pretty friendly. They live in a commune-type living. The Navajos live way far, far out but however, they are becoming closer. We have always lived in a community-type life and been pretty friendly with everybody. 

Interviewer: Can you think of any changes that have occurred in the school system in the last ten years?

MARTHA HAYES: Any changes? Oh, there’s been a lot especially in the B.I.A. school. I have seen the teachers down there, and I can see that their quality of education in the last five and half  years has really improved. I feel that up here, the quality has improved, too.    

 Interviewer: Which changes have made you happy?

 MARTHA HAYES: Oh, gracious. I really can’t say what changes. 

Interviewer: Which changes have made you sad or angry?

 MARTHA HAYES: Well, there hadn’t been any really changes that made me angry or sad. One thing I do feel is that, I think we as teachers are inclined not to push the Indian children and say, ‘well, they are not capable’ when they really are capable. It is simply that they don’t understand our language and this is their biggest problem. It is a language barrier and they are as intelligent as we are in some respect, more so. Some of them, you know. 

Interviewer: Now, we have a picture of a hogan. Please, tell me about what you think of life in a hogan.   

MARTHA HAYES: I’ve never been inside one so I really couldn’t say. 

Interviewer: What do you think is happening inside or..?

MARTHA HAYES: Well, I imagine that they are living just as a happy family. They are probably very happy, very content in their family because I feel, I feel, how do we know that our way of life is best.

Interviewer: That’s right. How do the people inside feel? How do you think as far as their personal life is, how are their feelings like? 

 MARTHA HAYES:  I think they are happy and they are content --most of them. Some of them have it very hard. Some of them probably want something better and have a little bit of anguish.  

Interviewer: Okay. Now we have a picture of the two people. Tell me something about these two faces.

MARTHA HAYES: [Giggles] Gracious, these two faces.. I think the Indian face is a typical Navajo face I mean he looks bland but because he is (‘strangest’) [inaudible] and he is not communicating. This is just their way. They don’t.. --umm, smile or show their emotions as outwardly as most Anglo people.

And as for the Anglo man, he looks rather stranded perhaps he doesn’t quite understand the Navajo. I think this is our biggest problem with us Anglos. We don’t understand the Indians and we....

Interviewer: Well, what do you think each one is thinking about? As they stand there, what are they thinking about? 

MARTHA HAYES:  Hmm! [Laughs] I like to know him better or I like to know them better. 

Interviewer: Good. What will happen to each of them if they go apart? What will happen? 

MARTHA HAYES: They probably will go on their --each go their own way of life. Perhaps, the Indian will, he looks like a young man, maybe go on to college and become a teacher or a doctor, or a professional man of some kind. Perhaps, the Anglo man is a young man, too, he’ll go on and be something --a minister or, he kinda reminds me of a minister. [Giggles]

Interviewer: He does! [Chuckles] Okay, fine and thank you very much.  



ETHELINE WHITTLE INTERVIEW

Interviewer: What in the Navajo/Hopi way of life do you think is most important for your child to know?

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Well, I feel that I want my child to understand about the histories of these people and try to know enough about their cultures, to how to deal with them. I know that my daughter has dated Navajo and Hopi boys, both and there are lots of times that she may have offended by them when she did not realize it, and it’s well to know enough about their culture to try to avoid these types when you offend other people. Is that it?

Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine. Number two, how is the Navajo/Hopi way of life different from the Anglo way of life? 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Well, I feel as a whole that Anglo people are more aggressive, that we are more competitive. That a lot of us are more missionary-minded and want to help these people in various ways and I feel that the reservation would hurt if it were not for these people who are missionary-minded. I feel that our schools are just loaded with these people. I feel that also we have more self-determination, and that when we have a job or when we have a goal, we go after what we try to get. Whereas I feel this is not the way of these other people. I think they are more reserve and they are not -- they don’t have so much self-determination and I don’t think they are motivated to learn like we are and to be missionary-minded. 

Interviewer: True. 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: I had heard before I came that they were the kind of people who helped one another and shared, but I haven’t found that to be particularly true on the reservation. I feel that they are seeking their own needs more than anyone else’s. 

Interviewer: ...And I said the third question and that is the picture of a school.

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Well now this is any school?

Interviewer: Yes. 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Alright. Well of course, this is a difficult thing to say because there are so many different kinds of programs being used in various schools. I think that many school are having vocational training than they use to, and I am much in favor of this. 

Interviewer: Good.

ETHELINE WHITTLE: I feel that even though college is important for a lot of people that, very many people do not --ah, profits them... [Pause briefly] Well --they are not aided by it. It really doesn’t help them that they could get by with the vocational training just as well, as they can with higher education. But not that, I’m not for higher education. Let’s see, here, sometime a few years back they said that, ‘more small classes were needed,’ and this is something I feel we definitely need in our schools especially on the reservation. To make these classes smaller, where we can have more, what, one-to-one correspondence with these people because this is what we need so badly and if we can have more aides? This also would help to have more one-to-one correspondences. 

As for ‘what changes have made you sad or angry.’ Well, I am not for team teaching in the lower grades. I feel that when you get 50 or 53 children in a room that, lots of time their little minds shut off. When we go to school, we learn that a child, first, is self-centered then he starts working in a group with two or three then he starts working in group a little larger than that, and many times before he comes to school, he is not accustomed to working in a group any larger than two or three. Then we put him in a class of 53 and I think that his little ears just shut off --just like that. This has made me very upset and I don’t feel that regardless of the explanation of team teaching that, a teacher can’t know of all that 53 little kids in a classroom.

Interviewer: Now, that we get to a picture of the hogan. 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Since I was never in one, it would be very difficult for me to know what to do. I believe that there is a lot of sleeping going on and I have often felt this when I would be teaching that probably a lot of children would spend a lot of time at home just sleeping. When they are out watching the sheep then, too, they might just be lazing around doing nothing much of anything. Also, they have the tendency to tease a great deal. I feel probably a lot of teasing goes on in the hogan because they don’t have any games or anything else to do so this is their fun to tease one another. I feel like a lot of this happens. I do believe it probably does have a feeling of closeness.

And I don’t know if whether I have time to tell this or not, when we went to <Phoenix> we took this Navajo boy with us. We as white people would do nothing but to rent that boy a room of his own because we have a daughter, see? Alright, this boy was offended to the.. oh, to the hilt. He was offended and he said, ‘you don’t like me, you don’t want me with you.’ And it was a terrible situation for us and so finally we said, ‘okay, we’ll rent a cot,’ and got that boy to sleep in the room that we did. We went to bed in our clothes just like he would, you know, just to make him feel happier and after that, I have felt probably because they live so close together that they do feel a closeness. They resented it when we wanted to put him in a room. 

Interviewer: How do the people in inside feel? How do you think more or less and to what extend? 

 ETHELINE WHITTLE: How do they feel?

Interviewer: As far as their emotions and their feelings towards school, those type of thing. 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: This is inside the hogan?

Interviewer: Yeah, they are sitting inside their hogan. 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Oh, dear. Well, I feel [chuckles] --I think they feel not worth it with not much to do, not any motivation to do much of anything is just that to tease one another. Maybe to do some duties of cooking and whatever they have to do. I really think --I don’t know. In such a position as that, I would feel very damned-hearted and gloomy. Well, I know where I would fit. I have to get something to do.

Interviewer: Okay. Well, next we have a picture of the two people.                                          

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Alright, I feel that this one man on the side is either a missionary or a teacher, or some worker who has come on the reservation. Who has come because he really wants to help the people not for... [inaudible] ...or anything else involved but because he really wants to help the people. The question that he is asking himself is ‘what can I do to help these people?’ Whereas on the other hand, I cannot help but feel, maybe he is wondering [with a chuckle] how he could run the white man off the reservation because that is what our papers are all full of. I meant of course they have practically promised to get rid of us within in five years. I feel that he is resenting the white man because he said, ‘he is trying to push his culture on me and how can I get rid of him.  I want to run my own business and just how can I go about it?’ This is just what I think he is feeling.

Interviewer: Okay. What will happen to each one of them? 

ETHELINE WHITTLE: Well, I feel in a few years that the white man will be gone from the reservation, and that if he is a teacher he’ll find teaching position elsewhere possibly in a little country town somewhere, and that he’ll be happy in his new work. The Navajo and Hopi will be training more people to lead them. They will be in some --some way leading their own people in a few years. 

Interviewer: You did fine. Thank you very much. 


