BUZZ BELKNAP Interview (transcript)



Anderson: HOW did you get involved?



Buzz Belknap: I've done quite a few trips with Dock before that starting in, I guess 1958 - well actually I've done a trip I think in 1953, a really early trip from Whitmore on down and then in 1958 I made a full length trip through the <Grand Canyon> with Dock, and in '59 did the Walt Disney trip with Dock. Did quite a few things with Dock since he was in on a lot of the organization - that's how I got into it - sort of.



Anderson: You weren't included on the original plans on the uprun?



Buzz Belknap: I carne in on the down trip at <Phantom Ranch>. I guess we got down to Lake Mead and they needed another pilot. I piloted on that '59 Walt Disney trip, so they just asked me if I'd like to try it. I said, Yes!



Anderson: Remembering your age (16) - how did they treat you?



Buzz Belknap: Just like another crew member. I didn't feel any different They treated me that way. I felt that way.



Anderson: They didn't play up or down to you in any respect?



Buzz Belknap: No..no..I just forgot about my age and they did too. It's something I'll never forget, really.



Anderson: What about Ed I'Anson?



Buzz Belknap: Ed was an engineer and he had a company called the Lincoln Foundry in <Pasadena>? I know he lived in <Pasadena>, his company was down there, in the <Los Angeles> area. Ed's a very intelligent person and a good person to have along. He was on several of the early trips with me. I did know him pretty well from those trips.



Anderson: What did you see happen in <Grapevine>?



Buzz Belknap: I was down below, and I guess Jon Hamilton and gone up through, and Guy Mannering had gone through. Fireball Young was just starting up through there. I was waiting down below, suddenly we just saw him with his nose down, floating back down the river. The deck of the boat on the bow had separated. It had been weakened I guess he hit enough rocks in other rapids that things had loosened up pretty well loosened up the boat and we just took a ride down below there. I think we just picked them up. I'm pretty sure we did, both of them. But I was amazed how fast that boat went down.



Anderson: Why is the uprun little known?



Buzz Belknap: I don't know. It's hard for me to answer that. All I could is just guess at it. I don't know if the company at the time didn't do enough in letting the word out... or the Park Service sense it's something that can't be done. I don't know if they just don't want anybody to think about doing it, I don't know, I really don't.



Anderson: Do you think you conquered the river?



Buzz Belknap: Yes, I would say so, definitely. All the way up there - just to have gotten the boats all the way through three of them I think so, I definitely do.



Anderson: What was the last day .. pulling into <Lees Ferry> like?



Buzz Belknap: A really great feeling. I had butterflies every morning before we started out and I was wondering if we were going to make it and everything, and when we did, it was a great feeling.



Anderson: Describe the scene.



Buzz Belknap: I really can't. I just remember the feeling of making it I can't really recall who was there whatever.



Anderson: Was there any feeling of apprehension?



Buzz Belknap: The only apprehension or feeling like that, like I said, just in the morning when we started out and have sort of an exciting, the adrenalin was pumping down below. In the rapids, some of them seemed like it was easier going up then coming down, cause you were able to pull to one position, look around, and decide where to go next. Some of them wasn't quite that way cause you were being turned around a lot, but once you actually got into the rapid and felt you really had control it was really a comfortable feeling. It was a lot of fun. I really enjoyed it.



Anderson: Did the canyon look different going up?



Buzz Belknap: I guess I have done so much before running up in the lower end of the canyon and we gone up through some of the rapids before that, the up and down didn't seem too much different really, except the feeling you had more control in some of the rapids.



Anderson: Do you think there should be one or a few things that should be brought out in this story.



Buzz Belknap: I think Jon Hamilton did a rather remarkable job getting all the boats up <Vulcan> that was a real highlight. Just watching him out there working away at it. It was pretty remarkable.



Anderson: Do you think there was any one person responsible for the success of the trip?



Buzz Belknap: There was a lot of people who really played a lot of important roles in it. Jon, his driving was just remarkable Of Dock did so much of the -- the planning and everything. It's hard to say just one person.



Anderson: Do you think other trips would make it up?



Buzz Belknap: It could be done again.



Anderson: Do you have anything to add?



Buzz Belknap: It was one of the greatest experiences in my life and I'm sure Dock had really had a good influence on me and I'll never forget him and how he got me on really gave things like this.

