FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Millard Kuhn

Interview number NAU.OH.28.68





Millard Kuhn, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1921 and has worked for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company for many years. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on August 17, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, November 1999. 



Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview 

Tape 1, Side 1 

Born in <Pagosa Springs Colorado> in 1907 

Parents 

Mother, Hazel Johnson 

Father, Fred Kuhn 

Both died in flu epidemic 

Father’s occupation 

Worked for DandRG Western Railroad 

Schooling 

Started in <New Mexico> 

Moved to <Los Angeles> with grandparents 

Moved to <Flagstaff> with grandparents 

West to training school in <Flagstaff> 

Grandparents 

E.T. Johnson, worked at ALandT 

May Johnson 

Lived on Riordan Rd. 

Started job at ALandT in 1924 

Type of work done 

ALandT 

Property owned by company in <Flagstaff> south of railroad 

Joe Dolan’s role at ALandT 

Why grandparents came to <Flagstaff> 

Marriage and family 

Married Nilma Johnson in 1932 

Background and how they met 

Children 

Fred, Carol Truman, Paul 

Downtown area in 1920’s 

Street conditions 

Train depot 

Front Street 

Matson’s dairy 

Mill area described 

Housing 

Commisary, mill store 

When mill stopped functioning, 1954-55 

Neighbors 

Steinmetz, Smith McNamara, Caffey, Greenhill, Herring, Burns, Peris 

Logging camps 

Schools for children in camps 

Areas logged 

Restrictions on logging, “sustained yield” 

Weather conditions affecting logging operations 

Cold-decking for winter 

Effects of dry years on mill 

Springs in area 

O’Neill Springs, Sewer Canyon

Tape 1, Side 2 

Water system for mill 

Lake Mary 

T.A. Riordan’s sail boat 

Riordan family 

Lived with T.A. Riordan family before married 

Social life of family 

Deer hunting story 

Dolans 

Cady Mill 

Box factory 

ALandT 

Saginaw-Manistee Lumber Co., discussed 

Baker, Fentriss and Co. from <Chicago> owned many pine mills in western <US> 

Social life of community 

Area on Riordan road, described 

Churches 

First LDS church 

Mill workers predominantly Catholic 

Ceremonies connected with the churches 

Weddings, funerals 

Work on City Council (late 1930’s) 

Water shortage in 1930’s 

6,000 foot dry hole in Ft. Valley area 

Duties of council members 

<Flagstaff> in relation to rest of state 

Frank Christianson 

Road situation 

Depression of 1930’s 

Mill shut down from 1929-33 

Shipped money from <California> to pay mill workers 

Cady Lumber shut down 

World War II 

Lumber industry was a defense industry 

Building of military installations in <Arizona> and <California> 

Ammunition boxes for <Bellemont> 

Strike, picket lines

Tape 2, Side 1 

Fires at mill 

Flooding along Rio de Flag 

Big snows 

1949-50, 168” in several weeks 

Snow removal at mill 

Horse drawn plows and hand shovels 

Epidemics 

Small pox scare 

Mercy Hospital, Dr. Sechrist 

Reaction to small pox vaccine 

Arthur Riordon’s death 

Polio or meningitis 

Ethnic groups 

Blacks 

Walter Garrison, Horn 

Hispanics 

Many worked for mill, most became naturalized citizens 

Native Americans 

Chinese 

June family 

Tourism 

East <Flagstaff> 

Greenlaw Mill 

Timber from Sunset Crater area, Cinder Hills, <Walnut Canyon> area 

University Training School 

Teachers at Emerson School 

McVey, Hoyt, Kennedy, McNerney



This is an interview with Mr. Millard Kuhn who came to <Flagstaff> in 1921 and has worked for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company for many years. The interview is being conducted on August 17, 1976, in Mr. Kuhn's home, located at 1316 McMillan Road, in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [The narrator's wife, Nilma, is also present and makes a few comments. (Tr.)] 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, Mr. Kuhn, when and where were you born? 



MILLARD KUHN: I was born in <Pagosa Springs Colorado>, April 7, 1907. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And who were your parents? 



MILLARD KUHN: My mother was Hazel Johnson, and my father was Fred M. Kuhn. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, did they come to <Flagstaff>? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, my parents died in the flu epidemic in 1918. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: In <Colorado>? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, my father died in <Durango Colorado>, and my mother in <Chama New Mexico> - four days apart. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, goodness, so you really WERE hard hit by the flu epidemic. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you have any brothers or sisters? 



MILLARD KUHN: No brothers or sisters, no. And at that time, I went to live with my grandparents, after [my parents'] death. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, where were your grandparents living? 



MILLARD KUHN: They were living in <Dulce New Mexico>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: For the record, I'd like to know what your father did. 



MILLARD KUHN: He was a railroader. He was conductor on the DandRG Western. He was running from <Chama New Mexico>, to <Durango Colorado>. He took sick on the end of his run, never got home. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (expressing sympathy) Oh! 



MILLARD KUHN: Died right there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So then did you receive most of your schooling in <New Mexico>? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, yes, up until about the seventh or eighth grade, and I moved to <Los Angeles> with my grandparents. We were there for… oh, in 1921, we came here from <Los Angeles> in the spring of 1921. And I finished my grade school at the Training School at the college. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Aha! So your grandparents actually moved here with you? 



MILLARD KUHN: That's right. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What were THEIR names? 



MILLARD KUHN: E.T. Johnson and May E. Johnson. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did you live, what part of the city? 



MILLARD KUHN: We lived on Riordan Road. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! Uh-huh. Did your grandfather work at the mill then? 



MILLARD KUHN: He worked at the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did the Riordans own it at that time? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And then when did the Dolans… 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, Mr. Dolan came here in June of 1933. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! so there was quite a gap there, that your grandfather __________. Now, you finished at the Training School? 



MILLARD KUHN: Then I went to Emerson School. And then the high school was upstairs in those days. The four years of high school was upstairs then. I never finished high school, though. My grandparents passed away, and I went to work for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. Now, about what year was that, do you remember? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I started steady in 1924. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And what type of work did you do at the mill? 



MILLARD KUHN: I've done all kinds of work over there. I've worked in the lumber yard, I've worked in the planing mill, I've worked in the shipping end, I've worked in the old commissary, I worked in the office - in and out of it several times. Of course I've been with the company almost fifty-two years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Hmm! Now you're with Southwest? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, I'm with Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, okay. (chuckles) 



MILLARD KUHN: We have no sawmill anymore, but we own nearly all the property on the West End of town there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! 



MILLARD KUHN: You know, beginning down at Granny's Closet, and going out toward the junction there. We own all those motel properties and all those service stations, the property where McDonald's is, and where the Burger King is goin' up, where the First National Bank is. That all belongs to our company. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So it's like an investment company now? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yes that’s right. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I wasn't aware of that at all. That's interesting. Well, do the Riordans have anything to do with that anymore? Or is that primarily…? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, the Riordan family [is] still. Some of the descendants are stockholders in the company. And then, of course, Joe Riordan, whom I'm associated with now, is vice-president and general manager, but that was a different Riordan family. So it's the same name, spelled the same way, but that was a different family. So I've been with the Riordans for many years. (laughs) And the Dolans also! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, the Dolans, did they actually… They just bought into the company? 



MILLARD KUHN: Mr. Dolan bought into the company in 1933, yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. For some reason, I thought he'd actually like owned it or… 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, his family [members] are the principal stockholders. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, I'm getting this kind of straightened out in my mind. Okay, let's go back a little bit then. Why did your grandparents come to this area in particular? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, my grandfather got a job through the Simon Saw and Steel Company at the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company plant, and he came here to work for them. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well… he heard about that in <Los Angeles>? Or did he have other connections here? 



MILLARD KUHN: It was through some of their traveling representatives that happened to travel this territory. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, why don't we go ahead and kind of work on [the biography form?]. When did you get married then? 



MILLARD KUHN: Hmm. In November 6, 1932. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: All right, and what's your wife's name? 



MILLARD KUHN: Nilma J. Her [maiden] name was also Johnson. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Had she lived in <Flagstaff> long? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, she was born in <Mesa Arizona>, and lived in <Mesa> and the <Phoenix> area for most of her young life. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How did you meet then? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, she was up here going to school at the teachers' college up here at that time, before it was the university. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Then you had children? 



MILLARD KUHN: Three children. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What are their names? 



MILLARD KUHN: Fred, Carol, and Paul. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And Carol's married? 



MILLARD KUHN: They're all married now. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What's her married name? 



MILLARD KUHN: Truman. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, are any of them still living in <Flagstaff>? 



MILLARD KUHN: No. The older boy, Fred, lives in <Costa Mesa California>. Paul and Carol both live in <St. George Utah>. They all went to school here, though. Fred went to college here, so did Paul. They didn't finish college here. Paul finished at Arizona State, and I think Fred graduated from here, but he's gone to other schools since. He's gone to Brigham Young University, he's gone to the University of Kansas, University of New Mexico, University of Arizona. He went to law school down there. He didn't make the grade, however, in law school. And he's presently teaching Spanish in the Costa Mesa junior high schools over there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Why don't we go ahead and find out what the other children [are doing]. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, Carol, the daughter. her husband's in the furniture business in <St. George>, and she was on the Dixie College faculty, a piano teacher, for quite some time. She isn't right presently, but she was. And Paul presently has just gone to <Salt Lake City> where he's in a real estate firm up there. He's just been up there a couple of weeks, so they probably will later move up there. We don't know just at this time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's interesting! what everyone's doing. Okay, why don't we go ahead and talk about the downtown area (MK chuckles) and what that was like when you came. Quite a difference? 



MILLARD KUHN: Muddy streets. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: They still weren't paved? 



MILLARD KUHN: They weren't paved when I came. The downtown area was not paved. No. We came in by train, of course, at that time, and the old depot - I don't know whether you've even ever noticed it. It's the old freight depot that used to be the passenger depot. About a block east of where the present depot is. That was the passenger depot for many years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there anything much along what they called Front Street when you came? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes, there were quite a few restaurants and hotels - the Commercial Hotel and the Pine Hotel were there. But some of the other businesses, the old one on the corner, the Bank Hotel, and some of those were there. Of course a lot of the businesses, the garages and further out, have been built over the years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was the residential area much closer to downtown than it is now? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, some of it was, yes. The city, of course, was not spread out when I came here. I don't think it was over 6,000 people here then. This area where we live now was the old - had a dairy over here in this area. I don't remember the name of it, but Mr. Matson ran the dairy over in this area, and this was mostly grazing area for the cows. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It really has changed! (laughter) Why don't I ask you to describe what it was like over by the mill, as far as housing went, and things. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, the company there had housing for the employees. Some of them did not live there, but many of them did. There were many houses out in that area that belonged TO the company. There were quite a few Mexican people employed there, and there was also an area for THEM, that was back behind Mrs. Dolan's house, if you know where that's at. They were back in THAT area. Of course they've all gradually been torn down. They're all gone now, and the only three houses left are Mrs. Dolan's, and the original T.A. Riordan house, and the old hospital. That hospital, our older boy was born in that hospital - Fred. Of course, at one time, that was the only hospital the city of <Flagstaff> had. It belonged to the mill company. It's been boarded up for some time, and it's been vandalized something terrible - you wouldn't believe it. Of course, the company office there, that has been the company office for seventy-five years, right where we're at now. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When your grandparents came, what was their house like? I never got a description. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, we had a five-room house, as I remember. We had electricity, and inside plumbing at the house. Of course in those days, they mostly used wood for heating purposes for both cooking and heating - before natural gas came into this country. And even in those times, oil hadn't been developed, at least locally here, for heating at that time. So wood was used from the mill to heat with. But the houses were quite nice. Really, they were quite nice. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, did they have to like, pay rent? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yes, very nominal rent. (chuckles) If you worked at the mill, it was very nominal. As I remember it, I think we paid ten dollars a month rent. Can you imagine that?! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (chuckles) No. Now, did you go downtown to do most of your shopping, or was there a place on that end of town? 



MILLARD KUHN: The company had a store right across the street from the office. Present [Highway] 66 runs right through the center of it, where it stood. (laughter) We had a commissary - what we called in those days a commissary - but we had everything that anybody needed. I mean, groceries, clothing, shoes, gloves - everything that you can think of, besides the mill supplies. It covered quite an area up there, it was a pretty good-sized store. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you know how it was stocked or anything? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, we bought from outside, [from] your general wholesale houses. We'd carload flour in, and sugar, because our railroad tracks went right alongside of the commissary there, and we'd buy it and come in there in carloads, just like any other grocer would. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: They didn't necessarily use the local… 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, no, unt-uh. We did use SOME of the local things that we DIDN'T have. For instance, we didn't have a butcher shop in it, but the meat we'd pick up down… We'd even take orders from our employees, and we'd pick them up and deliver it to 'em if they needed it. I mean, you know, groceries and meat, if they needed it. But we would buy it through Babbitts' downtown, through their meat department. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, how long was the ALandT, the actual mill, functioning? When did it stop being a mill? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I think it was in 1956. The mill property itself was sold out in 1954, but I think the mill was finally - most of it was dismantled. And then I believe it was set afire, finally. I believe it was 1956. I'm not just sure of the date, but it's somewhere along in there. It was a couple of years later - two, three years later. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's fairly recent. 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes. But we haven't been in the lumber company for twenty-some years now. (chuckles) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of your neighbors, like when you first came to <Flagstaff>? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes, sure, many of them. The John Steinmetzes lived up in that area, and the Smiths, McNamaras, Caffeys, Greenhills, the Herrings. Oh, and many others I don't recall just right offhand; Burnses. Mrs. Herring is still alive and lives here, you know. Oh, I just don't recall some of the other names right offhand. Mrs. Meyers, Burnhelms [phonetic spellings], Salvador Peris. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: He's still living? 



MILLARD KUHN: Salvador's still alive. He was eighty-five his last birthday. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, the house that they live in there on Riordan Road, is that the one that they occupied all those years? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, they have for MANY years, yes. They had one that was right on the corner where the service station is, and I think that was the one that was moved back, really. They moved back a little, because Salvador owns the property that service station sets on there - that Mobile station on the corner. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There just wasn't anything other than the mill and housing from there to town? 



MILLARD KUHN: That's right. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) It's a little hard to imagine. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, the Stimus [phonetic spelling] boys and I used to walk to school every day from out there to the Emerson School. Not only ONCE a day, but four times - usually we went home for lunch. (chuckles) Winter or no winter! Sometimes it got so bad we couldn't make it that four times, but often we walked in snowstorms back and forth. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you know any of loggers that worked out at the logging camps at all? Or know anything about the conditions out in there? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes, we had logging camps for years. Yes, sure. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Like, what did THOSE children do for schooling? 



MILLARD KUHN: There was a school right out there. Mrs. Murphy [phonetic spelling] taught school out there for many years. Mr. Murphy was our logging foreman. But most usually, they had a school right in camp out there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: An elementary school? 



MILLARD KUHN: An elementary, usually. They didn't have high school always. I think most of those children had to come in and stay in town someplace, usually. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Probably a lot of them just didn't go on? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah. And usually during the winter there was no logging going on anyhow, so a lot of 'em came to town. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, what areas in particular were you logging at the time? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, my! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) That's a hard one. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, for many years, we logged down in… it would be an area east and a little north of Pinetop. Isn't that what they call the Pinetop, Country Club (?). Or not Pinetop, but… 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Pinewood? 



MILLARD KUHN: Pinewood! Yeah, Pinewood. We logged north and east of there for many years. We logged in what was known as the Oak Creek Unit, which went into an area just behind <Kachina Village>, in that area. And then for many years, we logged - this was all railroad logging in the early years. Later on, we logged in what is known as Barney Pasture now. And it goes right onto - well, it breaks off at <Oak Creek>, is the farther to the northern part of <Oak Creek>, the canyon. So we logged in that area for about eight or ten years. And then more recently, of course, why, we moved into what was called the Rocktop Units, which was just a little west of <Mormon Lake>, and then on down to <Happy Jack>, and into <Long Valley>, in that area. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: In the early days, what kind of restrictions were placed on logging operations, as far as the forest went? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, this forest has for many, many years been on what they called a sustained yield, so that the cut was limited by how much you - at least of government timber you could take off. Nearly all of it IS government timber. The company owned some of its own timber, too, but as I remember it, the annual cut was allowed at about 48 million feet a year in those times. And they figured on that, the forest would never be cut out, it'd be just sustained yield over as many years as people (chuckles) would be able to cut, you know. So what it meant was that maybe you'd take… Oh, it's varied, it's gone as high as fifty percent of the stand, to sixty-six and two-thirds percent of it, and the rest of it being left for regrowth and reforestation. But the cutting cycle here would be continuous on that basis. It was determined, oh, many, many years ago. And that's more or less followed even now, as far as I know. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How did the different weather conditions affect the logging operations? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, usually in the wintertime no logging was done. Usually we would do what you call cold-deck logs for the winter. You know, we'd bring 'em in. You'd have to wait 'til after the summer rains and when it was warm, because logs brought in at that time of year, they get in the rain and then the heat, they'll turn blue and the bark will slip on 'em. So we have to wait 'til after usually September, October, and November, 'til after the rains, and then get your winter supply of logs to keep the mill running. And then there's what they call cold-deck. They put 'em in decks in here at the mill where they can be gotten real easily. It meant rehandling, but that kept the mill a-goin' most of the winter. Usually there was a couple of weeks shutdown period for repairs, but most of the winter it'd run. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And then if there's a particularly dry year, did they go ahead and permit logging? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, usually they wouldn't start decking 'em until later on in the fall. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Would there be actual restrictions saying "we can't have you logging out there because of fire danger and all"? I know now that they do that sometimes. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, usually the loggers are pretty careful and that. It's usually your outside people that [pose] more dangers than the loggers, because they're pretty well schooled in all these sort of things, and it's their livelihood. They're not near the danger that people riding along, throwing cigarettes out, are; or these people that build campfires and don't know how to put 'em out. (chuckles) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, but like the Forest Service, even in recent years, hasn't particularly said that during a dry year that there's no logging? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, not that I know of. They hardly ever keep 'em out. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did it make a difference in the yield that you got then, if it was really dry? I'm trying [to determine] if it had an economic effect. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, not in… Of course, in the summertime you'd have times when you couldn't log, but it'd be on account of muddy roads more than the dry season where they keep you out of the forest or something like that. It'd usually be, you know, if we got a lot of rain, why, the roads got so muddy the trucks couldn't get into the mill, and this sort of thing would shut you down - or shut the logging down, at least. But usually that was only a few-day period, you know. And of course that was in the days, too, before they got a lot of the roads cindered, where it didn't affect it so badly. It was mostly your roads goin' right into the woods that were adversely affected. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well then, since the mill, though, required a lot of water to run on, did it ever affect… You know, like if you had a particularly dry year, would it affect the mill operations then? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes, this is true. I can remember the year that the only water supply the city had for a period of about sixty days was our O'Neill Springs water. The city was COMPLETELY out of water. They were hauling water in here in 10,000-gallon tank cars from down near <Drake>, around Prescott, to keep drinking water for the people of <Flagstaff>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that in the thirties? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, I looked it up the other day, and I've forgotten just what year it was now. It seemed to me it was '38. But in order to run the mill, we were pumping water from Sewer Canyon in order to have water for our boilers. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Sewer Canyon? 



MILLARD KUHN: Sewer Canyon that’s right. I'm not kidding, it came from down by the old Standard Oil plant, where the bulk plant is now. We pumped water [with] the Flagstaff Electric Light Company at the same time. We went into a joint venture on the thing. We put a pipeline in, and a pumping station, and we pumped water to their boilers and to ours, so the people could have a little water to drink. Because this O'Neill Springs… which I don't know whether you know where O'Neill Springs is, but it's right down there where <Kachina Village> is. It was the old Santa Fe Springs. The Santa Fe had those springs and operated them for many years before the City had the reservoirs… 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2] 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, did you ever use Lake Mary water early, like in the twenties or thirties? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, our company originally built that dam. I was looking up some of the old stuff on it the other day. Originally, they were going to build a nine-inch pipeline to town for that water. But I don't think it was ever built. But the dam was completed BY the company, and it was named after Mr. T.A. Riordan's daughter, Mary. The water was later used - a lot of the sheepmen and cattlemen used it in that area, too. But the company actually… for a water supply to the mill, I don't believe it was ever used as such, because apparently the economics of a nine-inch line from that point into town was quite an item. And there was a good deal of rock that had to be - you know rocky places that they had to go through with a pipeline. As near as I can find in the old records, the line was never completed, but the dam WAS completed. I found an article the other day that Mr. T.A. Riordan was the first man in <Arizona> to have a sailboat, and he had one on Lake Mary. (laughter) I think it was 1908, I believe. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! that long ago?! 



MILLARD KUHN: I think it was, yeah, as I remember. Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What were the Riordans like? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, they were great gentlemen, they really were. They sure were. 'Cause I worked FOR them before Mr. Dolan came, you know. I was one of the fixtures that Mr. Dolan inherited. (laughter) But they were great people, they really were. When my grandparents died, Mr. T.A. Riordan and his wife had me just go right up to the house. I lived with them for many months before we were married, didn't I? 



NILMA KUHN: Uh-huh. 



MILLARD KUHN: I lived right up there at their house, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I was just wondering what family life was like in those beautiful homes. 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, they were tremendous, they were really nice people, all of them. They sure are. They were good businessmen, but they were real Christian people. 



NILMA KUHN: Can I tell you just a little? Mrs. T.A. Riordan told me… she said it was before they had any kind of theater or any kind of entertainment in town, and they had to make their own. The two big homes are connected by a recreation room. And they would - I don't know how often - but they would get together, and they would have plays, and they would have readings, and they would have programs together, and sometimes invite their friends. They enjoyed the arts and the creativity of different people. They were very great people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, from what I've heard. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, they really were. Ha! I'll never forget - this was, I don't know, it should have been about 1926 or '27 - Fred Stem [phonetic spelling] and I went out deer hunting. I got a deer out this side of Rogers Lake. We'd gone out before work, we'd gone out after turkey. To give you an idea, I got this deer and I was on my way back, and I got back to the house, it was about ten minutes of eight, before we had to go to work, and it was still warm. And Mr. M.J. Riordan was coming up the walk. Mr. M.J. came by while I was going in the house, and he said, "Where did you get that?" and I told him. He said, "Well, you run on up to the house and show Mr. T.A." (laughter) Mr. T.A. was quite a hunter, and he wanted me to show him the deer that I'd got out there before work. (laughs) That was his brother. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, were the Sissons still around? 



MILLARD KUHN: Not in my time, no. The name of Sisson is familiar to me, because I've seen it on company records and in the old minute books, but I never knew any of them. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, they had gone? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, had Mr. Dolan owned the Cady Mill before Mr. Cady came? 



MILLARD KUHN: Mr. Dolan, what his interest was there, I'm not certain. But I know he had quite an interest, and he was general manager over there for many years. I think Mrs. Dolan told me that they came here in 1910. I got that date, I believe it was for Billie Yost the other day, something that Platt Cline was working on. And I believe she said they came here in 1910. And I know Mr. Dolan was a stockholder - to what extent, I'm not sure. I don't believe he ever told me. But he was general manager over there, 'cause I had worked over there at one time when I was a boy, in their box factory. He was manager at that time, and that was before he became interested in the Arizona Lumber and Timber. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, did he go directly from that mill, as far as you know, to the ALandT? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, he was on the coast for a while. He had real estate over there, and he also - he and Mr. Burrus, who was his foreman over there, and whom I worked for in the box factory, opened a box factory on Grand Avenue in <Phoenix>. They called it the Dolan Box Company for many years, and then the Dolan-Burrus Box Company. They operated that for many years down there. Southwest finally bought that out. I'm not sure of the year, but it was, as I remember, around 1960 or somewhere along in there - about sixteen years ago. So they operated that for many years, because Mr. Dolan came here in '33, and let's see… he passed away in 1971; that's quite a while. But Southwest Forest Industries bought that plant about that time, about 1960, as I remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's great. Now, over in <Williams>, was that the Saginaw… I don't even want to try the last part! 



MILLARD KUHN: Saginaw and Manistee Lumber Company. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, who owned that? 



MILLARD KUHN: They were owned by Baker, Fentriss [phonetic spelling], and Company, out of <Chicago>. Now, I'm quite familiar with them, too, because I worked for them for ten years. I also worked for Mr. Dolan at the same time, but I was their office manager from 19… Let's see, they came here in March of '41, and I worked for 'em 'til January of 1950. But they were owned by Baker, Fentriss, and Company out of <Chicago>, who was actually the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company. So they had many pine mill operations in the West. I think they had twenty-six pine mill operations in the West. They had naval stores in <Florida>. They even had a pine mill operation in <Alaska>. They were very successful lumbermen. The reason they moved from <Williams> was that they had cut all the available timber for a mill of that size at that time. Their supply was depleting over there, so they leased the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company plant, with an option to buy in 1941. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So that was how you were kind of connected with the two of them? 



MILLARD KUHN: The two of 'em, uh-huh. As I say, I was office manager there for them for… Well, I left in 1950, is when I left; quit at that time. But they were real good people too. I worked for them for a number of years. But I was familiar with their Clover Valley operation, which was out of <Loyalton California>. And they also owned the Medford Corporation at <Medford Oregon>. They had Coos Bay Lumber Bay, at Coos Bay. Oh, I could go on. There's many of 'em, many of there offices (?). 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Must have been very large. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, very large. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Interesting. Okay, was there a special little social life in Mill Town or Milton? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, not particularly, that I remember. (chuckles) No. I just don't recall anything of that nature. Of course, I was pretty much of a kid when I… But even afterwards, I don't remember any special thing there. Mostly the church activities were downtown, and picture shows and things of that nature. Of course we always… when my wife went to the college over here, we were always to the college dances and things of that nature, and football games and basketball games. I don't recall anything especially of that kind - no, I sure don't. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, where did you live after you were married? Was it still over in that area? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes. Do you know where Salvador lives? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, we lived in the house about two doors down from where he did, on that same side of the street, when we were first married. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now that house is gone? 



MILLARD KUHN: His house is gone, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There's a - it looks like a little log cabin or something down there, still existing, by the coll… university. Is that like the groundskeeper's house? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, at one time, they called that the Gate Lodge. I don't know as they ever, as I recall, anybody ever living there, to keep people out, particularly. But it's been there for many, many years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do they just rent it out now? 



MILLARD KUHN: It belongs to Mr. Chambers, and I believe he has it rented out to someone now, I believe. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I just didn't know if you worked for him or what the deal was? Maybe you can tell me something about the churches in town, and what you knew. 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, boy. Well, of course when I came here, the Federated Church was here, and the Catholic Church, of course. The new church building, the new Catholic Church - I say "the new one" now, it's probably considered old by now. But the present one… In other words, the original Catholic Church is where St. Anthony's School is now, when I came here. And then the present building was built, I don't know what year now, I just don't recall - but many years ago, now, that was built. There used to be a Baptist Church up on north San Francisco that stood just about where Trans-America Title stands now, right in that neighborhood. I believe it was Baptist. And of course the Federated Church. Then, of course later they built the Guadalupe Church. The LDS [Latter-day Saint] Church used to meet over in the old Institute. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is that where the university… I don't know… 



MILLARD KUHN: No, it used to be right across from Campbell Hall, wasn't it, honey? 



NILMA KUHN: Yeah. 



MILLARD KUHN: Right across the street from Campbell Hall. Isn't it still there? 



NILMA KUHN: No, I think they've torn it down. 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, they've torn it down? 



MILLARD KUHN: I think so. 



MILLARD KUHN: I didn't know that. I sure didn't know that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, is that the only LDS institution in… 



MILLARD KUHN: It was at that time that was the only church there was. In fact, for many years, they met in the Emerson School building, and at one time they met in one of the rooms up in the college there, in Old Main, wasn't it honey? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How large a membership did they have then? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, in those days, what would you say, honey? Twenty-five? 



NILMA KUHN: Twenty-five or fifty. 



MILLARD KUHN: It wasn't very many. 



NILMA KUHN: Not very many. Mostly college students to begin with. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: To begin with, yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember Mrs. Compton? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes. Sure. 



NILMA KUHN: As far as I can determine, I think she was the only Mormon lady in town for a number of years. Wasn't she? Then she finally got involved. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, now of course they've got the big church up here on the hill, and then another one out in East Flag. It's hard to believe. And then also the college branch down there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, it's really grown! 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah. And some of the other churches, like up here on the… I noticed that the… Oh, honey, what's that new church out there in Switzer Canyon that they're just finishing? Jehovah's Witnesses. 



NILMA KUHN: Yeah, there's two out there - off the road up there. 



MILLARD KUHN: Is there? 



NILMA KUHN: Yeah. And then the Baptist Church on the corner of San Francisco and Switzer Canyon Drive. 



MILLARD KUHN: They're all grown. 



NILMA KUHN: I think it’s well represented. 



MILLARD KUHN: Is what? 



NILMA KUHN: The town is well represented with churches. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah. It sure is, if you stop and think about it. At least if you look in the paper, the listing of all of 'em, it surely… 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Would you say that most of the people that worked at the mill, or a large part of them, were Catholic at that time? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yes, they were, a lot of them. I know my friends, the Steinmetzes, were Catholic. The Riordans were Catholic. Mr. Dolan's Catholic. 



NILMA KUHN: There were a lot of Mexicans. 



MILLARD KUHN: A lot of Mexican people were Catholic there. And some of the others were of other faiths, but I just don't recall. The Caffeys were. The Burnses, they went to the Federated Church, and so did the Smiths, I think. And some of 'em were Episcopalian. It was quite a varied representation. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember much about, oh, religious-type ceremonies like christenings or weddings or funerals - what kind of place they had in the community? Did most people attend those kinds of things? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, it seemed to me so, yes. In the early days, a wedding was a big thing. You know, more so than I guess it is today. And funerals too - particularly if someone was fairly well known. I know I was a pallbearer at Mrs. Riordan's funeral, and Mr. Riordan's funeral. The church was packed both times, as I recall. 



NILMA KUHN: Mr. Dolan? 



MILLARD KUHN: I was just an honorary pallbearer at Mr. Dolan's. There was hardly standing room. And those people that I think of just off hand. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Large community affairs. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, this is right, and they were pretty well attended by a lot of people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember anything about city politics at all, or city government? It's a very hard question for most people to answer. 



MILLARD KUHN: (chuckles) No, other than I was on the city council for four years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! When was that? 



MILLARD KUHN: When was it, honey? I can't even remember. 



NILMA KUHN: Gosh, I don't know. I know we were having problems with the water. 



MILLARD KUHN: We even had problems with water in THOSE days! Not very smart council members - we drilled a dry hole out here in Fort Valley that went down 6,000 feet and got a dry hole. We were never very proud of that, but we thought we had good advice, geologically, and we thought maybe we might come up with something. But water has been a problem in this town as far back as most people can remember. But this we were ashamed of and would rather forget. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that in the forties or fifties? 



MILLARD KUHN: I think it was probably along about '36, wasn't it? Somewhere along in there. 



NILMA KUHN: Thirty-six, '38. 



MILLARD KUHN: About forty years ago, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh that would _______. What were your duties on the council? Did you have a lot to have to do? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, no, the town wasn't so big in those days. I was on the council when a lot of the West End was paved. When we were able to get federal assistance in those days, under I've forgotten what… It was shortly after the Depression, where you were able to get on projects of this kind, with some federal assistance, in order to keep men working, too. And I don't know, it seems to me that the biggest problem we had in those days was the water problem, even then. A lot of the things that… I never HAVE liked small-town politics. (laughter) And particularly after I'd been on the council! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, what was <Flagstaff>'s relation to the rest of <Arizona>, politically, or just communication-wise? Was there much? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I think in the last few years it's probably gotten more political boot than it had before. However, there was quite a few fellahs from here. Comes to mind, fellahs like Frank Christianson, who was on the State Highway Commission, and chairman of it. It seemed like that things in this area, and maybe a lot of other things had a lot of bearing on it, but our roads in this area improved considerably. It seemed like we got more things, more road projects in the northlands - not only in this county, but in other northern counties. Where before, it seemed like it was all southern, in the southern part of the state. And it seemed to me that beginning with him, coupled with many other things, the thing began to have more clout up here. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When you got some representation. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, got some representation - not only on the highway commission, but in the legislature and other places, because we've had some very good men from this area down there in the legislature - not one, but many. 



NILMA KUHN: Which Prochnow was it that was down there? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, Bob Prochnow. Then there was… Wasn't Gordon Evans down there too? Gordon Evans and… 



NILMA KUHN: I'm not sure about him though. 



MILLARD KUHN: I should remember several of the others, but there's been several of 'em, you know. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, let me see, I'm tryin'… You WERE here during the Depression? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes, I should say. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How did that affect you? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I was one of the lucky ones, I worked every day of the Depression, I had a steady salary. So I was real fortunate, more fortunate than most people. I was (chuckles) doin' a lot of things. Of course our mill up there was shut down from… Let's see, I'm not sure about this, but it seems to me it was shut down from October of 1929, 'til June of 1933 - the sawmill itself. We were still shipping lumber that we had in storage out there, 'cause when the Depression hit, we had some 22 million feet of lumber in the lumberyard. But at that time, I was a fairly young man. I was doing the chauffeuring, doing the buying, the bookkeeping, and just general flunky of all kinds. But I was real fortunate, I had work, and I had a steady salary. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What did the people do that were let go? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, it was a real serious situation for a lot of people. We had men up there workin' for fifteen cents an hour, and glad to get it, I'll tell ya'. And banks were closed, we had to ship money in here from <California> banks by railway express in order to pay our men at that time. A lot of people really suffered - men with families. People say, "remember the good ol' days." I hope those never come back. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yes, those particular ones. Now, did the Cady Mill shut down for a long period of time? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, they were shut down… I just don't recall. I don't remember whether it was due to the Depression, either, exactly. But they were shut down for some time. I say "some time" - probably six or seven years. I think they had shut down before the Depression actually hit, but that didn't help the situation any, of them getting started again, because, you know, your taxes went on and all this sort of thing, just the same, in business. But I wouldn't be positive on that, but they were shut down for quite a while. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did a lot of those mill workers then come over to the ALandT? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, we didn't have work for our OWN men, hardly, you know. A lot of fellahs were just doing anything that they could get of ANY kind. The company helped a lot of 'em out to some extent, but there was a limit to what it could do, also. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did a lot of people just have to leave town? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, yes, I think many of them did, yes. I don't know where they went, because conditions were pretty bad all over. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about World War II? How did it affect you and <Flagstaff>? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, of course during World War II, the lumber industry was quite a defense industry: I don't know whether you know it or not. So we were really makin' lumber, as far as that goes. Much of our lumber from this area went into the building of March Air Force Base in <California>, Luke Air Force Base, and Williams Air Force Base. Many of the air bases. The biggest part of the ammunition boxes for <Bellemont>, which was one of the main suppliers for the Pacific Theater, were out of our plant here. Therefore, we had pretty good priorities for everything that we needed, on critical things that were hard to get, like rubber tires and gasoline, meat for your lumberjacks and things of this nature. But yes, I remember it real well, I should say so. 



It got to one point I can remember, that we were shut down by strike during the war, and <Bellemont> needed ammunition boxes, and they sent men in with tommy guns on trucks, right through the picket lines, to get the lumber that they needed. And of course the union was real good, they sent over carrier drivers to help 'em get it loaded. But they didn't respect the picket lines for a minute. 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1] 



MILLARD KUHN: We had only one fire that really amounted to very much. (chuckles) I ran across pictures of it the other day. It looks like the whole mill was going, but as I remember it was around about $4,000 of damage, was all. Of course the mill at that point has - or before MY time - had burned down twice, completely, and been reconstructed. I went back over some of the old records, some old files. I think it was in a period of three years that the mill completely was destroyed by fire, way back in the [18]80's or '90s. And within a period of two or three years of THAT, it was completely destroyed AGAIN and rebuilt. But in MY time, we've been real fortunate, we haven't had any real serious fires. Except the one when it was being dismantled. (chuckles) Someone has always felt that maybe the college kids on homecoming set it on fire. I don't know, I wasn't here at the time. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about any flooding, or at least high water? I don't know, I've heard that this area where you're living has at times had quite a bit of water. 



MILLARD KUHN: I don't remember THIS area flooding so much myself, but at one time we lived down there on West Birch, right next TO the river. I set up one whole night when the water was flopping up on the bottom of the bridge down there, and I thought it was goin' over the bank at any time. 



NILMA KUHN: Right by Emerson School. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, right down there by Emerson School. We lived right across the street from it. Let's see, we sold that house in 1941, wasn't it, honey? 



NILMA KUHN: Uh-huh, I think so. 



MILLARD KUHN: So it was sometime prior to that, and I don't know just when, but we'd had a spring where it was fairly warm. We'd got quite a bit of snow and then quite a bit of rain on top of it, and the water was really comin' down, and really, we were fortunate, because it didn't get into our property. But a lot of poor people on the south side of town, it flooded quite an area down there, and did a lot of damage to some of the people's homes down there. And I just thought it would be comin' over the bank and into our yard any time, but we lucked out, it didn't. Fortunately, the bank was just a little higher at that point, where the house was, than the bottom of the bridge. It was up, you know, a little higher. But I watched that thing for most of the night that night, because I just thought we were gonna have it any time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: We talked about the dry years quite a bit. What about big snow years? Do you remember any of those particularly well? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, and I have pictures of some of 'em up at the office. When was it, '49 and '50? It was the year shortly after we got the service station built up there, wasn't it? 



NILMA KUHN: Uh-huh, I think so. 



MILLARD KUHN: I don't know exactly, but it must have been about '46 or '47. 



NILMA KUHN: Something around then. 



MILLARD KUHN: I remember we got 168 inches in six weeks, of snow, as I remember. Now, I don't know just exactly, but it was somewhere along in there, because I remember at that time we were living - our back yard was where Bob's Big Boy was at that time. [Hmm, I think he meant to say, "our back yard at that time was where Bob's Big Boy is now." (Tr.)] Our house was right in the front end of Metz Walk, there. I remember - I don't know who was with me. I guess it was Bill Preston, and I had been over at the house, and we were comin' out, and the snow was so deep, Sheriff Perry Francis was waitin' at our station down there, where the station [right in the gore?] is there. They were looking for somebody, and they were lookin' up the road. So Bill and I came out of there, and they couldn't see us comin' down, and all of a sudden we were on the road, and got down to the station, and Perry said, "Well, where'd YOU guys come from?!" But it was so high that you couldn't see the top of a car. Of course it'd been plowed out, you know, and thrown quite high on the banks. But I don't suppose at any time we had over three or four feet on the level. But when plowing it out, it just gradually piled up. I know as we went out from our house, we'd have to climb up on top and over on the other side to get to the car. So there's been some good snowstorms. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of snow removal did they have, like down on the mill area in the twenties? Was the mill itself responsible for it? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, of course out in the lumber yard where we'd be doing the work, why, we had plows that were pulled by horses, you know. We had horses in those days. That is, with MANY years ago, logging horses, and horses pulling lumber dollies out in the yard. So we had plows constructed for that purpose. But of course Riordan Road is a city street, so it's the City's responsibility. At one time, Riordan Road was - 66 came right around the corner of the office there and went right down to Milton Road there, or 89. That was 66 in those days _________. But of course we also, WAY back, the company had sleighs - you know, regular bobsleighs for delivering groceries or a lot of things that had to be done. But mostly the City would take care of the streets, but around the mill we'd have to plow ourselves out, of course. Then later, of course, the caterpillars and dozers came, and we had it made. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Had to do it the hard way! 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah. A lot of it was shoveled just by hand, too. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Having talked about the flu epidemic and how it affected your family in particular, do you remember any other epidemics after you got to <Flagstaff>? Or any bad illnesses where they reached epidemic proportions? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, I sure don't, except that there was a good small pox scare here a number of years ago. But they had everybody vaccinated for that. That's the only one I can remember. The reason I remember THAT so well, I got vaccinated. The only time I was ever in the hospital. I had to go to the hospital with a small pox vaccination. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It got all infected? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, it apparently took so bad, I was really… I remember Doc Sechrist put me up in the hospital because my arm was swollen so bad and was so badly inflamed that I… 



NILMA KUHN: (inaudible) 



MILLARD KUHN: He had me up there under ice packs for a couple of days. I don't remember too much about it, but I remember there was quite a scare over it, and there was a LOT of people vaccinated here at that time. But I don't remember it ever reaching epidemic proportions. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, were you here when… was it, Arthur Riordan died? 



MILLARD KUHN: Uh-huh, I sure was. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that polio, or was it meningitis, do you remember? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I don't know which was ever determined, but I think there was a lot of conflict of what it was, because… I don't know if I ever heard it determined exactly what it was. 



NILMA KUHN: I’ve heard both. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, you can hear both, because Arthur died, and then his cousin, Anna, died right close together. I can't remember, but they were just a few days apart. Arthur was Mr. M.J.'s son, and Anna was Mr. T.A.'s daughter. They were in different houses, two big houses up there. I just don't remember how close, but it was quite close together that they both passed away. And you know, just young people, too. At that time, they were just in the prime of life. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You mentioned Dr. Sechrist. When you had to be put in the hospital, was that his hospital up on Beaver? 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, he put me in the hospital up here, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was that like? Was it very small at the time? 



MILLARD KUHN: Up here? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, it was only a one-story building at that time, of course. It was on the ground floor, as I remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is it that little rock building that's right out there in the front by the road? Or is that a different one? 



MILLARD KUHN: I'm not sure, but it seems to me they had built over the old rock building. The main entrance, as I remember, was just about where it is now, to the older building. And whether that has been torn down, whether they built over it, or what they've done, I'm not sure. But as I remember it, there was only one story at that time. Of course, Dr. Sechrist was the company doctor up there for many years, at the old Mercy Hospital, which was right next door to our office there. Then Dr. Creighton, and Dr. Sechrist, as I say, our older boy was born in that old hospital up there. It's too bad it's in the shape it is now. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. You had at ALandT a lot of Mexican Americans or Spanish Americans working at the mill. 



MILLARD KUHN: Right. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you ever have any black employees? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, we had never a great number. There were two families that I remember that would come to… It was a fellah by the name of Walter Garrison. He was a pipe fitter and kind of a plumber. And then there was… I can't remember his first name, but his last name was Horn. They were colored people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, did they come up from <Louisiana> with… 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, to tell you the truth, those people were here when I GOT here - or were here, working for the company when I got here. So I don't know just where… And they remained for a number of years. Other than that, I don't remember too many other colored folks working there. Maybe in later years, but mostly Mexican people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were many of the Mexican people naturalized citizens? Or did a lot of them still retain their Mexican citizenship? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, most of 'em became naturalized - a LOT of them did. Because I've done papers for so many years, trying to establish when they came here, you know. I don't know how many of 'em, but there's been many of them, so they could get their citizenship papers. I didn't look lately, but I had a fellah call me, old Ralph Horace [phonetic spelling], who was secretary or president of the union over here, the Woodworkers' Union, call me regarding one fellah the other day. But in years past, I remembered looking up the old records to establish how long certain fellahs had worked here. We can't do that anymore 'cause most of those records have been given to the university. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I’ve seen a lot. Here's a strange question, maybe. Do you think there was any resentment when a lot of the black workers came in from <Louisiana> with the Cady Company, from the Mexican workers? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I don't know, I think a lot of local people resented it in the beginning. As I remember, there was quite a bit of… What should I say, the local people that resented so many colored people coming in. I don't know whether the Mexican people ever felt that way or not. I don't think so. They may have, but if it was, I was not aware of it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I was wondering if it was resentment over the racial issue, or if it was bringing in… importing workers to take jobs. 



MILLARD KUHN: Yeah, I think there was a good deal of hard feeling about that at the time, because they did bring in quite a few colored people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any Indian families in town when you first came? 



MILLARD KUHN: No. I'm sure there must have been some, but I don't recall them. Probably not any great number, but I imagine there must have been a few, I'm sure; must have been. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were there many Oriental families, Chinese families? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, not too many. There were two or three families that I know real well, like the Junes, you know. I can't think of the others' names. I would say there was only three or four at the time, at least. I don't think there's too many NOW, really. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was there much tourism in the twenties? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, there was quite a bit, in this way. Of course the roads in those days weren't too hot. They didn't get around like they do now. Not TOO many years ago, an idea of the tourism, you know, the Santa Fe ran a train from <Williams> just to the <Grand Canyon> for many, many years for the tourists. But I think tourism has been, in THIS area, has been pretty substantial, even as far back as I can remember. It just gradually… of course, with the improvement of roads and cars and everything, it's really got to be quite an item, __________. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, ____________. Let me see, what was out in East <Flagstaff> that you can remember? 



MILLARD KUHN: (chuckles) About all that was out there that I can remember, was the Greenlaw home. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Hmm, now, their lumber mill was operating then? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, the Greenlaw home was out there, it stood just about where the Americana is now, and probably part of the Highway House. That was the old Greenlaw home there. Of course, they had a lumber company out by a place called Cliffs. Did you know that, or not? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm not sure where Cliffs is. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, let's see if I can explain it. It's right at the point of Elden, almost, and it was called the Greenlaw Lumber Company. I was trying to think what's out there right across… It would be just a little north of where you turn off to go to the Tri-State Shopping Center out there. Is it Tri-State, or… I'm trying to think what else is familiar out there that I can think of. But anyhow, there was a Greenlaw Lumber Company that operated out there for many years. In fact, it was a subsidiary for about twenty years of OUR company. It was dismantled in 1926, I think, as I recall. And then our mill was doubled - a lot of machinery was brought in here and we made kind of what we call a double-band mill out of it here. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And most of their logging was done in the Peaks area? 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, no, a lot of it done around Sunset Crater and the Cinder Hills area, and over toward <Walnut Canyon> and in that area. That's where their timber supply came from. I don't know just what year it was organized, but the Greenlaws had it for a number of years, and then it was later a subsidiary of the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. In fact, I had a Mr. Jack Smith call me the other day, and he's doing quite a bit of research in connection with the old Beale Road, as I understood it, and that name I'm not familiar with at all - Beale Road. I told him I'd look and see if I could find something up there. And on my desk right now I have a plot of the town of Cliffs up there, with the houses, the store, the sawmill, and everything. And on the map all it shows is the county road. Whether it was Beale Road or not, I can't… It says "to <Flagstaff>" one way, and "to <Winslow>" the other. I'm afraid I'm not going to be of much help to him, because I can't find anything that has anything on the Beale Road. He thought that that might be where - that was part of it at that point. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You kind of alluded to the growth of the university. Now, you went there to the Training School? 



MILLARD KUHN: Uh-huh. It was in where the forestry school is now. That old building. I'm sure that's where the - just this side of the old library. Isn't it? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think. Yeah, it's one of those sandstone buildings there near the administration. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, let's see, you know where the Jack-in-the-Box is? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, it's right across the street from the Jack-in-the-Box. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. 



MILLARD KUHN: So that was the Training School at that time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it very small as far as number of students? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, they had a pretty good attendance there, as I recall. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember your teachers at all? 



MILLARD KUHN: No, I sure don't. I remember one or two other teachers at the Emerson School, but I don't recall any names up there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Who'd you have at Emerson? 



MILLARD KUHN: Oh, there was J.P. McVey, who was the shop teacher and also taught us military training. And Mrs. Hoyt, she was the English teacher. Mrs. Kennedy was the… I forgot what she taught, but she was later superintendent of the Emerson School. Miss McNerney taught Spanish. She was the Spanish teacher. Let's see… That's the only class I ever flunked out on, was Spanish! (laughter) School! She flunked me. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, I can't think of anything specifically to ask you. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, I was going to say, then I never went back to school after that, I had to go to work, so it didn't make any difference whether I flunked Spanish or not! (laughter) No, I only went to my sophomore year in high school, or through my sophomore year. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Considering all hardships, that was really an accomplishment. 



MILLARD KUHN: Well, when my grandfather died, why, I had to go to work to support my grandmother. I did that for eight or nine years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, it hasn't held you back too much. (laughter) 



MILLARD KUHN: No, I don’t know about that. Maybe I'd have been a success at it, if I'd gone on to school. (laughter) 





