FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Fred Nackard

Interview number NAU.OH.28.32

Fred Nackard, who is the President of Fred Nackard Wholesale Liquor Company and the local Pepsi Cola Bottling Company. Interview conducted by Susan L.Rogers on February 2, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, July 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1 Side 1

    Born in <Georgia>, 1907 

    Parents moved to <Albuquerque>, eventually to <Flagstaff> in 1912 

    Houses lived in 

    Chinese restaurants 

    Bender’s Café 

    Houses lived in, continued 

    Lived in back of father’s store 

    Lived on south side of town 

    Father bought red light district after Prohibition 

    Turned block into rentals, hotel (Downtowner) 

    Bought a house from madam by name of Marie, family lived in house 

    Prostitution 

    Reputation of S. San Francisco St. 

    Schooling at Emerson 

    Spoke mainly Spanish when started school 

    Mexicans and whites, divided 

    Blacks 

    Prejudice, most whites biased against Mexicans and blacks 

    Lice story 

    High school

Tape 1 Side 2

    Chores as child 

    Had cow and calf, chickens, rabbitts, horse, pigeons, donkeys 

    Noise of animals in nieghborhoods, flys 

    Automobile dealer 

    Development of wholesale liquor company 

    Prohibition in 1920’s, Depression in 1930’s 

    Listening to old-timers 

    Compares to today 

    Old-timers listed for possible interviews 

    Willis Brown 

    Herb Babbitt 

    Hogans 

    Other Babbitts 

    Flu epidemic of 1918 

    Fire near Santa Fe and Lerous in early 1920’s 

    Confectionary shop 

    High school beats college in football, 1925 

    Snowfalls 

    Father and cousin hurt in 1916 

    Snowfalls in 1948, 1967-68 

    Mrs. Nackard tells about friendliness of people during snow storms

Tape 2 Side 1

    Effect of snowfalls on Pepsi Co. 

    Different murders 

    Salesman, gun duel at <Canyon Diablo>, duels downtown 

    Background on parents 

    Mrs. Nackard tells about meeting Mr. Nackard, marriage and son 

    Wholesale liquor business 

    Car racing 

    Philosophy about old-timers 

    Circuses coming to town, Barnum and Bailey, Mexican circuses 

    Dances, <Flagstaff> and <Phoenix> 

    Philosophy, people used to be happier with less 

    Story about old man in <Italy>, tossing his hat in front of statue of Blessed Virgin, and being taught how to pray

This is an interview with Fred Nackard who is president of Fred Nackard Wholesale Liquor and the Pepsi-Cola Bottling Company. The interview is being conducted on February 2, 1976, at 306 West Dale, which is the Nackards' home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [The narrator's wife, Monica, is also present and makes a few comments. (Tr.)]

SUSAN L. ROGERS: Mr. Nackard, when and where were you born, and how did you end up in <Flagstaff>?

FRED NACKARD: I was born in <Atlanta Georgia>, on November 20, 1907. Shortly after my birth, my parents moved from <Atlanta Georgia>, to <Albuquerque New Mexico>. There in <Albuquerque>, my father left my mother and I there with friends, and he came to the <Arizona> Territory, looking for some sort of an opportunity. About a month or so later, I understand, he sent for us and we came from <Albuquerque> - my mother and I, that is - came from <Albuquerque> to <Douglas Arizona>, in 1908. We remained in <Douglas Arizona>, until 1912. Sometime during 1912, my older sister, Najla Nackard, became desperately ill by some ailment, which I never did understand. But the doctor in Douglas recommended that she be moved from there to a mountainous, clear, cool climate. My father, having come from the mountains of <Lebanon>, loved <Flagstaff>, for it reminded him of his home in the mountains. So we moved here in October. I don't know what date exactly, but it was the first part of October of 1912.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, when you first moved here, can you tell me what houses you lived in and a little bit about the neighborhood?

FRED NACKARD: Yes. I recall that vividly. We lived in a house that now is approximately where the service station belonging to the Ford Motor Company fronting on Highway 66. I don't know what the name of that service station is.

MONICA NACKARD: Is it Verde?

SUSAN ROGERS: I think so.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, no, it's on the corner of Verde and 66, that's true - the station is - but the house was a little white house that was possibly fifty or sixty feet from that corner. And it sat back from the street maybe fifty or sixty feet in kind of a depression. The home, the little white house, belonged to an old Mexican tailor. I believe his name was Benome [phonetic spelling]. That's about all I can remember of THAT place. I don't know how long we were there, but I recall quite clearly that we used to come up to where.... Well, let's see, where the Grand Canyon Café, west of the Grand Canyon Café is a saddlery, isn't it? Of some sort - a saddlery shop of some sort. Well, there was a Chinese restaurant. ALL the restaurants, if my memory serves me correctly, were Chinese in those early days. And we used to come up there to eat. Whether we ate ALL of our meals there or not, I don't remember, but I know we did eat there frequently. I've kind of reached the point of what else to say. Now, what might be your next question?

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let me ask you about those Chinese restaurants. Can you tell me a little bit about what they were like inside?

FRED NACKARD: Well, by today's standards they would be very primitive, because they hadn't changed much until I became a teenager - they were pretty much the same. I believe that Joe Bender, the first white man, to MY recollection - I could be in error, but it wouldn't be a very serious error - opened up the first Bender's Restaurant that was NOT Chinese, and it was exquisite compared to the Chinese restaurants of that day.

MONICA NACKARD: Which one was it?

FRED NACKARD: It was first located.... Well, what's the name of that shoe store across from Fine's?

MONICA NACKARD: Karl's?

FRED NACKARD: Karl's. It was located in where Karl's shoe store is presently located. That was their first place. Then Joe Bender moved around on Front Street about where.... (chuckles)

MONICA NACKARD: Next to the grocery.

FRED NACKARD: Next door to the grocery and west of the grocery. It would be the next door to the present-day grocery. Now, Susan, what might be your next question?

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let's just continue on with the houses. From that house, where did you move to then?

FRED NACKARD: Oh! Of course I can't recall specifically or by dates when we moved from that little white house, but we must not have been there very long - maybe just a few weeks or a month. But then we moved up to where this saddlery is today. We lived in the back of that building, and my father opened up a little store in the front part of that building.

MONICA NACKARD: A grocery store?

FRED NACKARD: No, it wasn't a grocery store. It was, I think, more of a dry goods store. What in the dickens is in that building today? Where Doc Williams used to be. What building is that?

MONICA NACKARD: There is still the saddlery shop there I believe.

SUSAN ROGERS: There’s down there.

FRED NACKARD: I think it's still the saddlery. Doc Williams was there for many, many years. And Doc Williams was a very dear and wonderful, colorful man, as I say.

MONICA NACKARD: Isn’t there a saddlery shop in there now?

FRED NACKARD: There is a saddlery shop, I think, there yet.

MONICA NACKARD: I never go down that way.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. I don't know the order.

FRED NACKARD: But we lived in the back, which was not an uncommon situation in that day, and there was a little store up in front that wouldn't be much bigger than most people's living rooms. And I remember my father saying that the reason they came and opened up that little store there was because the Santa Fe had just begun the double tracking through this country. And there was - they weren't called booms in those days, I don't think, like we indicate explosions of certain things that happened nowadays - but there was a lot of people working. You know when jobs were done in those days, such as railroads or any great big performances, it took many men, lots of horses. And so it took teamsters, it took people that handled shovels and so forth.

MONICA NACKARD: Cowboys.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, no, no, there wouldn't have been any cowboys necessarily working on this. But there were hundreds of employees, where today one big machine would replace fifty or sixty or seventy employees. And so there was a temporary boom while the double tracking was going through here, sometime in 1912, if my memory is serving me right.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Then how long did your father have this store? Did you move again from there or did you-

FRED NACKARD: Oh, the store progressed from that little opening in 1912 or thereabouts, he moved over next door to - I don't know what's in there now - and finally to the corner where there's Joe's Place. And that's where my dad was there for a good many years. Sometime about 1927, I think it was, or '26 rather.

MONICA NACKARD: Were you still in high school?

FRED NACKARD: Oh, yes. He built and moved to the present-day building in which the Fine Store has been in operation. And I don't know what's in there now. There's a beauty parlor and other offices in that building and apartment upstairs.

MONICA NACKARD: May I interrupt a minute? When did you live down on the south side, where you took care of the cows and what not, while you were still in high school? That's a smelly part of your existence, but I remember you saying about it.

FRED NACKARD: Well, I had overlooked that. Maybe perhaps I'd asked you to sit in and prompt me a little bit. About 1917 or '18, let's see, it was 1918 that <Arizona> went dry, was voted dry. That's prior to the Volstead Act of 1920 or '21 - I don't recall exactly. But <Arizona> went dry before the nation went dry.

The area between Phoenix Avenue and Cottage, and then on below, was then the red light district. The red light districts of THAT day were just as established as grocery stores or anything else. Well, when Prohibition came to <Arizona>, the red light district was voted out WITH Prohibition. So my dad bought from the madams that block - from several madams. It didn't only belong to one, but to several. And we moved down to one of the houses that is today - and was then, of course - on the corner of San Francisco and Cottage Avenue.

MONICA NACKARD: Or Phoenix Avenue.

FRED NACKARD: No, no, Cottage, the first.

MONICA NACKARD: Oh.

FRED NACKARD: I grew up in that house. And some of my brothers and sisters grew up in that house. It was a beautiful home by those standards of THAT day. Beautiful white oak floors, tasseled doorways.

MONICA NACKARD: Heated (?).

SUSAN ROGERS: Is this house still standing?

FRED NACKARD: Yes, it is today the Consolidated Investment Company today. Yes, it's still standing. It has gone through several remodelings and renovations. It was once, for many, MANY years, or twenty-some years, or almost twenty-eight years, maybe, to correct myself exactly, the headquarters of Fred Nackard Wholesale Liquor Company. But anyhow we lived there. I have to tell you about it, because as I say, I think the owner, the madam, was Marie something. But it was a beautiful place - exquisite floors, tasseled doorways, mirrors to be seen in all postures and so forth. Bar rooms....

MONICA NACKARD: _____________. (laughter)

FRED NACKARD: And of course my dad and father and mother converted it over into a home. And the rest of the block was turned over to rentals and a hotel that still operates today. They call it now the Downtowner. I think in the early days, after my dad bought it, I think it was called the Flagstaff Hotel. (chuckles) The rooms were nice by those standards. But you had to go down to the end of the hall to use the restroom, or if you chose to take a bath as people occasionally did in those days - not too often - you had to go down to the end of the hall, too.

SUSAN ROGERS: What happened to all the girls? Did they just leave town?

FRED NACKARD: No. The girls were scattered, yes, and I guess you might say that they scattered into society today, and now they're everywhere. Where then-

MONICA NACKARD: They’re scattered around town.

FRED NACKARD: They're scattered everywhere, in all levels of society, where in those days they were secluded and protected, and they had a society of their own, they were happy and contented with their work. But there was a demarcation line-

MONICA NACKARD: What do you mean by "being protected"?

FRED NACKARD: They were protected by the law. You couldn't go down and tear the place up or cause any riots or disturbances. They had police protection, just like the people on the north side had police protection.

MONICA NACKARD: Well even 1935, when we were married, and we moved into that warehouse, there was one of those houses behind us.

FRED NACKARD: Well, but it was illicit then. It was not, and by the 30’s-

MONICA NACKARD: _____ nice girls.

FRED NACKARD: It was illegitimate. I'm talking about the early days when it was legitimate. We're now gettin' confused.

MONICA NACKARD: Well that’s my opinion.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well that’s good, clarify some points. I was going to ask you about the reputation of South San Francisco. Did it change when the girls were moved out of there? Or what kind of reputation did it have as you were growing up? Or what you thought anyway.

FRED NACKARD: Well, just exactly how to say it in today's vernacular, I don't know. I think it was an area called the red light district, but it was quiet, well mannered. I don't think you could use the word exactly respectable, if you want to search the dictionary for what the word respectable might mean. But anyhow, I don't believe that it was any worse, or as bad, possibly, as today's South San Francisco. I don't even consider TODAY'S South San Francisco to be an outlaw area. I don't feel that it is. More often than not, I think one is safer down there than he might be in other parts of town. There's really no phonyism down there. It is what it is, and I rather like the area, I like the atmosphere of the area. I guess it's because I was raised there. I've never really divorced myself completely from it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, when you were living down there, where did you attend school?

FRED NACKARD: Well, of course, I attended the Emerson school in grammar grades, which, of course, I think was just closed this past year.

MONICA NACKARD: Yes.

FRED NACKARD: But that was the grammar school, the only grammar school in town. Remember that <Flagstaff> was only around 2,500-3,000 people in those days.

MONICA NACKARD: I think there is a nice anecdote in this when you started Emerson School, all you could speak was old (?) Arabic and Mexican.

FRED NACKARD: No, I could understand a few commands in Arabic, of course, that might have been issued by my father. But the only language I spoke was Spanish. That was the result of our living in Douglas just a few feet, or maybe not a block away from the Mexican border. But if you might consider that as being odd - it isn't, because my parents tell me that there were some colored twins that lived across the street from us who couldn't speak English either - THEY spoke Spanish. You know society and the population wasn't as transient as it is today. It was more stable and people stayed. So we picked up the culture of the area. So when my folks moved to <Flagstaff>, I don't know, I must have understood SOME English, but my conversation was in Spanish. I learned to speak English, you might say, at the Emerson School.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, did they have any rules where they said you weren't allowed to speak Spanish at all?

FRED NACKARD: No, there was not that severity then, since a big percentage of the population WAS Spanish. But there was in those days a very definite, and a very deep crevice between the blacks and the Mexican population. They did not fraternize. There was a certain ostracism to the Spanish speaking. And because I was dark-complected and spoke maybe exclusively Spanish or mostly Spanish, I was put in with the Spanish group, because classes in those days were divided between the whites and the Mexicans. We used the word "Spanish" today as a euphemism, but then they were called Mexicans and whites. (aside not transcribed) But that's how it was.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about, were there any blacks around?

FRED NACKARD: No, I don't believe there were more than one or two black families in the entire town. There was a family called the Fullers [phonetic spelling]. Incidentally, since you bring that up, I might say that just beyond where we lived in the little white house, as I indicated a few minutes ago, they lived almost exactly in a house where the present-day service station that's closed. That's just runs along that railroad track going into the Babbitts' warehouse. You know where that might be?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes.

FRED NACKARD: Well, there was a house there. That was the edge of town then. There was nothing beyond that - absolutely nothing. Now, there were farmers, a few, but no more town. And there was a colored family called Fuller. The boy was named Andrew, and I used to play with him. And there was a daughter that they all called "Sister." I saw Andrew, he came back to <Flagstaff>, and I saw him possibly ten, twelve, fifteen years ago, I don't know. By then he had retired from some position in <Los Angeles> and of course he was past middle age and bald-headed and so forth. But I played with him when we were little kids.

MONICA NACKARD: But in the schools-

FRED NACKARD: No. Well, of course there might have been one or two.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don't know of any prejudice or anything?

FRED NACKARD: Prejudice in those days? Oh, there was lots of prejudice in those days. It was a primitive prejudice, not like it is today - more by holy (?) beliefs. Then, it was very deep. The white who were also illiterate predominantly. There were very few educated whites in the West in that day - VERY few. I doubt if more than five or ten percent of the population had even seen past the eighth grade. And there wasn't radio or TV or anything like that. There was really very little communication, so there was a lot of provincialism and localism and so forth. And the whites were very biased against ANY color or creed that did not have blue eyes and red hair, basically.

MONICA NACKARD: Tell about another interesting anecdote, I think. When you were in Emerson and you were put with the Mexicans.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, yes.

MONICA NACKARD: And blacks, possibly.

FRED NACKARD: I think it was when I was put in the Emerson School - must have been the first grade, of course - and as I just finished telling you a minute ago, I was dark-complected and spoke Spanish so I was put with the Mexican group. Classes were all divided, right down - the whites on one side, and the untouchable Mexicans on the other side. And I was with the untouchables. I use the word "untouchable" - I don't think that had been coined yet. But I recall that one day a fellow came through there who was the county health inspector or health doctor or someone - came through there and he said, "Everybody on this side of the room come with me." Well, that meant all the Mexicans, including me. So we went. And they put us in a couple of cars. Oh, this has to be 1913, '14, so you know what kind of cars. I'd say about 1913. And we were taken down and taken upstairs over what today is Choi's Restaurant.

MONICA NACKARD: Yes, Choi’s Resturaunt.

FRED NACKARD: I think the Health Department was up on the second floor. Now, this was, oh, I'm guessing possibly right around 1:00 or 1:30, and they washed all of our heads out with coal oil, because all of the Mexicans, because of their difficult circumstances and poverty, were lousy, they had lice. So they washed all of our heads out with coal oil, and we were released afterwards to go home. Well, I went running home, I was delighted gettin' out of school and everything. And when I came into the house, of course smelling like a coal oil barrel, my dad wanted to know what was going on, why I smelled like coal oil and why I was home from school. Well, of course, as a little kid, gee, I thought that was a great thrill! And I told him what took place. Well, I don't think I finished the story before he was flying out the door puttin' his coat on. I wrote a story in college about this. I have some of my college work there. And they got quite a kick out of it in the college class when it was read, this short story. All I can say is that the next morning, something miraculous took place. I never did understand what happened, but I was seated with the whites. (laughter) My complexion hadn't changed, but I was seated with the whites.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Now, from Emerson, where did you go?

FRED NACKARD: Well, of course after I graduated from Emerson School, the eighth grade, there was no high school in <Flagstaff> at that time. You had to go to the normal school, which is today the university. I really can't tell what was just prior to my time, but when I graduated from the eighth grade, then there was a ninth and tenth grade at Emerson School. From there you had to go over to the normal school to take your third and fourth - you know, junior and senior years. Now, at the end of my sophomore year at the Emerson School, my parents sent me to the New Mexico Military Institute in <Roswell New Mexico>, for my junior year in high school. But I completed my senior year at the high school, which is now torn down - it is not presently standing anymore. I completed my senior year in the building that has since been replaced by these new buildings. In the year 1926 I graduated.

MONICA NACKARD: Twenty-six, yeah.

FRED NACKARD: So, you see, I'm ALMOST prehistoric! (laughter)

SUSAN ROGERS: I don't know about that! Your wife mentioned something about you milked cows or you worked with cows on the south side. Do you want to tell us a little bit about maybe your daily chores that you had as a youngster, that type of thing?

FRED NACKARD: Well, before I go on, let me have a cigarette.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

FRED NACKARD: About the chores, you asked me. Really, I can't see how they might be of any interest to anyone, but they were certainly different than what present-day tadpoles, young people, have to do. As I said, we lived on the corner of San Francisco and Cottage Avenue, which is today the Consolidated Investment Building. Across the street where the Fred Nackard Wholesale Liquor Company is now presently occupying, was the cow barn. I had a cow and her calf that I raised from the time she was born until I began milking her. But I had two cows to take care of and milk, morning and night, naturally. I had about 100-150 chickens to take care of. I had thirty or forty rabbits to care for. I had a horse that of course was my first love. Oh! And I had pigeons. Now, that today may sound kind of like a fabled story, but everybody had that. ALL people had cows, chickens, horses, all over town. People weren't impressed because a dog barked, or because an animal breeds in the same block. We all lived together in peace and harmony. Dogs barked all night, cows mooed all night, horses and donkeys. There were a lot of donkeys. Incidentally, I might say-

MONICA NACKARD: The burros.

FRED NACKARD: That's what I'm talking about, the donkeys, or burros, whichever one you want to call 'em. They brayed all night and day. But it was a beautiful symphony. In fact, I even loved the aroma of the area. The only thing that I think HAS improved; there were lots of flies in those days, which we don't have today. And that is a vast improvement. I can recall that it was nothing to see fly paper and just a mass of flies on a back door screen. But I think in all sincerity and complete honesty; I loved that day very much. I think it was wholesome and pure and clean and vigorous, and it didn't have all the _______ that today has.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did you work in your dad's store at different times?

FRED NACKARD: Yes, for a short period of time, not much. My dad was disappointed in me, as I've been disappointed in mine. I didn't like the business he was in. I preferred the garage and automobile business which I was in, got into, worked in garages and service stations, and finally became an automobile dealer with a Mr. John Pierce, who to this day I still recall as one of my great benefactors. We had a Chrysler agency, and I was with him until December of 1933 when repeal came, and I and Monica, we went into the wholesale liquor company.

SUSAN ROGERS: This wasn't a development from your dad's store? 

FRED NACKARD: No. Into a liquor- it was completely an undertaking on your own?

FRED NACKARD: It was my own idea and my own innovation. Even the automobile business, my dad was not involved. [He] disapproved, and rightfully so, because I failed miserably at it! (laughter) But it was not a failure due entirely to myself and John as it was the Great Depression that people speak of today as the Great Depression, but doesn't quite compare as easily as today's situation.

SUSAN ROGERS: While we're on the Depression, do you want to tell me a little bit about what you remember about Prohibition, and also how the Depression affected you maybe a little more?

FRED NACKARD: Well, of course, the Prohibition days, or the Roaring Twenties, shall we call them, I was in the full bloom of life then, in my late teens and early twenties. They were beautiful years. Everybody seemed to be content and happy. Everyone was prospering. When we speak of prosperity in those days, if you had a job anywhere from $125 to $200 a month, you were in high cotton.

MONICA NACKARD: Working 10 hours a day too.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, yeah, six, seven days a week, but that didn't bother us, we loved every bit of it. We had plenty of time for fun. Well, the Roaring Twenties, as it was termed historically, were beautiful years. Some of my very dearest friends that I grew up with, and now almost totally are gone, dead - some are missing, I don't know where they are, I've lost contact with them - but in the main, they've all died off.

Now, the Depression years were difficult, but we didn't think they were too difficult. Maybe we did, but we got by and we were happy, always. We didn't any of us have any money, but money wasn't important then. Even we in business didn't have any money, but it wasn't that critical. We got by. We had lots of fun. There wasn't what I think today is the almighty dollar. There wasn't this horrible tax structure. There wasn't all of this - oh, these ideas of everybody being dissatisfied. There's nobody happy today, nobody's content with his situation or circumstance.

MONICA NACKARD: They didn’t in those days- we didn't have all those darned forms to fill out.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, no, business was simple - LIFE was simple. I think, to compare it with today, I think life is beautiful, absolutely beautiful. I'm probably an old man talking. I remember when I was in that period and I listened to an old man like myself, and sometimes I was intolerant. But the old men of that day were the true pioneers of the West, the HONEST pioneers of the West. Most of 'em had never married, because there were no women in the West to marry. Most of the West was settled by men - there were very few marriageable women. There were red light districts, and then damned few called "respectable" women that got married. But most of 'em lived and grew old as single men, but they were teamsters, cow punchers, loggers, and they were a very colorful group. They had a vernacular all of their own. There was no similarity in any of them like we are today. We're all cut out of the same piece of cloth today. We're homogenized, so to speak. Yes, you're redheaded and I'm gray-headed, and I'm masculine - or at least I think so - and you're feminine and so forth. But in those days, there were very distinct differences between individuals, because they lived in different parts of the world entirely. There was no way of everybody being alike, like we are. Now we all watch TV, we listen to radio, we all read the same newspapers, the same magazines, the same things, so that our psychology and our pattern of living is identical. It was not so then.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any of these old-timers in particular that maybe you can tell me a little bit about?

FRED NACKARD: Well, as I told you over the telephone when we spoke a few days ago, that your coming here is almost anticlimactic, it's sad, because the people that you SHOULD be interviewing, have died. There may be one or two living yet, that I can't recall right now.

But I did tell you about Willis Brown, and a man whom I knew from my early childhood. He was much older than myself, of course. But I used to sit, enchanted, listening to his stories of the very early days, because I think he came here sometime in the 1890s. He was apparently one of these, what do you call 'em? Photograph nuts - or not nuts. What do you call people like that?

MONICA NACKARD: Buffs.

FRED NACKARD: Buffs! That's the word I'm looking for, photograph buff, like gun buffs and so forth. So he had lots of pictures and I do hope that his widow will supply a lot of those pictures. But she won't be able to supply the story behind them.

The other person that I knew and enjoy him SO much over a bottle of beer at the corner bar, was Herb Babbitt. Both of these men, Willis and Herb Babbitt, were ten, twenty years my senior. So their history went back even EARLIER than mine, and it was richer than anything I could ever say. But I wished I could relate the stories they told me. I don't know whether I could, even if I was prompted to recall them verbatim as they told them. Dan Hogan was another. Now, his son, Pat Hogan, lives over here on Cherry.

MONICA NACKARD: I think they moved, I'm not sure, but I-

SUSAN ROGERS: Is another son Ernest? (all talking at once)

FRED NACKARD: Ernest is Pat.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, we have him down.

FRED NACKARD: I think Ernest or Pat, whichever one you want to call him by, his father dates back to the early days, and also told me some wonderful stories of his experiences.

MONICA NACKARD: There's a daughter of the Hogans living here.

FRED NACKARD: Well, I don't know how much she could tell, maybe she could tell a lot. But I'm sure that Ernest could tell some - or Pat, I called him. If he's still available here in town, I think you should make every effort to contact him.

MONICA NACKARD: Former fire-

FRED NACKARD: Chief. He was the fire chief of <Flagstaff> for many years. His father, Mr. Hogan, the old gentleman, was once mayor of <Flagstaff>. And in the very early days, I think was a.... What do you call those? A deputy sheriff. And he told me a story one time of having to go out here near <Canyon Diablo> and got into a shootin' scrape with three renegade Navajos, and I think two or three of 'em were killed. He came back into town. I remember that story, his telling me that - the father, I mean.

Now who else? You know there are some of the Babbitts. I think John would be a wonderful source of information. I believe even an equally rich source of information would be.... What's the attorney?

SUSAN ROGERS: C.B. Wilson?

MONICA NACKARD: Charles?

FRED NACKARD: No, no, no.

MONICA NACKARD: Gold? Mr. Gold?

FRED NACKARD: Oh, Mr. Gold, if he's still lucid.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right, he’s very sick.

FRED NACKARD: If he's still lucid today and not too sick today, he could tell much, MUCH. No, no, Monica, Frances' husband. What's that Babbitt? What's his name?

MONICA NACKARD: Oh, you mean Paul!

FRED NACKARD: Paul Babbitt! Of course, Paul!

SUSAN ROGERS: That’s John’s brother, right?

FRED NACKARD: Paul, Sr., of course. I think Paul could tell SO much, because he would be a contemporary-

MONICA NACKARD: Now, he didn't come here that early, Fred. Paul and Frances.

FRED NACKARD: Paul was raised here. Paul Babbitt would be a contemporary of Herb. I'll tell you another tremendously rich source of early days, and also a buff of early-day history, but you'd have to leave town, or get in touch with him, would be George Babbitt.

MONICA NACKARD: He lives in <Scottsdale>.

FRED NACKARD: In <Scottsdale>. Now, George Babbitt possibly would be the richest mind claim that you might possibly hit, for today's source of old-time history, because even though I didn't listen to it, I know that George had many pictures, newsreels and so forth. And he's quite eloquent about telling it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MONICA NACKARD: I haven't seen him in two or three years, but I know they have a beautiful home in <Paradise Valley>, in <Scottsdale> somewhere, he and Madeline.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well, they also have a home in <Oak Creek>. I don't know....

MONICA NACKARD: Oh, yeah, that fishery __________.

FRED NACKARD: But through the Babbitts here, you could locate George Babbitt. But I think he'd be a good.... Now, let me see if I can think of anyone else. (pause) They're all dead, damn it!

MONICA NACKARD: Don’t cuss you're on tape.

FRED NACKARD: Yeah! Smile you're on TV.

SUSAN ROGERS: So let me ask you a few more questions then. Do you remember that flu epidemic of 1918?

FRED NACKARD: I very well do, yes. All of us, every one of us in our family were down, except my dad. My dad took care of all of us. We were all sick in bed. Strange that you bring it up. How come you know something about that?

SUSAN ROGERS: Experienced reading.

FRED NACKARD: Well, I can tell you that the busiest vehicle in town was the hearse. They died, I don't know how many, in a little town like this, in one family, the Dickinsons, who were our neighbors, I think three in one family died - John.... I don't know, I know two brothers died. But they died just like flies. They couldn't bury 'em fast enough. They couldn't find people to bury 'em, but we survived, all in our family, and I think possibly our dad brought us through.

SUSAN ROGERS: How long would you say that the schools were closed?

FRED NACKARD: Oh, goodness, I can't remember.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was it half a year or two weeks?

FRED NACKARD: Oh, I don't think so. I don't think so. Possibly maybe a month or so. But then now I'd have to be guessing. But you know, in those days, nothing was magnified out of proportion as it is today. There were no inflammatory headlines, dramatic - nothing like it is today. Even the 1918 epidemic was absorbed by the people. People died. We all wore around our neck - what was it, assiduous, they called it?

MONICA NACKARD: No, Acidphidity (phontically spelled).

FRED NACKARD: Acidphidity or whatever they called it.

MONICA NACKARD: Smelled like the devil.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes! It stunk like the dickens, and I don't think it saved a single soul. (laughter)

SUSAN ROGERS: What about any fires you remember any particular ones?

FRED NACKARD: Well, I do remember one big fire. There were many, of course, but one big fire was when the area on Leroux Street between San Francisco and the alley. That whole block, a bunch of little shops in there now. There used to be a drugstore on the corner for years and years. And there was a confectionery in that area. I repeat, it's between - no, not San Francisco - Santa Fe - and the alley on Leroux, going north - that half a block all burnt down one night, completely. There were several of us, my friends and I; we used to run together. The confectionery, before it caved in and everything, I remember we were in there - one of us, not I - but one of us was behind the fountain serving ice cream sodas and stuff, and ice cream sundaes. It lasted all night, and it finally caved in before daylight and we got out. None of us were hurt, but we were having a great time, it was a great deal. It was in the wintertime, very cold.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember about what year it was?

FRED NACKARD: No, I don't.

SUSAN ROGERS: Just around. Was it in the teen years, or in the twenties?

FRED NACKARD: Older. Definitely in the early twenties. Yes, sometime in the early twenties, because I was still in high school, so it had to be somewhere around '25, '24 - something like that. Just guessing.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mrs. Nackard, were you going to say something?

MONICA NACKARD: I was going to say, Santa Fe going in the alley.

FRED NACKARD: Going north.

MONICA NACKARD: Going north, yes. But I thought the confectionery shop you used to talk about was further north, closer to Aspen.

FRED NACKARD: No. Well, there was one there, a little drugstore, but not the one....

MONICA NACKARD: Not the one you're talking about, I see.

FRED NACKARD: Of course in those days, before bars and nightclubs and everything, the hangout was in the confections. They called it the Confection Den.

MONICA NACKARD: Well that had to be behind that drugstore that’s been on the corner all those years.

FRED NACKARD: It was between the corner and the alley, about midway. There's so many little shops there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah right.

FRED NACKARD: It’s impossible to say which one. But it was midway between the alley and _______. And it was a nice shop, by the standards of that day, very nice. Had a mezzanine floor. A fellow by the name of Fred Nelson, I believe his name was ran the place. It was quite a hangout. That's where we met all the girls, made all the dates, _________ or whatever happened. That was the meeting place in town. You see, in those days, I think the normal school had become a teachers' college by then, but it was only about, oh, I'd say 300-400 students, of which maybe - if it was 300 students, I'd say 250 or 260 of 'em were girls, and the others were just boys. They hardly had enough fellows, boys, to make a football team. In fact, in 1925, I believe, my last year in high school football, we beat the teachers' college.

MONICA NACKARD: Twenty-six [1926] was your last year.

FRED NACKARD: Yeah, but then that would be the spring of '26. We played in the fall of '25. We beat the teachers' college, and it was the last conference game between the high school and the teachers' college. It was a humbling humiliation for the teachers' college.

SUSAN ROGERS: A great victory for [you] huh?

FRED NACKARD: We played on Armistice Day of 1925.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember any big floods?

FRED NACKARD: No, I don't. There were some big floods prior to my knowledge of this time. I was told by old-timers that the River de Flag ran over its banks and flooded the town, but that was just hearsay, I wouldn't know nothin' about it.

SUSAN ROGERS: I know there's been lots of big blizzards and snows. Do you remember any one in particular?

FRED NACKARD: Oh, yes. Yes, the big snowstorm of 1917, I believe.... I think it was six feet of snow fell in one storm, and my father and my cousin - both of 'em deceased now - were up on the roof shoveling the snow off. And that roof would be next door, east of the present-day Joe’s Place. I guess they had shoveled the roof off, but they were getting ready to shovel- In those days, it was customary to have canopies over. It's not used today too much, except for in a uh- Well, you see it today in hot climates. What do you call it? Well, in hot countries - even in <Phoenix> you don't see it anymore, but they used to have canopies over all this. My vocabulary apparently seems to be off kilter tonight. But they stepped from the roof down to shovel that off, and it gave way. My father fell and my cousin _____ fell, and of course they were both injured badly. My father, from that day 'til he died, had a bad limp, crippled. It crushed his heel and ankle and so forth, so he limped the rest of his life from that day on. Yes, I remember that. Now, that was back in the days of the horses and the sleighs yet, too. And the Orpheum Theater caved in, and a lot of other buildings caved in during that storm. Now, that's the one big storm. And then I don't think we had a reoccurrence of the storm of that magnitude until, what was it, 1948, when eight feet or maybe seven feet fell - eighty-four inches?

MONICA NACKARD: It wasn't that long ago.

SUSAN ROGERS: It was since I came back from <California>.

MONICA NACKARD: It was in the sixties.

SUSAN ROGERS: That one in ‘67. All right people have said there was a big one in '48-'49 and then ‘67-’68.

FRED NACKARD: Yes, there was a big one in '48 and '49.

MONICA NACKARD: I was here.

FRED NACKARD: It was a big one there, and at that time 144 inches of snow fell, but it was over a two-, three-week period. Yes! I was isolated in <Winona> all night, remember?

MONICA NACKARD: Yeah, now I remember.

FRED NACKARD: Yes. And the roads were closed. It was a terrific storm. But the one that occurred, I think, in '67, I believe it was, or '68, was possibly the biggest storm that I can recall, because I think it was seven feet fell in four days and nights, all in one bundle. But we had reached a different era. You know the snowplows and what have you. So it only stopped us for a few days.

MONICA NACKARD: That's long enough. We have a miniature cherry tree out in our east yard, and it never grows any taller. It got to be about eight feet tall. I stood there in the den window, Which doesn’t have any curtains, just drapes. And I watched that tree sinking - the snow was coming up, up, up. All the neighbors would put sticks up with flags on 'em, to indicate their driveway, or indicate a [form?]. Then we'd also walk to Babbitts' grocery store and take gunnysacks with us. And we'd shop for everybody in the neighborhood, and we'd drag the gunnysacks home. We'd get to my house and my neighbor's house on the corner; we'd __________ and distribute it __________. I don't ever want to do THAT again! We couldn't get the car out for eight days - except for four wheels drives they could go. I would say that was really a magnificent experience for me because it brought in all of the love and consideration of your neighbors. You know, we all say, "hi, how are you? May I borrow this, may I borrow that?" But when the nitty gritty came, my neighbors ____________. I didn't know my neighbors ___________. She helped ____________. She came up with her gunnysack, she said, "You ready to go?" I said, "I'm ready to go." (Tr: Interference on tape from phone conversation)

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2, BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]

MONICA NACKARD: And we’d go and we just dragged the gunnysacks home. And we split up all the food in the neighborhood. Everybody paid their share. We did it, in that big storm. And remember, when our trucks went out - as I say, our Pepsi was on Cottage Avenue where the liquor company is now. They would buy, when they COULD get out, they were trying to buy chains for our trucks, and they would pay an ENORMOUS amount for chains. I can't remember the amount. And they'd go out maybe an hour and the chains would all break and fall apart. And there we were again.

FRED NACKARD: Well, it was a disastrous storm, is what had happened. Money-wise it wasn't a lot of fun. We lost our garages. We lost our branch operation - in fact, they all caved in from the storm.

MONICA NACKARD: And no insurance.

FRED NACKARD: And no insurance. We had insurance, but it didn't cover snow. It covered sunshine, but not snow.

SUSAN ROGERS: While you were growing up, do you remember any crimes that stick out in your mind as a little kid, or anything?

FRED NACKARD: Yes, I think I had an interesting time I can tell you about. Before my father, as I said here a while ago, bought the red light district, where the office of the present-day Downtowner is, was run by a madam. In those days it was all a beautiful palatial place - big mirrors and such. It was run by a woman called Dutch May [phonetic spelling]. Now, a salesman, a jewelry salesman, stayed there a night or two, whatever happened _____, and he disappeared a day or two later. They never discovered his body, never discovered whatever happened to him, for, for several years. Then, oh, maybe six, seven years later, he is now dead, but was also a contemporary and a friend of mine from childhood, was Bert Huffman [phonetic spelling]. He was herding the cattle out here about where the KCLS radio station is now. Behind the KCLS radio station, toward the railroad track, were the wells apparently in those days, shallow or whatever, and Bert and some little friend of his began playing in the well, and they discovered the skeleton. It turned out to be this man Schwab who disappeared. He had been murdered and thrown into that well. It was traced to - I can't think of this man's name - it was traced to the son of a <Colorado> banker. It's a matter of record in the newspaper; you can find it there. It was traced back to him. He killed this jewelry salesman and took his car and I guess went to <California>, the promised land, and was living it up there. But he was finally arrested and brought back to <Flagstaff> and convicted and given a life sentence. It was quite a sensational trial. But his parents had a lot of money, his father had a lot of money, and he did escape the gallows. Now, about twenty, twenty-five years ago, he was pardoned, after serving twenty, twenty-five years, and I don't know where he lives today - maybe he's not even living now - but he was pardoned. That's one crime. It was ________.

Another crime that took place back in those early days was out here, what is now known as Two Guns or <Canyon Diablo>? I knew that man - not intimately, but I knew him, because he would be much older than I - but he was an Indian, but a very well educated Indian, and he had a white wife. Years later, I met their daughter, and she was a very beautiful girl. I met her in <Winslow> years later. But he killed- I can't think of his name. I knew the widow later. But he killed him in a gun duel there, and was exonerated, in self-defense.

In those days, it was not uncommon to have killings. I recall I was just a little boy then, it must have been just about like now, maybe 5:30, 6:00, 6:30, and we were then living, as I said, still living, I think, at the saddlery shop. But it was early enough in the evening that I was in my dad's store that is where the present-day Joe’s Place is, when we heard some shooting. I ran out into the street, a curious little boy, well I couldn’t have been more than 10 years old. And then on the corner, in the center of the street, one man was dead, shot in the head. And then where the Corner Bar is now, Club 66 is. I don't know whether that trap door is still in the walk or not, but I put beer down in there and stuff, another was dead. The sheriff, Mr. Dickinson, who apparently was a very bad shot, killed both men over something; I don't know what the trouble was. But there was something, it was a gun duel, but gun duels were not uncommon in those days. They were not either common, either - not like these westerns on TV - but they were not absolutely uncommon.

Another case or two that I recall when I was still a young fellow would be on the corner of Phoenix Avenue and.... I don't know what the name of that other street is. It's not O'Leary. It’s the one-

MONICA NACKARD: Verde?

FRED NACKARD: Maybe it's Verde, west of O'Leary, the first street west of O'Leary, and Phoenix Avenue, some fellows....

MONICA NACKARD: That's Verde!

FRED NACKARD: Yeah, maybe Verde. I remember that quite clearly someone was killed there. This man waited for this individual, standing there, and stepped out and killed him. And I recall the next day that I went down there, curious again, and they had it all boarded off, you know, with kind of a wood flooring, because they were supposed to bring blood hounds to smell out. But as far as I know that man was never found nothing ever was resolved with that murder at all.

Another murder that happened some years subsequent to that occurred and I saw it, too. I didn't see the actual killing, but I saw the man die. It was on South San Francisco, on the corner of Benton and South San Francisco. Some kind of a feud took place and this man was shot in the mouth - I remember that because I thought it was a terrible sight. But I saw him die. And the man that killed HIM was never caught. Many of the early-day killings, many of them are not caught. They got away. Maybe there was because it was more permissible in those days and there was more manliness about things, I really don't know. Things were considered fair _________. Anyhow, they didn't knock themselves out. Of course, they don't catch too many of them now. But in those days, duels were performed by men I would say with vengeance and valor, not so much by drug addiction and junk __________.

SUSAN ROGERS: To completely change the subject. Tell me how you met your wife and a little bit about your family.

MONICA NACKARD: I should do the talking now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, you move over.

FRED NACKARD: Not about the family. My father, of course, my father came from <Lebanon>.

MONICA NACKARD: She's talking about OUR family, yours and mine.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well, right after your marriage. If you want to go ahead and tell me exactly where your parents came from, that's fine, because I don't think you hit that in the very beginning. You told me a little bit about where YOU started, but not then.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, I can tell you, it’s quite brief. My father came from the old country after spending five years in <Egypt>. He came to <New York> in July of 1900, came west to <Ogden Utah>, got his naturalization papers in 1905, went BACK to the old country to visit his parents, married my mother who was in a convent and had been in a convent from the time she was seven years old, because her mother was a widow. She'd been in the convent from the time she was seven until she married my dad and they came to <New York City>. I was born in <Atlanta Georgia>, in 1907. Now, from there, you know the rest of the story. (to wife) Now, you want to take over?

MONICA NACKARD: Well, no. She just wanted to know about when WE met.

FRED NACKARD: Well, we met, what, in 1934?

MONICA NACKARD: You're out of your mind. We met about '32.

FRED NACKARD: Yeah, I think you're right.

MONICA NACKARD: It was about in July of '32. I was with a friend of Fred's, and we were on dates. And your racecar had lost the race at the racetrack. And you were very obnoxious that night when I met you.

FRED NACKARD: She was a student at the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: What was your maiden name?

FRED NACKARD: Heaney, H-E-A-N-E-Y. We met them and certainly didn’t see eye to eye to each other at the time. And then a couple of weeks or so, we, I don't know, we had a date, I suppose, and it began from there. And then we were married in- let's see we went together two and a half years and we were married in ‘35. We have forty-one coming up this month. Forty-one big ones.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

MONICA NACKARD: We have one son, and we were married seventeen years before he was born, and he works in <Colorado>. We have our dog, Bonny. He just had major surgery last week. Had a big tumor below his ear. Hopefully it's not going to be malignant. We'll get the report in the next couple of days. They took a biopsy. And we've worked together all our lives.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want to tell me just a little bit about your wholesale liquor business? I don't know anything about business at all. If you want to just tell me a little bit about it.

FRED NACKARD: Well, there's not TOO very much to say. I started it first on November 4, 1933, the day I started. I went across the street. In those days we were still a little bit of a western town. And you know, I don't know whether YOU know, the horseshoe was considered good luck. Do you recall that?

SUSAN ROGERS: If they're hung in the right way. (laughs)

FRED NACKARD: I went over across the street the day I started, and I found a little horseshoe, and I brought it over and nailed it over our front door, and it is still on our front door of the house we lived in.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it? (laughs)

FRED NACKARD: And I think it did bring us good luck. The years were good. They were difficult, but they were good. Of course it is presently run by my brother Philip and my nephew Frederick. I'm no longer directly involved. I'm now ________. But we are today - the only thing of any material importance, we are today the OLDEST wholesale liquor and beer company in the state of <Arizona> under one ownership. And possibly we're very close to one of the largest in the state. But we predate all other liquor companies in the state of <Arizona>.

MONICA NACKARD: Under one ownership.

FRED NACKARD: Under one ownership.

MONICA NACKARD: Those were the days when we worked from six 'til whenever.

FRED NACKARD: Oh that isn't important!

MONICA NACKARD: Well, it is important!

FRED NACKARD: Oh, it isn't important today!

MONICA NACKARD: You just don't go to work at eight and get off at sunrise.

FRED NACKARD: They don’t want to know that.

MONICA NACKARD: But she can cut that out of her tape.

SUSAN ROGERS: It is important. You said you usually worked six days a week, too.

FRED NACKARD: We worked seven, seven. But they were seven enjoyable days. We all worked six. A big percentage worked seven, but we get by. We played and had fun. It wasn't an oppression like it’s considered to be.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's go back. She said she met you when you were auto racing. Can you tell me a little bit about that?

MONICA NACKARD: I didn't say he was auto racing.

SUSAN ROGERS: He was AT the auto races.

MONICA NACKARD: I said he had a racecar.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, okay.

MONICA NACKARD: But he didn't drive it.

FRED NACKARD: Just one race.

MONICA NACKARD: Yeah. But somebody else drove.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, where were these races held?

MONICA NACKARD: Up here at the City Park.

FRED NACKARD: At the City Park and eventually the car was sent to <Holbrook> to race on the mile track there. And the fellow ran a big bill up on it, and when I went to get it, I found out I had a big bill against it. That was the end of my racing career. But I spent a couple of years at it. Interesting, I loved it, but then I was glad now to get rid of it.

MONICA NACKARD: But the time I met him, he hadn't driven that thing. It was someone else who had driven, and his nose was out of joint because they lost. That's what I meant.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, fine. Okay, well, I think you've just about answered all the questions that I had. Can you think of anything you want to add or anything you think I might have forgotten to ask or anything?

FRED NACKARD: You know, I just don't know what really to tell you, because I don't think that you accomplished what you came here to accomplish - to get old-time history. I'm kind of an in-betweener - the OLD West and the new. So you couldn't mine from me the real true stories you wanted. They're in the den (?) there, most of 'em. And they're resting out in the cemetery with most of 'em.

MONICA NACKARD: Well, Fred, you remember when we were married in '35 and we were living in that house on Cottage and South San Francisco. You remember we had one big snowstorm when we were down there, and the streets were all dirt, and the circuses would come to town. 

FRED NACKARD: Oh, yes. And they would unload them at the Santa Fe depot, and they'd bring all the animals down South San Francisco to about where the college football field is now.

FRED NACKARD: Exactly, where the college football field is there. All of the circuses-

MONICA NACKARD: I was working in the office, I wouldn't even answer a telephone while the circus animals were coming down the street. And we have pictures somewhere where the snow was way deep.

FRED NACKARD: Well, not many circuses. The circuses came, but anyhow....

MONICA NACKARD: We had a big snowstorm one of those years before they ever paved the streets.

FRED NACKARD: These were all dirt streets in those days.

MONICA NACKARD: We've always had a dog - a million of 'em, but there was a dog- One of our dogs was lying way high on the snow, you know, everyone had to shovel.

FRED NACKARD: But in those days, I might say, it is no longer customary - apparently the economy has changed - almost every year Barnum and Bailey's and other circuses of that day - that's the only name I can recall right now, there were others - one or two other big ones. The names escape me, but they would come every year, along about the early fall, apparently on their circuits. And they would pitch their tents, BIG tents, out there where the university grounds or the football grounds are. And of course they had the elephants and the giraffes and the tigers and all that, and they would come up and down San Francisco in the morning. They'd come a puttin’ up the stuff, that. And then at night - you know, being it's a one-day stand. And that was one of the great miracles of the day, and how they could put it up before daylight to start. And then sometime during the night they'd disappear. There'd be a whole train, you know, maybe twenty, twenty-five cars. And it was a spectacular for me. You understand it was before TV, before radio, before lots of things.

MONICA NACKARD: ___________.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, no, never as good as that, but I'm going back even before your time, Monica.

MONICA NACKARD: (inaudible)

FRED NACKARD: And there used to be the Mexican circuses used to come. But that was a source of entertainment, kind of like.... I recall back in the twenties and so forth when the big thing was the jitney bands. You know ten-cent bands. You'd go to the dance and the women, the guardians, the mothers, would be there to watch that their daughters didn't go out with anybody. And they'd sit there and wait for people, men, to come up and ask for a dance. And they had tickets they'd tear off. They called them dance halls, but it was not only in <Flagstaff>. I remember going to <Phoenix>, down to Riverside, on South Central. There was a big dance pavilion there.

MONICA NACKARD: Ballrooms.

FRED NACKARD: They called them ballrooms then, and now out at <Mesa> and <Tempe>, there were those dances in the summertime - they were open-air affairs. I guess many knew one another, but I don't think you had to know everyone to buy a string of tickets for a dime or whatever the occasion, you’d go around and dance, ask girls to dance. You either got turned down or you danced or whatever. It was no big deal either.

I remember- What was the name of that bar? It used to be Rancho Grande.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh, I think that’s right.

MONICA NACKARD: (inaudible)

FRED NACKARD: Yeah, Rancho Grande, which later belonged to a very dear friend of mine who's now deceased. But prior to that, it was called the Chin Chun Chan.

MONICA NACKARD: Now THAT I don't know about.

FRED NACKARD: Oh, no. The Chin Chun Chan. Now, there was nothing but- just no bar, no restaurant, just a dance hall. That's how popular dance halls were in those days. It was the only way of society gettin' together, males and females. And they would have dances there every Sunday, and I was just a kid then, too young to ask girls to dance, but I would go down along with a bunch of other kids and look in the window and watch 'em dance. And there were some good dancers. Some of those girls and fellows could really dance.

You know life was simple then - very simple by today’s standards.

MONICA NACKARD: All things change.

FRED NACKARD: Well, there is a certain sophistication today that people think it's better, and maybe it IS better, but I doubt very seriously that it is.

SUSAN ROGERS: I think they're trying to turn back anyway, a little bit nowadays.

FRED NACKARD: Well, I think it would be most beneficial if it turned back a LONG way, because we've gone far offstream where we are. There probably never has been - at least as far as little as I know of history - when people are so terribly dissatisfied with themselves and their circumstances, and with their neighbors and their government, their cities, and everybody else. That was not the case ________. I was raised on the south side, and of course I ate, lived, played, and almost slept with some of the poorest people. But there is no comparison today to their problems. I was in homes where there were no floors, no bathrooms, no water. It would be a well. And yet they bring out their guitars and they would sing - some of the most beautiful voices you ever heard in your life. Yes, they were poor, but they had that God-given gift of joy and happiness. Go down there now, nobody sings. They've got cars, they have bathrooms, they have floors, they have curtains. They have everything that everybody else has, but nobody sings anymore.

Reminds me of a story, and I think it's quite appropriate. It's not a new story; you may have heard it. It's the story of Old Hickory, of an old man in a little town in <Italy> who used to pass by a convent in this little community, and there was a statue of the Blessed Mother out in front of the convent. And this little old man would come by and he'd take his hat - the mother superior was watching. And he'd take his hat and toss it up into the air and catch it in front of the Blessed Virgin's statue, and go on. She watched him for several days or weeks, whatever it was, until she finally made up her mind that she was going to wait for him and speak to him. So one morning she waited for him. She had him pretty well timed, he came very early in the morning, either going to work or whatever he was doing. And this morning he came and she was waiting. "My good man, I've been watching you for quite some time, and I notice that as you pass the statue of the Blessed Mother that you toss your cap in the air. Why?" "Sister," he said, "I don't know how to pray. I can't read or write." "Oh," she said, "that's easy. I'll teach you how to pray." So he was all pleased and so was she. So she taught him a very simple little prayer. And she continued to _______. For a few days he would kneel at the statue, she watched him cross himself, and say this prayer _________. It went on for a few days, then she was quite content, she'd made an achievement, she'd gotten another disciple. Lo and behold, one day she looked out again, and the little old man came by and he tossed his cap up into the air and went on. So the next day she waited for him and talked to him. She said, "I thought I told you how to pray, and I saw you toss your cap yesterday morning." He said, "That's right." She said, "Why? After I taught you how to pray?" He said, "The Blessed Mother quit smiling when I started praying." So you see, it doesn't make much difference what we have or what we say or what we do __________. It's the reward from what we give and receive that counts. So affluence, with the government today paying and subsidizing and doing all of these things that they're doing to try to make everybody equal, trying to level the mountains down with the valleys and raise the valleys up to the mountains - well, they shall not succeed. And they have not succeeded, and they shall never succeed. What we need to do is with a man’s heart and mind, not stuff their pocketbooks and bellies with groceries ____________.

I'd better get off of the damned air - I don't want to talk like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Want me to turn it off?

FRED NACKARD: Yes!


