Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

Brad Dimock Interview (Part Two)

Interview number: 53.52

[BEGIN SIDE A] 

This is the River Runners Oral History Project, and it's [August 26], 1997. And we're in <Flagstaff> at Brad Dimock's house. 

(aside about tape) 

Steiger: Usually when we do these, I usually get everybody's background before they ever got to the river, and I wonder if we talked about that on the Oldtimers Trip. 

Dimock: I don't think we talked about much. (

Steiger: I'm sorry that I didn't....) It was a quickie. 

Steiger: Yeah, it was. I forgot we'd even done that one. If I had remembered, I would have looked it over, just so we didn't cover the same ground twice. Let's just start with your background, like what did your parents do?, where were you a little kid at?, and like that. 

Dimock: Let's see, I was born in 1953, in <Ithaca New York>, where my mother's family has lived for ever and ever -generations. My dad had just come there in '39 to teach at Cornell. I was the fourth of four, a postmenopause accident. We lived way out in the country, in a little sort of abandoned farming area that had gone to woods. Nobody lived out there at all, and nowadays it's a very hoity-toity neighborhood. But it was pretty cool, just out in the trees. We had acres and acres of land. Our neighbor had 200 acres that surrounded us, and there were creeks flowing through. Our nearest neighbors were about a half a mile away. Turns out, they're Reegan Dale's cousins. 

Steiger: You're kidding! 

Dimock: I'm not kidding. 

Steiger: But you didn't find that out until.... 

Dimock: Until after I was a boatman. 

Steiger: Obviously. 

Dimock: Their mom is a Duffy, and Reegan's mom's sister. Now she lives in <Prescott>. 

Steiger: Wow! 

Dimock: Anyhow, we farted around in the woods and made forts and didn't really do much boating at all -the creeks were pretty small. Looking back on it, there was more boating to be done than we did. We tried to make some boats, I remember, but they didn't work out. 

Steiger: What did your dad teach at Cornell? 

Dimock: Plant pathology. He was a research professor of plant pathology, so he didn't really even teach much, I don't think. I don't know what he did, but he [didn't teach] that much. He was a full-time professor. 

Steiger: He was busy. 

Dimock: A busy man. Self-made, from the ghetto. 

Steiger: From the ghetto? What ghetto? 

Dimock: The Bay Area, northern end of the bay, <Richmond California>. His dad was kind of a crazed Baptist -not even a Baptist, some other religion. Just these awful stories of destitution and poverty. His dad never had a job, and he just praised God. When my dad was a teenager, he just split, put himself through high school, put himself into Berkeley, graduated, got a Ph.D. at Berkeley, and took off. He became an atheist, a Communist, and a couple other things. 

Steiger: A Communist?! 

Dimock: For a while. Then he decided it wasn't goin' anywhere. 

Steiger: That's like in the forties or something? 

Dimock: In the thirties, early thirties. 

Steiger: There was a lot of 'em then. 

Dimock: Uh-huh. And [he] ended up getting an assistant professorship at Cornell in the late thirties, and that's where he met my mom. 

Steiger: Was she a student? 

Dimock: No, she was just a local gal. I'm not sure how they met. My mom was kind of a wild gal. She was a flapper, dance hall girl, had just the wildest stories of her adolescence, growing up, and going to the speakeasies and getting their stomachs pumped and drinkin' methanol and all this stuff they'd sell ya' in the speakeasies. 

Steiger: Gettin' their stomachs pumped?! 

Dimock: Yeah, 'cause it's poison. You now, rubbing alcohol and stuff. 

Steiger: Oh, you mean.... 

Dimock: This is during Prohibition. 

Steiger: So people would go and you'd drink something, and then you'd have to go get your stomach pumped 'cause you were sick. 

Dimock: Yeah, 'cause you'd been poisoned. 

Steiger: "Whoops, wrong stuff." 

Dimock: One time she drove Freddie Elston's Pierce-Arrow back from <Binghamton> at about 150 miles an hour with everybody else in the car puking -to the hospital. Anyhow, I think my mom was a little too wild for my father. They never did seem to get along very well. So we went to the public high school there, and I graduated in '71 and took off, went to <Prescott> to go to college. 

Steiger: So you were like, by far, the baby of the family? 

Dimock: Yeah. My next brother is five years older. Oldest brother is eleven years older. 

Steiger: Why the hell did you get from <Ithaca> to Prescott College, for cryin' out loud?! 

Dimock: Well, I had a friend in high school, was two years older than me, he graduated way ahead of me and came back when I was a junior and said, "Hey, I found a place you oughtta go check out, go to school, in <Arizona>." A good friend of his, who he'd met in <Berkeley> when his dad was on sabbatical there, had gone to <Prescott>. And my friend, Bruce, went to visit him. So I got the catalog and they had cool pictures -people rock climbin' and shit. So I went. I don't know if I read the catalog, but they had cool pictures. And it was out there, way far from <New York>, and there were cactus. I thought cactus were cool, so that's where I went. 

Steiger: Were you interested in plants as a kid? 

Dimock: Kinda. I did like botany. Lookin' back on it, it's hard to stay what I was interested in. I was interested in art, mostly. I painted pictures a lot, drew pictures -abstract, weird shit. 

Steiger: Grew up outdoors, not that many neighbors or nothin'. 

Dimock: We built a swimming pool when I was ten, and at the time a common toy you could get at the dime stores were these blue plastic boats, about four or five feet long, just made of thin plastic. You know, if you really whacked one hard with a bat, you'd break it. I loved that boat, and I'd get in it and I'd paddle around the swimming pool. I hated to swim, still do. And I remember just bein' in that boat. And I think I really must have somehow learned a lot about boating in that damned thing, just roarin' around the pool with a single paddle. And I paddled that thing until I grew too big to float in it. I'd get in it, and there'd be about an eighth of an inch of freeboard, and I'd paddle around 'til the thing sank. (pause for train) 

Steiger: So this little blue boat, you paddled around with a single-bladed paddle. 

Dimock: Uh-huh. 

Steiger: Was it like a canoe? 

Dimock: No, it was shaped like a rowboat. 

Steiger: Like a sport-yak or somethin'? 

Dimock: Yeah, it was pointed on one end, had a blunt stern. Had a lot of kinda fluted little rib things in it to keep the structure. It's like a sixteenth of an inch thick, stamped out of blue plastic, about a foot tall -not even a foot. 

Steiger: So then you got out there to Prescott College? 

Dimock: The first thing that happened when I got to Prescott College, there was a thing they did -they still do, I think -kinda like an Outward Bound course. They take all the freshmen out to rattle their cages a bit. And they took me down <Grand Canyon>. You know David Lovejoy? (

Steiger: Yeah.) He was one of my instructors, even back then. He was still a student. And Bob Miller out in <Chino Valley>. You know Bob? (

Steiger: Uh-huh.) God, I haven't heard from him in years. 

Steiger: I just met him, I don't know him real well. 

Dimock: And a couple of others. And off we went on this really bizarre <Grand Canyon> trip. As it turned out, it was a fiasco. It didn't work out that well, because we had this kind of wild character who taught at <Prescott> forever, named Vern Taylor. And Vern was the Old Man of <Grand Canyon>. He's been down there a bunch, he'd done a lot of travertine studies and he'd take these little yellow duckies and tie two together and go through <Grand Canyon> in 'em, with another researcher. Just wild, you know, smaller than sport-yaks. And he got it in his mind that <Prescott> needed a motor rig, and he bought one from Ron Smith, a big ol' "S" rig, side tubes and everything. And we had that on our freshman orientation trip. And then we had a paddle boat as well. And then some of the kids got to go in the paddle boat, and everybody else sat on the motor rig. And after a day or two, the boatmen who were runnin' the paddle boat got spooked that they needed these guys who they'd already taught how to paddle, and so nobody else got to paddle in it. 

Steiger: They didn't want to be trainin' new ones. 

Dimock: No. 

Steiger: So if you were lucky enough.... 

Dimock: So if you weren't in there in the first day or two, you didn't get in. And so I never really got to go in it except one day, I think. But it was really weird, because Vern was so neurotic about this big boat, and worried about getting in trouble, and that we spent all eighteen days without hiking. 

Steiger: (laughs) On a motor trip! 

Dimock: On a motor trip. Well, Day One, we were gonna leave, and then neither of the motors worked. And the Quist brothers were there, and Vern had met them before, and I remember Bob -and I think it was Bob and Clare -stayed up all night at that gas station that used to be there at the ramp, fixin' Vern's motors. Meanwhile, the paddle boat had already left. 

Steiger: Had left?! They left before they realized you couldn't start the motors? 

Dimock: Yeah. (Steiger gasps.) So they were down at Six Mile Wash or something, bivouacking with no gear. Oh, God, then we spent a night at Badger and a night above <House Rock>, and a night at <House Rock>, and then I forget how the schedule went from there. But he had everybody worked into a tizzy. And you had to have everything lashed on that motor rig so that you couldn't move it. Nothing would budge. And we all wore helmets. 

Steiger: (laughs) On the motor rig! (laughs) Say it isn't so! 

Dimock: It's true! 

Steiger: Well, it was a pretty big -what was the year now? 

Dimock: [It was] '71. And Vern wasn't really that good a boatman, either, from what I could tell. He was kinda learnin' it by Braille as we went, and I think he was in over his head. And on we went. We did end up with one layover at <Tapeats Creek>. And one of the things that you did on freshman orientation, you're supposed to do a solo. But we didn't have really time to do a hike and a solo on our eighteen-day trip, and so you had your choice. So I did a solo. Four of us did solos in the gorge, and everybody else hiked up to <Thunder River> and spent the night, came back -or something. A little of this is hazy. We went on down, we motored all the way to <South Cove>, made 100 miles the last day, we were so far behind. (laughter) Drove all night to get to <South Cove>. 

Steiger: What kind of kitchen did you have? What was the stuff like? 

Dimock: We had cook "teams," so there'd be like four of you with a little Svea stove and some freeze-dried fart fodder and stuff. 

Steiger: And I guess there were just the old cloth sleepin' bags, or were there good _____________. 

Dimock: We had those big square rubber army bags -you know, big, huge, heavy monsters you could turn into a backpack if you're a sadist. We had those, and then just whatever you had for campin' gear. I have no idea what kind of sleepin' bag I had -probably a Sears or somethin'. But it was an interesting trip. But it really didn't make me think I wanted to go be a boatman or spend much time down there, but it did get me interested in geology. 

Steiger: It wasn't like, "This is it!" 

Dimock: No, that wasn't it, actually. It was kinda neat, but I was so overwhelmed with paranoia and frustration that it wasn't that great a trip. So I went back to college, was studying geology, biology, and art. The next year, around Thanksgiving, this guy I'd met workin' in the dish room -we washed dishes -he said, "Hey, I'm goin' down <Grand Canyon>. We're takin' a private trip down at Thanksgiving. You want to go? One of the guys bailed out." And I went, "Okay." And so we did a paddle trip over Thanksgiving -fucking cold Thanksgiving it was, too! Our wet suits froze every night, so we were sleeping on them, puttin' 'em under the sleeping bags so they wouldn't freeze. But we had two little Yampas, and one of 'em was a Prescott College guy and five students from the Catalina Island School, and the other one was six of us from <Prescott>. Real dysfunctional group, too -most of us didn't like each other. And off we went. We did pretty good, but we got down to <Granite> over Thanksgiving weekend, and Vern had told us that you could not run on Thanksgiving weekend water, and so we laid over for four days at <Granite>, just because Vern had said we had to. He wasn't even along! (laughter) 

Steiger: "Just forget about runnin' on Thanksgiving." 

Dimock: Yeah, just don't even.... 

Steiger: Don't even think about it. 

Dimock: The water didn't change a God damned bit for four days, and then we kept going -you know, went on our merry way. 

Steiger: So even when it came up, it didn't change? I mean, even like after.... 

Dimock: It didn't do much at all. 

Steiger: Did it occur to you guys that this was silly? 

Dimock: It did, a little bit, but again, we were just so bamboozled by it all. We figured Vern knew everything. Vern didn't, but we thought he must. And he told us we had to portage <Lava Falls>, so we did. We didn't flip. We all fell out at Pipe Creek, hit a big wave on Thanksgiving Day, and all fell out of the boat, got back in, over there on the right somewhere. Don't remember a lot of the runs. 

Steiger: Did you guys trade off being "captain"? 

Dimock: Not much. Again, that was.... 

Steiger: It was the guy who had the permit, he got to be the captain? 

Dimock: Yeah. And at that time, you could just call and get a permit, say, "We want to go down on Thanksgiving." "Okay." 

Steiger: Yeah, no big deal. 

Dimock: And so you'd go. And so we went. And so I got back off that trip.... 

Steiger: Did you even see anybody else? Probably didn't, did you? 

Dimock: No. Hell, no. We did see the Quists on that first trip, though. We saw 'em at <Deubendorff>. 

Steiger: After they had fixed your motor. 

Dimock: After they had fixed our motors. They went down the left in low water, and just made a lot of racket. (laughter) 

Steiger: They were in motorboats, too? 

Dimock: Yeah. Looked real violent, as I recall. But, hell, nobody knew how to drive back then -or very few, as far as I can tell. So I got off that trip and I got this idea. I wanted to be on the fire crew with all my buddies, but I was such a weenie-armed geek that I washed out. I couldn't swing an ax right, and so I couldn't be on the fire crew with all the cool guys. So I said, "Well, maybe I could be a helper on a river company or something." I figured I could never row, so I applied as a helper to all the motor companies. And of course they didn't write back, except for one. Canyoneers said, "Come on up for an interview." And I hitchhiked up to Canyoneers and Gaylord [Staveley] was out that day, as it turned out, and Joan, and Pete Lindaman [phonetic spelling] -Dan's older brother -talked to me for a couple of hours. 

Steiger: Joan <Nevills>? 

Dimock: Yeah. And that was right after Gaylord had left her for little Jan, but they both worked in the office -Jan and Joan. Kind of a strange relationship. 

Steiger: Must have been an unpleasant situation. Were they -well.... 

Dimock: They were civil. And they hired me as an interpretive assistant. Everybody at Canyoneers has always had a big name. You're never a "swamper" or a "boatman," you're an "interpretive assistant." And then I did my first trip, commercial, in probably June of '73, at twenty bucks a day. I never swamped a trip for free. 

Steiger: Wow! 

Dimock: One of my small claims to fame. 

Steiger: That's pretty good. 

Dimock: And got a raise after my first trip to twenty-five a day, from twenty. And pretty soon I was assistant pilot, and I worked two seasons swampin' -or actually, interpretive assistant and assistant piloting. And then in 1975, I'd just graduated from college. In '73, '74, everything I studied at school had to do with <Grand Canyon> at that point. You know, geology, biology, archaeology, boating, expedition stuff, and outdoor leadership. So I kinda got a degree in bein' a boatman. And in '75 I went back for another season of being an assistant pilot, and the lead pilot didn't show up -this nitwit named Ed, who'd been working for Canyoneers for a while who was just a train wreck of a boatman -it was terrible. The day before the trip, I went in to Gaylord and I said, "You know, I think I could probably drive the boat if Ed doesn't show up." And Gaylord said, "Well, I think you could, too." The next day I was trip leader, because Cameron wasn't old enough to be trip leader. 

Steiger: So he went, but he wasn't.... 

Dimock: Yeah, Cameron was the other boatman. And Cam and I ran together for a couple of years. Once he got old enough, he led a lot of the trips. 

Steiger: Was he pretty level-headed? 

Dimock: Yeah. 

Steiger: Back then, even? 

Dimock: Yeah. Yeah, I did a lot of my training under him. He's real quiet, real good boatman, good driver, read water well. One day I was drivin', and I was really gettin' it, you know, and I was catching a Tour West boat, and they were faster than us, but they didn't drive so good. I was really excited, 'cause I was really gettin' it. And for like two hours I was gainin' on this thing, and then I caught one bad swirly, and it took me off into an eddy for a minute. And Cameron, the first thing he said to me all day, he just looks over, "You're not readin' the water." (Steiger laughs) (Dimock swears under breath.) Bastard! 

Steiger: Very encouraging. 

Dimock: Yeah. It was 83 Mile, I think, got me. Couldda happened to anybody. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah. What were your duties as an interpretive assistant? 

Dimock: Same old shit. As an interpretive assistant you were expected to 'splain stuff to people. 

Steiger: You were supposed to go up front? 

Dimock: Sure, and yack. But that was really -on the river nobody thought about that. We were just tryin' to get to the other end. 

Steiger: Every day. 

Dimock: Yeah. You know, get the God damned boats -those things were just so huge, and they were falling apart and leaking and exploding, and frames were shattering. 

Steiger: I'm trying to remember what they.... They were different then, huh? 

Dimock: They were thirty.... 

Steiger: They had straight tubes __________. 

Dimock: Four straight tubes that were made of snout tubes. And originally what they would do is take one snout tube and lacerate the front pointy part, that chamber, into about six strips, and then glue 'em onto the back of another snout, so you had this really funky place. 

Steiger: Where it didn't hold air. 

Dimock: Well, it didn't hold air that good, and it looked like hell. You know, here were all these pointed strips comin' off of one snout tube, glued onto the back of another. Really funky. And then three big frames that were all put together with trailer hitches. Whenever we'd hit somethin' big, the trailer hitches would snap and break and stuff, or somethin' would go through a tube, and "ffsshhhwww." [Okay, you try spelling what he just uttered! (Tr.)] A lot of leaky, leaky, leaky rubber. But about the time I got to be a pilot, Russ Sullivan came in as the shop manager. And over the winter, he tore 'em all apart, and cut the whole snout part off of the back tube, and cut that first bulkhead off, and then took what would be the second chamber of the snout and pulled it clear up over the back chamber of the forward snout, so it made it six chambers, instead of seven -turned it into a thirty-two-footer. He redesigned the frame. There was more room on the boat than there had been before, even though it was five feet shorter (

Steiger: Wow!) and really made a pretty tricked-out boat. He built these huge iron hinges instead of the trailer hitches, and those things were bomber! You could put 'em anywhere -we tried! Cameron and I would do horrible things to 'em, just to see if we could break 'em, and we couldn't. You know, gettin' some fast, long stretches: like 110 Mile, catch an eddy, and then when you see the other guy comin', you just pull out in front of him, pointed upstream, and hit him, bow on -bow to bow. 

Steiger: ______________. Oh, my God! 

Dimock: Yeah. And they'd just stand 'em up, way up in the air, and then they'd come back down. It's really cool. 

Steiger: And this is with people and everything on 'em? 

Dimock: Oh, yeah, full load, twenty people on each boat. Always ran the hole in <Crystal>. Always hit the top hole in <House Rock>, pointed left so that it didn't knock you too far to the right that you couldn't still get off of Pour Over, too -'cause you couldn't go off both of 'em. You were nobody. We ran everything we could find. We'd run the left edge of the right run at <Lava> so we could hit that huge crasher at the top of <Lava>, and still get all the bottom waves. Huntin' for the big stuff. 

Steiger: I've always thought those boats were kinda scary, in terms of all those hard things. Even then they had those little seats or somethin', didn't they? 

Dimock: Yeah. Gaylord had this idea -and actually, I think they were a pretty good boat in that sense. Those seats were pretty.... 

Steiger: They worked. 

Dimock: They worked. The boat was so heavy, and especially after Russell worked 'em over, they were so solid they were just about unbreakable and unstoppable. And so they didn't snap and whip around like a lighter boat does, and people didn't fly off 'em. It was just "ka-schperr" [Again, can anybody come up with a better spelling for this descriptive sound? (Tr.)] It was like a bus. If you snout rode, you flew, you fell off. But we had very few injuries on any of the trips I was on -almost none. There were some trips that did have some people get in a flex point or something. 

Steiger: I remember seein' a couple of those guys. I was on a trip with Cooper when John Gray kinda had a terrible day. 

Dimock: Oh, yeah. That was later. That was after Gaylord threw away the Sullivan design and went back to a forty-footer. 

Steiger: Which wasn't as good. 

Dimock: No, but he called it a sea craft. He always called it a sea craft. He loved those big names. [We were] able to put twenty-three people on it, by making it that huge. [Gaylord] convinced the Park that it was capable of carrying that many people. 

Steiger: So that's what he was up to -he just wanted to get more on there. 

Dimock: As far as I can tell -no other reason to make it bigger. They're terrible to drive, compared to.... The ones we had, I'm very lucky in that the three years I was a boatman for Canyoneers, we had a pretty maneuverable boat. You could turn it and stuff. I liked it. 

Steiger: Then Gaylord came along and said, "Gotta make these bigger." 

Dimock: Yeah, he made 'em bigger shortly after I left. 

Steiger: Was he pretty good to work for? 

Dimock: (pause) This isn't getting published 'til after I'm dead, so.... He was weird to work for. He was a really neat guy to go on a trip with. We went up to <Utah> one time, did a private trip with Gaylord and a bunch of boatmen -had a blast. [He's] real funny, real sharp, witty guy. But there's the dark side, like Darth Vader. You wouldn't see him at the office for weeks, and then you'd get a memo, you're "in trouble" for this or that or something. Or he'd call you into the office. One time he called Cameron and I in and told us that he'd heard we'd been running really big stuff intentionally, and that if we hurt anybody and he got sued, he'd sue us. "Oh, cool." Jan, the one before Joy -they're really pretty similar -it was pretty hard to trust her, too. So it was a little weird. But I get along okay with 'em, pretty well. And Joan was there, and she was always just great. But in '73, that first year I worked, in midsummer, Prescott College wanted to do an exploratory in Cataract Canyon, and I got word of this, and I wanted to go along, so I took a trip off from Canyoneers and went up and learned to row -Delahunt [phonetic spelling] and I. You know Day? 

Steiger: I don't know him, I've just heard you talk about him. I've never even met him. 

Dimock: Well, Day and I decided to split a boat, share a boat, and we both learned to row. (chuckles) All that flat water, and then a couple of rapids, and then flat water. But some people told us what to do. You know, you pull on one and push on the other, and it turns. Tuck in here.... We thought that was pretty neat, so we took off down there, and we did pretty well. (aside about refreshments) But we went down there, the lake wasn't really full yet. I think there was still a riffle at Gypsum, or near Gypsum. But we went back, and in '74 I did a couple of <Diamond Creek> trips with Prescott College, rowing. And I thought rowing was actually pretty cool, and maybe I could row. And then in '75, Gaylord said, "I'm starting a rowing program, and I'd like you to head that up, Brad." I was very flattered. I was the only one in the company who'd rowed, other than Gaylord. So we got these big Moravia trabascos that were a lot heavier than the ones they built later. It was a heavier material, but classic Moravia seam failure stuff. But we thought those were pretty neat, and we were supposed to go out in a couple of weeks. I said, "You know, I haven't ever rowed through <Grand Canyon>, and maybe we should do a training trip. Will that be okay?" "Oh, sure." So we took off and rowed these things down through, and figured out how to do it, kinda, and went down a couple of weeks later with the folks. [Tim] Cooper was in on that, and myself, and Jim Norton. And we did one a year of those, and I really liked it. (aside about spellings) So I kinda had gotten this taste for rowing, and I wanted to do some more rowing, and Gaylord was thinking that this wasn't gonna work out, and he was going to phase the rowing program out. To me, it was kinda the death knell for my career there. And more or less, I was pretty happy. I was lead pilot by then. Cameron had left to go to school, so I was the top dog at Canyoneers -for what that's worth -and doin' some pretty wild stuff in those boats. When Cam and I were runnin' together (chuckles) we had this bet, who was gonna go off the ledge at Serpentine first? just to see what happens. Well, I did. 

Steiger: You did?! 

Dimock: Yes, I did. 

Steiger: You're kidding! 

Dimock: No, straight off. 

Steiger: In a boat with people and everything? 

Dimock: Canyoneers motor rig full of people. Just made a bad noise, everybody looked back at me like.... 

Steiger: "Why did you do that?!" 

Dimock: "That was stupid!" 

Steiger: What was the water runnin'? 

Dimock: Twenties [20,000 cfs] somewhere. 

Steiger: So there was still a hole. 

Dimock: Pretty big ride. But mostly just violent. Took one down the left at Bedrock one day. 

Steiger: On purpose? 

Dimock: On purpose. That was in '77. Actually, I think I was pretty good at that point with a motor rig. I could put it just about anywhere -gently, delicately. And backed down the left side of Bedrock and eased the stern over into that far left eddy, swung the bow past the island, and motored straight out, never touched it. (with feigned braggadocio) "I'm the best boatman in the world!" And then the next day you crash into a rock, "I'm the worst boatman in the world!" 

Steiger: That's pretty good, though. You backed in there. 

Dimock: Backed down the left. And see, it was short enough, it would swing. 

Steiger: This is the old Canyoneers boat? 

Dimock: This is the thirty-two-footer. So that was the "acne" of my career there. 

Steiger: Boy, that motor was right in the back too, wasn't it? (

Dimock: Yeah.) So it would turn. 

Dimock: Back into anything, it's toast. 

Steiger: It could really pivot. 

Dimock: Yeah, that's true. But in the spring of '77, the famous low water, when they shut the dam down because of -I forget what it was that year -something. 

Steiger: Yeah. Oh, was it <Rainbow Bridge>? 

Dimock: I thought that was '73. That was the low water of '73, which is what I was training on originally. My first few trips were big water, and then they shut it down in the fall of '73, and I worked the whole fall, back to back, doin' these just zero water trips. So in '77, they did it again in the spring for some reason, and Cooper and I were flailing away on this apartment house we'd bought. He was actually out of town, and I got a call from Gaylord, who actually asked for Cooper, but he wasn't there. So he told me that Ken Sleight was at <Phantom>, way late on a trip, and he needed a boatman at dawn to row out. I said, "Well, I'll go." So I just nailed some carpet over the side of the house. I had a whole wall off the exterior of the building, and nailed a carpet over it and left for a week and a half, and hiked in. And it was quite the crew. It was Kim Crumbo, Mark Crumbo -later Mark O'Neill -Stewart Reeder, Bob Whitney, and a guy named Bob Shelton who was workin' for Sleight. He used to work for North American. And me! And off we went on about 3,000 [cfs] or less. I don't remember what it was, but it was just abysmal water. This was the first time I'd worked outside of Canyoneers, and it was really pretty exciting people to work with. These guys were (

Steiger: Pretty fun.) big stuff. We had some real wild runs down. I remember Serpentine, just goin' off a ledge down there -just a scary rapid. Of course, when Ken hiked out, Stewart switched boats before Ken was out of sight, because Stewart had this brand new Salmon raft that had bad glue, and it was leaking like crazy, and that's what I got. 

Steiger: Of course. 

Dimock: And it just got softer and softer, and I'd pump and pump and pump and pump all day, and it was just a disaster. And at <Lava Falls>, I'd pumped it up hard as a marshmallow, and Whitney and I wanted to run right at <Lava>, down this series of three waterfalls, and Crumbo has always been very, very conservative -prefers rocks to waves -had this pinball run down the left he'd figured out. But Whitney and I, we were gonna run right -fuck it. And we came back and the people were going, "Oh, my God!" And my boat had blown up, and just "POOMB!" given up and blown right at the bulkhead in the front, so both front quarters were gone. So I had half a boat with two thwarts. And it kind of took the wind out of my sails in terms of rowing it through. [Well, duh! I'm just glad it didn't blow in the middle of <Lava> with a load of passengers! (Tr.)] So we switched all the gear with Bob's, took all the garbage that Bob had, and I gave him all the good stuff I had, and we rolled the front half of the boat up onto the thwart, made this little round boat, moved the frame back, and pushed it off. [It] had a perfect run on the right, and then [I] went down the left with Bob (

Steiger: Oh, my!), caught it at the bottom. 

Steiger: Wow! Shades of P. T. Reilly! (laughs) 

Dimock: Yeah. I just begged these guys for a job, you know, but they didn't have any work for me, the spring of '77. 

Steiger: What was it?, just that they were cool, or the boats were cool? 

Dimock: Yeah. It was just they were a rowing company, and I was ready to leave the motor operation and work with some people that -they knew so much more about a lot of stuff than anybody at Canyoneers. We were all self-taught over there, we really didn't have any real boating "gods" in the company to learn from, so we were just kind of flailing about. I think a lot of companies were that way, (

Steiger: Yeah.) trying to figure it out. And these guys knew a lot of stuff. But Ken, you know, I only met him for a while at <Phantom>, but he had so much charisma, too, I just wanted to work for him. That's before he was seldom seen -or no, it was right as he had become seldom seen. The book had just come out. So that summer I worked all summer long for Canyoneers, doin' really goofy stuff in these motor rigs, and doin' back to back to back to back. You'd get up at three on Sunday morning and get in the truck, drive to the Ferry [<Lee's Ferry>], rig out by nine or ten. The folks would get there, you'd drive down to 20 Mile or somewhere and camp, and by Friday night, you were at Scorpion Island. Saturday morning you'd drive into Pearce [Pearce Ferry], load the boat on the trailer, drive to Flag, switch the old gear off the boat, the new gear onto the boat, wash your clothes, go out to dinner with the folks, get drunk, cash your paycheck, buy some more beer, get an hour's sleep, get back in the truck, go to the Ferry and do it again and again and again and again. [Ah, the romantic life of a boatman! (Tr.)] 

Steiger: Boy. And rig, and then the people would be there that same day. 

Dimock: Yeah, they were on your tail. It was just ________. 

Steiger: Without a second. 

Dimock: Nope. (

Steiger: Wow!) You had to be quick with that rig-out, 'cause they were comin'. They were three or four hours behind ya'. But, you know, the boat was fully loaded when it left the dock there at the -we called it the dock, but the warehouse. 

Steiger: That's right. You were still just puttin' the outside tubes. 

Dimock: The side tubes, and a thing called a superframe which tried to support the ungodly heavy rear frame. They still run it that way, I think. And get all your straps right, and get the thing pumped up. So we never knew anyone, you know. You would just come in, we were so frantic at <Lee's Ferry>, and drivin' so fast to get downriver that we weren't really "in the club." 

Steiger: You didn't have time to stop and visit. 

Dimock: We were like Tour West boatmen. 

Steiger: (aside about sleeping bag?) So you leave Sunday, and you're back in Flag, eatin' dinner, eatin' a farewell dinner Saturday night. (

Dimock: Uh-huh.) And you call that a seven-day trip. 

Dimock: Un-huh. On the water, at least for a little bit, each of those seven days. The schedule was, we'd go down usually just above North [Kane?]. We didn't know North Kane even was there. 

Steiger: Didn't know that was like a hike or anything? 

Dimock: Didn't know that was a place. Well, it wasn't a place back then. Hell, nobody __________. 

Steiger: None of 'em were, were they? 

Dimock: A couple of the dory people knew about it, but they weren't tellin', they wouldn't talk to us. We'd camp down there around 18, 19 Mile, and usually, if we made it that far, the next day we'd go down, have lunch at <Nankoweap>, send the folks hikin' while we made 'em lunch, and then go down and camp around <Unkar> somewhere -somewhere Tanner Mine to <Unkar>. The third day we'd go down and have lunch somewhere between <Granite> and <Elves> and camp somewhere. If we were really hot -in my later years, when I had it wired, I'd be down below <Deer Creek> that night. 

Steiger: On your fourth night. 

Dimock: Third night, so that we could hike the Mooney the next day. 

Steiger: So you'd go from like below <Nevills> to below <Deer Creek>? 

Dimock: Above <Nevills>. [END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

Steiger: Above <Nevills>, <Unkar>. 

Dimock: To below <Deer Creek>, yeah. That was Tuesday. 

Steiger: Man, that's movin'! 

Dimock: Yeah, in big water that day. 

Steiger: Yeah, 30,000. 

Dimock: So you'd squirt on through. And then Wednesday was Havasu Day, and we'd spend anywhere from an hour there on the old schedule, where we were flailing along to my finely-tuned schedule where I could get 'em to Mooney and back on Wednesday, go to National or somewhere. And then Thursday, get down to Trail Canyon, 220, somewhere in there. And then Friday you'd drive all the way across the God damned lake. 

Steiger: Now, did that involve exchanges? 

Dimock: No. ____________ exchanges. Every once in a while there'd be somethin' at <Phantom>, but most of the time we wouldn't even stop. 

Steiger: So by and large, you were takin' those people all the way. 

Dimock: Uh-huh. 

Steiger: Huh, interesting. I wonder when those guys built in the exchange program. 

Dimock: That was later (

Steiger: Must have figured _________________ out.) after I left. 

Steiger: "Gee, we need to get more people and free user days." 

Dimock: What a horrible idea. 

Steiger: Yeah, it's an unfortunate system. 

Dimock: So the summer of '77 I did five back-to-backs late in the season, which was a lot, I thought. Day 35 I just staggered into the warehouse and told Gaylord I was gonna look for another company the next year where I could do rowing, mostly, but that I'd finish the season. And then I went out to do more trips. 

Steiger: But you just made up your mind, "Fuck this, this is too hard." 

Dimock: "Fuck this, this is stupid." And that fall we had the WRGA [Western River Guides Association] meetings here in <Flagstaff>, and I found Sleight one day, and he remembered me. He had liked me. And I said, "I'm quittin' work for Staveley, and I'd really like to work for you next year, if there's any way you could work me in for a trip or two." And he just looked at me and he goes, "Considered yourself hired." I just went (almost crying), "Oh, thank God!" And I also talked to Martin [Litton] at that meeting -just one of those classic encounters with Martin, where he just starts talkin' about God knows what. "Staveley, huh? You know, he's afraid of the water." (Steiger breaks up in laughter) "That's his problem." 

Steiger: That's what he said?! (laughs) 

Dimock: Yes! Gaylord can't swim -can't swim a stroke, won't go near it without his life jacket. The passengers tried to throw him in one night. It was scary. 

Steiger: He wouldn't go in? 

Dimock: He didn't go in the water. 

Steiger: "Too scared of water -his problem." Did you even know who Martin Litton was? 

Dimock: Oh, yeah! I had seen -remember, you and I, I think, were at the same [showing?] at Yavapai. 

Steiger: At Yavapai College. No kidding. 

Dimock: And Cooper had gone to work for him. 

Steiger: Weren't you workin' for him by then? 

Dimock: No. Cooper had gone to work for him in '77. My last year at Canyoneers, Cooper was workin' for Dories. And so I had an "in" there. And Tuck, the manager, was at the WRGA meetings, and we got good and drunk, and blah, blah, blah. So in the spring of '78, I went to work for Ken [Sleight] and early in the spring I got a letter from Martin sayin', "I've got you on two trips in the fall." 

Steiger: 'Cause you had asked him about.... 

Dimock: Yeah. I didn't think I'd hear boo from him, unless I kept badgering him, and here was an actual letter written to me. Actually, Persus sent it to me, Persus Farley [phonetic spelling], his secretary. But I went to work for Ken and did back to back to back to back to back trips all summer for Ken. It was great: <San Juan>, Deso [phonetic spelling], <Grand Canyon>, Cataract, Deso, <Grand Canyon>, <San Juan>, Cataract, Deso, Deso, <Grand Canyon>. 

Steiger: Wow!, a variety. 

Dimock: And usually you were hittin' the take-out, running, to get loaded fast enough to drive 500 miles to the next put-in. 

Steiger: Which was like the next day? 

Dimock: Yeah, which was the next morning. God, one time he picked us up at Hite, we drove, got to <Lee's Ferry> late that night, launched the next morning. He picked me up at Diamond and I was supposed to lead a trip launching at Deso in the morning. And then get off that and -I'm probably out of sequence here -but get off that and drive into <Mineral Bottom> to run a trip that had already launched two days earlier from Green River, short one boatman. (

Steiger: Oh, God!) But they were motoring, so they were towing the extra boat. It was so much fun workin' for Sleight, 'cause it was just always somethin', but he was right there with ya'. (

Steiger: He was doin' it.) He slept in the truck, he didn't have a house. He slept in his truck. 

Steiger: Was he on all the trips? 

Dimock: No -of course, on a few of 'em. 

Steiger: Who was the crew for most of 'em? 

Dimock: In <Grand Canyon> it was Crumbo and Tim Murtins [phonetic spelling] -Murtz, "Dirty Murtz" -and Bob Shelton who'd been on that first trip I did with Sleight, and myself. We were kind of the four main ones. Kathy Taylor was doin' a few. And Steve and/or Mark Sleight did a few. But that was kind of the crew, and Kim and I did not get along at all -had just such radically different ways of lookin' at the world, that it just wasn't gonna work out. 

Steiger: Crumbo always has been extremely conservative. 

Dimock: Yeah, and I was a big water guy, and I came from Canyoneers upbringing of just go for the biggest stuff you can possibly hit. 

Steiger: ________ run this stuff. So, now, you go for the biggest stuff you can possibly hit. That wasn't Gaylord -if he was scared of the water. 

Dimock: We invented it -Cameron and I invented it. 

Steiger: You and Cam, "Hey, let's go run this and see." You were in big boats. 

Dimock: The rest of the boatmen who had worked for 'em couldn't miss any of the stuff. 

Steiger: Oh, they didn't know how to miss it? 

Dimock: Yeah. 

Steiger: You guys could have missed it if you'd have wanted to. 

Dimock: Yeah, but why would you?, it was so much fun. 

Steiger: Big boats are not gonna turn over, probably. 

Dimock: And Gaylord was not all that quick with the stick, either. I mean, he was out there in the middle of everything, gettin' creamed. 

Steiger: But you also didn't -you're sayin' you never did have any spectacular wrecks? 

Dimock: Well, the biggest wreck I had was a low-water wreck the year after that rockfall below 27 Mile. And we made it through all summer long, and it was tight, if you hit it on low water, which we usually did, 'cause it was Monday mornin' early when we came through there, and the water wasn't up yet. And the last -well, probably not the last trip of the year, but late in the year of '76, was a one-boat trip. Scott Staveley was the swamper -assistant pilot. He was the assistant pilot, and he was drivin', and we got down through, comin' out of the tail waves of 27 Mile, and I said, "You know how to get through this rock pile down here?" And he goes, "Oh, yeah." And then he goes, "Why don't you do it?" And he gives me the stick, and I started driving, and the nose caught in the slow water on the right, and I tried to fight it back, and it had me. And by the time I gave up, and realized I couldn't bring it around straight and had to spin it, I was goin' in, and I hung it up. I was there all day. That's my only big wreck. In fact, I camped there. In fact, it's kind of a good story. I'd been there for quite a while when a Relco boat came along, Stan Jantz [phonetic spelling], and he pulled in, and he had this kid swampin' with him, Joe Greeno [phonetic spelling]. And Greeno wanted to set up a Tyrolean to get the people off the boat. I'm goin', "No, let's build a bridge out of the pontoon." And Greeno was so excited by the Tyrolean, that he set this up, and we almost drowned somebody. You know, they got halfway across this, and they're hangin' in the water, underwater, [gagging]. 

Steiger: Oh, my God! 

Dimock: So we got everybody Tyroleaned off, and we still couldn't pull the thing loose, so they left. And then I built my bridge and unloaded a bunch of stuff and camped. That evening a bunch of kayakers that I knew from kayak racing, came in and laughed and laughed and laughed at me. I said, "C'mon, let's go push this boat off." A bunch of us got out there. And by then, no part of the boat was touching the river, 'cause even though Monday's high was due, it was Labor Day, and it just dropped all day. (

Steiger: Oh, my God.) So the whole Canyoneers' boat -I've got a picture of it -is completely out of the water on this rock in the middle of the river. And we're camped over there on the right where there was no sand at the time. That sand came in, in the later high water -wasn't there then, there was no sand. But in terms of big-water wrecks, I didn't have any. I wasn't on a trip with any. The only good one we had was Cam got a little off one time, and I was swampin' for him, and he ran right into the wall in <Granite Falls> and the whole boat exploded. Had a lot of sewing to do. 

Steiger: Just like (

Dimock: BOOM!) multiple chambers. 

Dimock: Yeah. Just a couple of chambers, actually. It sounded like the whole boat. I went runnin' up the side tubes, cause there was this horrible screaming from up front, like broken femur kind of screaming. We hit another wave, I fell off the boat, grabbed a rope, yanked myself back up on the boat, kept runnin', and the gal was just scared, she wasn't hurt at all. I don't know, I just always thought that if you're gonna run big stuff, you just need to really pay attention and don't screw up when you're doing it. And so far, that's worked for me. Knock on wood! (knocks table) All my wrecks, all my flips, have been doing "the company run." 

Steiger: Doing the ______________. 

Dimock: Yeah. And so far I haven't screwed up doin' a gonzo run, which is what I do a lot of, actually. 

Steiger: What interests me about you -most of us out there, me included, you tend to do -or whatever boaters -you tend to get to run the works. You know, you get something figured out that works. That's what you do. Why? Well, 'cause it works. 

Dimock: Works for me. 

Steiger: You tend not to do different ones. And you, it seems like as soon as you get one that you know works, you go look for another one, some new thing. 

Dimock: Except at <Granite>. 

Steiger: Except at <Granite>? 

Dimock: I've got one that works at <Granite>, and that's what I do. 

Steiger: And that is? 

Dimock: Come in, you go pretty far to the right, and then just come in pushin' like a bastard for the left, and just crowd everything that you can where those rocky places are, until it's not working anymore. By then you've missed that one big whomp-whompa, and then you come flyin' in behind that, hit that next one really straight, and then just turn dead-ass sideways, and point to the wall. (imitates shot from a gun) Take those laterals off the wall, and then bring in, as you go past the big hole, straighten it out. 

Steiger: Dead ass. (Dimock knocks table for luck again) 

Dimock: It's been working for years. I haven't been pummelled there in the better part of a decade. 

Steiger: One time you told a really funny story about you and Cooper workin' a Canyoneers trip. So did Cooper.... So you guys worked together for Canyoneers for, what was that? 

Dimock: A year or so. He came in after I'd been there a couple years, and he actually got a boat first. He just exudes confidence and ability, more than I do. And it works. So he got a boat a little before I did. (pause) No, he didn't, he just got one quicker, 'cause my first trip as a boatman, he was swampin' for me. But then he had a boat, like, within a trip. 

Steiger: Wow! You probably recommended him for it. 

Dimock: I did. I said, "This guy's good." 

Steiger: Probably let him drive. 

Dimock: Uh-huh. (pause) I'm tryin' to think -a funny story of me and Coop and Canyoneers? 

Steiger: I remember there was a story about -maybe it was Cooper who told it -about all these people jumpin' off the boat. 

Dimock: Oh, God! I think Coop and I were runnin' two different boats that trip. We had some people that wanted to swim a rapid and hadn't figured out -you know, didn't really think about it much -and we're motorin' along, just bein' clueless, you know. And we get down, and we're passing <Diamond Creek>, and I throttled down, Tim's beside me, and I said, "Hey, how about this one?" Coop's kinda, "Yeah." "Okay, you guys that wanted to swim this rapid, go ahead and jump in, and we'll catch ya'." And everybody jumped in! 

Steiger: Everybody?! 

Dimock: On both boats! (laughter) We had like forty people in the water at <Diamond Creek>, goin' into a rapid that's two miles long. You know, people clingin' to the walls, and it's just fuckin' what a disaster. 

Steiger: Cooper said that was his moment. He said there was this moment when everybody jumped in, and he said you just looked at him and you went.... (gestures) (laughter) And you guys realized.... 

Dimock: Like, "Oops!" (laughs) "Could we rethink this?" 

Steiger: What were the people like?, passengers in general, if you can generalize. 

Dimock: I can't generalize, you know. I think they were people, they were great folks, they had fun. Occasionally you'd get a lemon in the batch, but hardly ever. In my early trips, when we were just absolutely clueless, they did great, they seemed to have a good time. When we got a lot better at it, I think they had a better time. Now we're a little better able to make them not suffer quite so much, and have a little more fun, and be a little less concerned about their safety. I think some of those early trips, they were just a little spooked sometimes. Or just, you know, ill at ease. I wouldn't have blamed them. 

Steiger: Wow. That's funny how you buy into all that. 

Dimock: I remember in the fall of '73, when they'd shut the water off to flood <Rainbow Bridge>, we got a call from Ed -Ed Buckner -and you were supposed to call from <Phantom>, Tuesday before lunch, and just tell everybody you were okay, 'cause the water was low. Well, Ed didn't call, so we figured Ed was probably doin' okay, and he just was runnin' late and had gone on by. Thursday afternoon Ed called from <Phantom>. Not Tuesday morning, Thursday afternoon. This is a Canyoneers schedule. He's really, really late. He had two boats and one motor left at that point, and he needed help. And so Gaylord decided to send in a relief crew. And we were gonna take the motors down the trail. We had it all figured out, we were gonna just wheel 'em down on the dollies. But thank God Gaylord thought that was a stupid idea, and he flew the motors in. But we hiked in that night, three or four of us, and I remember goin' over to the trip, and this gal came over to me and said, "Are you part of the new crew?" and I went, "Yeah." And she goes (impatiently), "When we leavin'?" I said, "Well, Ed says that...." She goes (shouting), "Ed's an asshole!" "Yeah, well...." 

Steiger: Oh, man. 

Dimock: Yes, that's correct. Ed. I wonder whatever happened to Ed. Ed gave me my job, though, by not showin' up. Canyoneers. Boy, you know, I tell ya', cookin' for forty over a fire. I loved that. 

Steiger: That'd make you efficient, wouldn't it? 

Dimock: Yeah. You know, you'd get up in the dark, and you'd put the three big wash buckets on the fire, and those were staggered, and then you'd have the coffee pot, the tea pot, and a pot of somethin' for like oatmeal, so you could get six on there. And you had that thing jammed full of wood. It was a split fifty-five-gallon drum, and then you'd just pour in about a quart of gasoline, and "POOMB!" kick it off. And that thing would just rage ten-foot flames for fifteen, twenty minutes, and by then everything was cookin' pretty good. (

Steiger: All the water was boiling.) And then by then you've got a dutch oven full of bacon in there half in flame, engulfed in this thing. Scrambled eggs for forty, boom, boom, boom, bam, pack up, on the boat, "Let's go!" Six-thirty we're motorin'. 

Steiger: Oh, man! Every day, too. 

Dimock: Every day. 

Steiger: A far cry from the eighteen-day trip you did. 

Dimock: One time we were cookin' chicken for some reason. Oh, the menu was pathetic! This one dinner was fried chicken, and it was this pre-breaded chicken stuff in plastic bags, and you take it all out and put it in these big dutch ovens with a bunch of grease, hot grease, and fry this stuff up. And it got away from us one night, and the whole thing went up, just this giant, giant grease bomb. Ruined the dutches. 

Steiger: Well, God dang it, __________ shoemaker. I'm fallin' asleep here. 

Dimock: That's okay. 

Steiger: We ought to make this a chapter, rather than go to like -you know, or sittin' here in Canyoneers. Don't you think? 

Dimock: Sure. 

Steiger: I'm wonderin' what should we.... What else do we need to think about when it comes to just that period, the Canyoneers period? 

Dimock: Cutoffs, tennis shoes, nice outfits. 

Steiger: Yeah, channel locks. You didn't have to dig a hole, though. You guys carried your shit out, didn't you? 

Dimock: We had these huge septic tanks on the boats. We had this huge thing that actually had a.... 

Steiger: We used to laugh at that. We thought that was pretty funny. It was pretty progressive, though. 

Dimock: Gaylord, in spite of all the bizarre, weird shit he does, he was ahead of the game on several things. The big septic tank was one, although the rocket box shitter was a definite improvement. The trailering of the boats was his from the get-go, and it wasn't because it was just easier not to de-rig and rig -it's because it was impossible. Those boats were so huge. I never saw one put together or taken apart. It was all done in the winter with cranes in the warehouse -big overhead winches. They were so heavy, so mammoth. I don't know what we would have done on the river, because none of us even knew how to put one together. As far as we knew, it had to be done in the shop. So if we had turned one over, we'd have really been sratchin' our heads pretty vigorously. It was an interesting time. Never really got to know any other boatmen. I got to meet one other boatman. For some reason, he and I would end up at <Lava> at the same time -one of the few places we paused long enough to get off the boat. It was Bob Whitney, and he was runnin' for Fort Lee. We'd get up there and yak for a while and started playin' tricks. You know, I'd get this Jim Beam bottle full of ice tea and take it up there and we'd point and drink and point and drink and go run our boats through and stuff. For the most part, I didn't know anybody. When we started doin' our rowin' trips, we met some of the OARS [acronym stands for ___________] guys and some of the ARTA [American River Touring Association] guys, and they were real nice to us, told us tricks, how to do stuff, pack lunches. Wow, what a concept! The slot at <Lava>, I first heard of it from OARS. They called it "the right bridge." They described it to me, and then I went down and found it and ran it -hoping that that was what they meant. (laughs) 

Steiger: Oh, my God! 

Dimock: It was. (pause) Well? 

Steiger: Well, I should be asking an intelligent question here, but I think I'm about to pass out. 

Dimock: That'll happen. 

Steiger: Maybe we should.... How are you doin'? 

Dimock: I could pass out, easily. 

Steiger: Well, let's do that. I think we'd better. So this is just Part One. We'll come right back on this same tape (

Dimock: Very good.) and do a couple more sessions here, at least. 

Dimock: Yeah, I'm sure I forgot all the good stuff. 

Steiger: You'll think of it. When we come back, we'll start this with "What did we forget about the Canyoneers days?" 

Dimock: Okay. 



