VIRGINIA BURNHAM INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.19

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're with Virginia Burnham, at R. B. Burnham and Company Trading Post in <Sanders Arizona>. It's July 17, 1998. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger, who is running the sound and camera equipment. We're going to talk to Virginia a bit about her growing up on the reservation, and her experiences trading with Indian traders, and also as the wife of an Indian trader. 

Cole: Virginia, to start, if you could tell us a little bit about where and when you were born and what your childhood was like? 

Burnham: Well, I was born on the Navajo Reservation. I was raised on the reservation. Actually back when my mother was carrying me, there was no transportation, so she tried to give birth on the reservation in the hogan. I guess she was having some problems, and so someone rode a horse to the mission, which is about fifteen miles, and took a message that my mother was having a hard time. So they transported her--the missionaries did--to <Ganado>, and that's actually where I was born. 

Cole: What was the mission? 

Burnham: The Navajo Gospel Mission in Hardrock. They were really close friends of my mother. 

Cole: What were some of your early childhood memories? 

Burnham: Well, basically we moved around a lot. My mother had a lot of sheep and cattle and so wherever there was a lot of feed, that's where we went. We didn't really have.... Well, she did have a hogan, which was kind of central, around in the middle of the grazing area, so we lived there in the wintertime. The rest of the time, it was like wherever there was water and more feed, that's where we went with the sheep and the cattle, and it was basically just my mother and us children. My stepfather didn't stay around very much. 

Cole: How many brothers and sisters do you have? 

Burnham: I have five sisters and one brother on my mother's side, and then I have one brother on my father's side. My father actually was Hopi, from <Oraibi>. My mother is Navajo. 

Cole: And what is your mother's name? 

Burnham: My mother is Ella Kishkoli Begay. I was born Virginia Kishkoli Begay. And then she remarried, after my father died, and she had the rest of the kids, which were the five sisters and one brother that I was raised with. And out there on the reservation, we didn't have any close neighbors--mainly my aunts and uncles and my grandmother lived at least two to five miles from each other. It was just basically our family. My husband always said, "Why did those young kids always hide when we go visit them, or go see a hogan out there that you want to visit?" I guess we did the same thing--I did. We used to hide every time we'd see a vehicle or someone coming. That's because we never had visitors, and we were all shy, I guess. We didn't want to.... It was just strangers--we didn't see strangers. And after a while, the person comes in, and then you start peekin' around the side to see who it is. Sometimes if it's a relative, then my mother would call us in and introduce us. We just were very quiet. I guess that's why a lot of the Navajo people are very quiet, because they just kind of.... You know, we were in remote areas. 

Cole: When you were traveling in the summer with the sheep herds, did you live in hogans then? 

Burnham: Sometimes. Most of the time that I remember, it was just like camping out. We'd go take our provisions and the few necessities--our bedding, some dishes and stuff. We'd take that along, and wherever we settled, it was usually--we'd pick a place, my mother picks an area maybe under a tree, and that's where we'll stay for a few days--I don't know, maybe a month or so--and then move on to another area. We didn't have permanent homes in those areas, except for the winter home. 

Cole: Did your mother weave, too? 

Burnham: Yeah, she did. The kids learned at a young age to help her prepare wool. We learned how to shear when we were young, learned how to clean, card wool, and spin. And then she did the weaving. I was always too busy with the sheep or something else, taking care of my little sisters and brother, to really learn. I think my mother just--to her it was peaceful when she was weaving, because whenever she went to weaving, she'd always tell us not to bother her or talk to her. It was just that kind of a peace with the rug. We just stayed away from her, and every once in a while she'd say, "Now I'm going to teach you how to weave, how to do this." And we'd just watch her. She didn't really say, "Now, do it like this." We would watch her do her warping, or start weaving. I was too young to be really interested in weaving, so I never really asked any questions. I just basically knew. Once I tried to weave on my own, and it just happened that day I was trying to do that, my mother showed up and she showed me how to do my warp the right way. But I never did really learn. And she did most of her weaving just for trading with other people. She would do her weaving, save it up, and take it to the Gallup Ceremonial or to the Window Rock Fair. At the time, the Flagstaff Powwow was really big. That's where she would save all her weavings to trade with the other people--the Zunis and Santa Domingos. She loved jewelry, so she would trade for things that she liked. 

Cole: Would the kids go with her to the fairs and stuff? 

Burnham: Not all the time. I'm the oldest one in the family, so I'd usually end up staying home with all the little kids. She might take the youngest two with her. She'd always promise that she'd bring us something, so we stayed home. 

Cole: You would have to tend the sheep, too, then? 

Burnham: Yeah, we did. We'd tend the sheep and the cattle and made sure that we had water. We stayed in the same area. Sometimes my grandmother would come and visit, check on us to see if everything was going okay. 

Cole: Was your grandmother close by then? 

Burnham: My grandmother lived about five miles from where we were at. My grandmother was one of those very lively.... She walked everywhere. And if it was long distance, she rode a horse. Right up to the day she died--she was ninety-five when she died--she was still walking long distance, and still doing the things that she did from her younger days. So she would always walk to different areas to visit her grandchildren. (aside about drinking water) 

Cole: What was your grandmother's name? 

Burnham: Bessie Kishkoli. You might have heard my husband talk about the Kishkoli name in the family, from the Long Walk. My grandmother and my grandfather were all Kishkolis, and we carried the name on. That means "club foot." I guess my great-great-grandfather was named Hosteen Kishkoli, "the man with the club foot." And then his son was Begay, and then the grandkids were Benalis, and it just kept repeating, because my late uncles were also Kishkoli Begay and Kishkoli Benali, but they were like the third or fourth. You know, the name just carried on. 

Cole: What was Hosteen Kishkoli known for?, the great-great-grandfather. 

Burnham: My mother told me a little bit about him, that he did a lot of--he was kind of famous, I guess, among the Navajo people. He did a lot of trading with other tribes. And from what my mother said, he was well-known, traveled long distances. But we found, reading the book called The Long Walk, that he was not only trading goods, but stealing children and trading them to other tribes, like the Apaches or to Spaniards. He was just kind of like a chief, I guess. I don't really know. We've heard a lot of stories, but most of the stories that were told to us are just word of mouth. We've never written anything down, nobody has. You know, the Navajo people don't write, so it's just something that you're told over and over, and pretty soon you get it. Some of it kind of sticks. 

Cole: When you were, like especially maybe alone, when your mom was off traveling, what would a typical day be like? What would you have to do with the sheep, to manage them? I don't really know. 

Burnham: Well, first of all, my mother had like over 1,000 head of sheep, and more than 300 goats. But goats is what we didn't like, because they ran. They would take off. My mother had the sheep trained pretty good, I guess. From the time she was little, she started raising some of those lambs, and she would talk to them, and she could recognize almost every sheep that she had by different markings. She knew exactly which lamb belonged to what sheep. And I couldn't--sheep were sheep to me, they're all the same. If we lost one, she would always know. She'd say, "Now, that one that was like this is gone." But what we did was we had a corral and every morning, the first thing we'd do is, if we had small lambs, we'd catch all the lambs that were the smallest, and put 'em in a pen, and then the rest we let out. And then somebody--usually myself or my cousin and another one of my sisters--would have to go after the sheep. We'd just take them, because there's a lot of coyotes out there, we had to watch them constantly. And then there was other people that had sheep, like my grandmother and my aunts and uncles. We all watered our sheep in the same area. There was a watering hole there. So in order to keep them from getting mixed up, we have to keep our sheep back until my grandmother has her sheep headed back her direction. And then we'd take ours in. And then we have to stay there with them and make sure that all our sheep, when they're leaving, that they're all together, so someone else can bring their sheep in to water. And then for the cattle, we had to make sure that they had plenty of water. And if there were small calves, we always marked them, to make sure that, you know. And let my mother know which cow had a calf. Each one of those was the same--she knew each one, the markings on them, and she knew which calf belonged to which one, and so we had to tell her when there was a new calf that came. So just a big responsibility. My mother was raised that way, so she, at a young age, even when I was six or seven, a lot of that became my responsibility because I was the oldest. 

Cole: What about horses and dogs? 

Burnham: Oh, we had dogs. We had about four dogs that were really good sheep dogs, and we had to make sure that they were fed all the time, because when you take the sheep out to pasture, the dogs were right there with them. And also, the dogs would alert you when there's coyotes or any kind of danger that's coming around--they would start barking. So my mother always, even to this day, she has sheep dogs. She always has quite a few.

With horses, we had maybe two or three horses, and they had to be very tame, my mother, because most of us were girls--we had only one boy in the family--my mother and us girls, so most of the horses that we had were just like donkeys. (chuckles) They don't move, we had to saddle them up if we needed to go somewhere on the horses and feed 'em and put 'em up. We just had a lot of responsibility. 

Cole: Did you have to feed the animals hay and stuff like that in the winter? 

Burnham: In the winter, yes. I remember there was a lot of feed everywhere, and very seldom did my mother bring hay, unless the snow was really deep or something. Then she would get hay. But we'd go up higher in the mountains in the wintertime where there was more feed. 

Cole: What was your family life like in the evenings, and stuff like that? 

Burnham: My mother made us get up early, before the sun was up, every morning, to start our chores. And then we went to bed with the sun. When the sun went down, we had to be ready for bed. We always had early evening dinners, and then lots of times we would sit around and tell stories, or tell of the day's events. Then the funnest time I think we had was when my grandmother used to come over. Another one of my grandmother's brothers--we call him Shichei--he used to come over and tell us stories of the Navajo legends. You know, the coyotes, and about the lizards--just lots of stories. That was like watching TV, I guess. (chuckles) We used to want to hear those stories over and over. We really enjoyed the stories in the evenings. 

Cole: Was he a good storyteller then? I guess what I'm wondering, were some people a lot better at telling the stories? 

Burnham: Oh, my grandmother was a good storyteller, and so was my grandfather. Adakai Begay [phonetic spelling] was his name. He was an old medicine man, and he told really good stories. I never recorded any of those. My stepfather, later, when he started staying around a little bit, I would hear stories. He would sit down and try to tell us stories, but he didn't have.... You know, he would leave some of it out, and we always reminded him, "No, it's like this! That's not the way it is!" But my grandfather's gone now, and he was the best storyteller, and so was my grandmother. I wish I'd have known to record some of their stories. 

Cole: Was there a trading post near where you lived? 

Burnham: I told my husband--one day we went up to where we used to live in the wintertime. There's an old gas pump that you pump, one that has a little glass on the top. I showed that to him. I said, "This used to be our gas pump." And we had some barrels that my mother used to bring gas in. My mother had a little trading post there. My aunt and my mother put their money together and started a little trading post out there. They originally put it in my grandmother's log cabin, which was right next to the main road. So they ran a little trading post--mostly just staples, foods, you know. Most of the merchandise was stuff that's not very perishable. And they sold some gas. That's my first experience with a trading post, is that of my mother's. I later learned that their backing was from one of the Hubbell's--Lorenzo Hubbell, I think, had backed them up on their grocery store. And then later my aunt and my mother had some problems. I guess it was mainly my aunt's husband that had some problems, and so they split up, split their merchandise. My mother took hers to where our winter hogan was, and had a little tiny house there that they put up, and that's where she had her stuff. And then my aunt left, and she kept that for I don't know how long. That's about the time I started going away to school, so I don't really know what happened. One year I came home and it was all gone. She had these old, old cash registers, and I don't know what happened to all that stuff. 

Cole: Where did you go to school? 

Burnham: I started at Piñon Boarding School in kindergarten. And then from there I went to Tuba City Boarding School. And then I was shipped to <Albuquerque>, the Indian School in <Albuquerque>. Then [I] came back to <Snowflake>. 

Cole: Would you return in the summers from school? 

Burnham: Yeah. We left home, I think it was in August, got on the bus in <Chinle>, and I didn't see my mother.... Some of the kids, did, you know--would go home for Christmas, Thanksgiving or Christmas, the ones that didn't live very far. I never did come home for Christmas or Thanksgiving, until school was out. I think we came home like in June, July, and August [we] were back to school again. 

Cole: When did you meet Bruce? 

Burnham: I met my husband at the trading post in Dinnebito. After my high school, I came back to the reservation. It was going to be for just a short time. I was going to spend the summer with my family and then go back to <California> to work. That's where my aunt lives, and I lived with my aunt in <California> for four years, through my high school. I planned on going back over there to work. And then I got a job working for Bruce in Dinnebito, and I stayed there for two months. That's where I met him, in the trading post. After I left the trading post, then I just didn't think I was going to see him again, and one day he came and asked me out for a date to go deer hunting. (laughter) That was the beginning of our relationship. 

Cole: So where did you go deer hunting? 

Burnham: We went to <Kaibab>, just for, I think, a full day, and then he brought me back. In the Navajo tradition, or Navajo religion, women aren't supposed to hunt. So when my mother found out, I got home and my mother was there at my apartment. My little sister was living with me at the time, and she was going to school there in <Tuba City>. I told her, "I'm going deer hunting with Bruce, but we'll be back tonight." And so we did, and I guess my mother got there before I did. When I got there, she was very, very upset, and she told me, "You know, there's a lot of things that women aren't supposed to do, and this is one of them. This is a no-no." She told me a lot of things, the reasons why I shouldn't hunt. So we started off wrong. (chuckles) She was trying to run Bruce off the whole time that we were dating, so finally we just ran off and got married. 

Cole: Once you were married, was Bruce still working at Dinnebito then? 

Burnham: Yeah, he was at the trading post, still working at Dinnebito Trading Post. 

Cole: So did you live there for a while then? 

Burnham: We lived there from January to September, I think, at the trading post. I went back to work in the trading post for a short time while he was there, and I learned a lot about trading while I was there at the trading post. And then we left Dinnebito and went from there to The Gap Trading Post, with the intentions of buying The Gap Trading Post, but things just didn't work out the way we thought they would. So then we were there a year at The Gap Trading Post. And then we left The Gap and came to Sanders.

I was telling my husband, a few days ago he was asking me about trading. I said, "You know, I really enjoyed being at The Gap." And here I have really enjoyed the trading business with my people. At Dinnebito, there were too many relatives. (chuckles) All my relatives, you know, the day that Bruce and I got married, I had more relatives than I knew I had, and every one of 'em was coming in and wanting something for nothing, I guess. I would have someone come in and say, "Give me some gas." Never say, "I need to borrow," or "I'll pay you back," or anything. They just asked for things and said, "Give it to me." I told my husband I was really glad to get away from there, because I just felt very uncomfortable, either way, because I had to tell these relatives, "I can't just give things away, because they don't belong to me." And we were working for Lij Blair, and I said, "Things have to be done the proper way." You know, it wasn't mine to give away. And then they felt--you know, lots of them, the relatives would kind of turn against you, I guess. They started calling me names and stuff because I wouldn't give 'em five gallons of gas or a bag of groceries or something. And I just was very, very uncomfortable in that situation. And then we moved to The Gap, and I really enjoyed doing business with people there. They were really nice. I wasn't in that situation where I was put on the spot all the time.

The same here, when we came to Sanders, people were really different. I still do enjoy the people that are here. With this relocation that took place, a lot of our relatives from Dinnebito came to this area, but since they came here it's been really different. Eloise is one of my relatives. She works here, one of our number one clerks here. The people have been just totally different. 

Cole: What kinds of things have you done for trading? I mean, have you worked all aspects of it? 

Burnham: I've worked all aspects of it. When we first got started here at Cedar Point, it was just Bruce and I. We had the little trading post, so he and I did all the work. Kids started coming at that time. We started having children, so I would bring a crib into the trading post, behind the counter, and work at the same time, and watch the kids too. We worked together more like we were business partners. Whenever he had any kind of decision to make, we would sit down and talk about it, and we made decisions that way. Even now, it's still like that. We're more of business partners. He would tell me what he intends on doing, or his new ideas, and ask me for my input, and we just work together like that. 

Cole: Sounds like you didn't continue to do any weaving, or you haven't. 

Burnham: No, I don't weave. I never did learn how to weave very good, so I didn't weave. But I did learn how to silversmith and do gold work. When we went to Cedar Point, that's how we got by. We had the little trading post, and it was very small and not doing very well when we took it over. We were leasing. And in order to pay a lot of our bills, I guess I started doing some silver work. Well, mostly, it was for just friends in the area. (tape turned off and on) 

Cole: You were talking about your jewelry work, silversmithing and goldsmithing. Do you still do any of that? 

Burnham: I don't do a whole lot of silversmithing anymore. Bruce is the one that took sand casting class when we first moved here, and I learned from my husband how to silversmith then, and gold I learned on my own. We went to one of our first shows in <Flagstaff>, and we sold everything I had, and that's what got us started. When we came home, we had enough money to hire some silversmiths and just really get into making jewelry. That's what we did, we started a production of Indian jewelry. I did all the layouts and the design. I designed almost everything that went out. My husband started doing the same with some things that were different. So we really got into the manufacturing of jewelry for about three years. Then we got bigger. I think we did, for a few years, like eight years or so, just were really into making jewelry. It was right during the jewelry boom. We did very well. We got out of the trading business and did just jewelry manufacturing for a few years, and then went back. Bruce got tired of traveling all the time. (chuckles) You know, we had to go out and wholesale a lot of our jewelry. So he decided that he didn't want to travel too much, so that jewelry manufacturing enabled us to build our store here. And we built this trading post and got back into the trading business, which is what he loves more than anything, I think. He said, "I miss dealing with the Indian people," with my people, you know. So we got back into it, and we've been here ever since. 

Cole: How do you like the trading business yourself? 

Burnham: I enjoy it, I love it. Well, I do a lot--he’s here most of the time--you know, more than I have. We have children that are still in school, so I'm home taking care of my boys. And then I do a lot of the shows, so I usually come in. He does the buying of all the rugs. I do the jewelry and other things. I don't do a whole lot with people that are bringing rugs in. He's the man for the rugs. (laughter) I do like fetishes and jewelry and paintings and other things. That's my line over there. And so we just kinda put everything together, and we do scheduled shows at least once a month, and we go to the shows to sell our merchandise. That's to keep the money flowing so he can keep buying rugs. (laughter) 

Steiger: Are those your earrings that you're wearing? Did you design those? 

Burnham: This is my brother's, and my brother is Hopi. Emerson is his name. He does most of the Hopi inlay. I do the Navajo jewelry. Lately I've been doing--well, I haven't done anything in the last year or so, but I did a lot of treasure necklaces and I've not done any silversmithing for quite a while. 

Cole: Do you trade much with the Hopis yourself? 

Burnham: Some, not a whole lot. We do some. Most of our business is with the Navajo people in this area, with rugs, jewelry, and.... 

Cole: Do you have certain jewelers or artists that you deal with?, the same people all the time? Or is it different? 

Burnham: We have quite a few that are the same artisans. It's usually people that are like--I usually chose things that I like. It's always been my experience that whenever you like something, you can sell it. I always pick things that appeal to me. It's real easy for me to sell things that I like. The same with rugs. If I like certain types of rugs, I can sell 'em really easy. At the shows we both do either--sell rugs. And then he'll deal with the weavers. I used to put the colors together for a lot of weavers. When I was still living here I did pick out the colors that I liked and put 'em together, and then they would weave it. It's not always the way I imagined [it], but the colors come back, and we started having really good response to that. I guess the reason I did that is we had some rugs that came in where the colors just really clashed. No matter what you do with that rug, the colors just didn't.... You know, we had a hard time selling the rugs, so I told my husband, "I'm going to start putting colors together." I did a lot of that, and Eloise still does that. We seem to have really good response to the colors in the rugs. We call it the Burntwater bundles. 

Cole: When you trade or buy jewelry, is there a similar--like Bruce was saying a lot of time with the rugs he might loan somebody money to get started, for six months or whatever--do you do similar kinds of things with the jewelry people or not? 

Burnham: No, I don't. He's braver than I am. (chuckles) In the jewelry business, we used to have accounts for only people that were working for us. That way I would get them the silver and the turquoise, and I told them exactly what I wanted, the designs and all that. I just put everything on paper for them. I would weigh out the silver and turquoise, and then they would bring it back. There we did some loans like that against their work, but anymore I just, if I like something, I buy it. I've learned that when you advance money to these people, they can do a sloppy job and bring it back and say, "Okay, here's your product," and you're kinda stuck with it. And weaving, sometimes it happens, but most of the time Bruce has learned that.... I think he's not taken the rug when they brought it not exactly the way he wanted it. But with jewelry, it's a lot harder to do that. 

Cole: What shows do you go to? How far do you travel? 

Burnham: We travel quite a bit. We just recently came from the Red Earth Show, which is in <Oklahoma City>. And then we're gettin' ready to go do <Costa Mesa> in <California>. We do the Gallup Ceremonial and the Southwest Museum Show, O'odom Tosh in Casa Grande, and just different shows. And there's some smaller ones that we go to. We used to do a lot of <California> shows, but we're not doing them anymore. We do <Pasadena California>, which is a pretty good-sized show. 

Cole: Are you selling directly to the public at those? Or is it to wholesalers? 

Burnham: Well, we do both. Most of it's geared for the general public, but a lot of wholesale buyers come to the shows, and so we just do both. And then sometimes on our way we'll give some of our wholesale customers calls, and just stop in and sell to them on the way over or on the way back. 

Cole: What do you see as the future of trading? 

Burnham: The future? (chuckles) Well, we've been kind of worried about.... You know, we have a lot of open accounts with our customers here, where they have no collateral, we just lend them money against whatever--it might be rugs or their checks that come in every month--they borrow money against that and buy groceries and stuff. We've been told that they're going to demand that a lot of these Navajo people get checking accounts or savings accounts so that they can have direct deposits with their Social Security checks. I think that's gonna hurt us some in the trading business, but I don't know. We were with a couple of people that already have direct deposit, and they're pretty good about coming in and paying their bill. But then there's some that have.... We get stuck with some accounts. At Painted Hills we've had maybe a dozen people. They'll do really well, as long as you work with them. They'll come in and pay their bill and keep working with you, but one time they want to borrow over their limit. If they borrowed more than they can afford to pay back, then they end up just taking their check and going somewhere else. So it's really kind of hard, it's a gamble that we take in trading. But there's a lot of trust between our people and us. We know these people, and lots of times it's just.... We don't take credit applications or anything like that. They'll come in and talk to us and say, "I get $700 a month. I want to open an account." A lot of the people that I know that we're working with, they take their check, in two days, it's gone, there's nothing left, and then they want to come in and pawn. They don't have anything for the rest of the month, and it's really hard for a lot of these people to manage their money. With open accounts like that, they can go a little bit at a time. When they come in, you tell them, "Well, this is how much you've got left." They get their groceries a little bit at a time, or borrow money only when they need it. I guess when you have it there.... And the situation with a lot of my people is that when I have money, my relatives see that I've got money. They have no gas, they say, "Okay, I need some gas money. Give me some gas money." And so you put twenty there. And then somebody else wants some hay for their horses, so you give a little. Pretty soon it's gone. It just kind of.... It's hard for a lot of the people to say no. It's hard to say, "No, I don't have it," or "I'm going to have to make this last a month." It just goes really fast. 

Cole: What kind of changes do you see, having grown up on the reservation? 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's July 17, 1998. We're at the R. B. Burnham and Company Trading Post in <Sanders Arizona>. We're visiting with Virginia Burnham, and we're talking to her about her life as an Indian trader. This is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project.

Virginia, I just was going to ask you about what kinds of changes you've seen on the reservation, growing up there, and now when you drive through it and stuff like that? 

Steiger: This is Tape 2, of a two-part interview so far. 

Burnham: I have seen a lot of changes. We used to drive through the reservation without seeing very many lights. Just recently we were driving through, it was just like driving through town, through the city. Even hogans that are out there on the reservation have outside lights, those streetlights. I was commenting to my husband about how many lights--it was just like going through a city. We used to come through here and every once in a while you'd see just a real dim light out there where somebody lives. And most of the time you'd think that there's nothing out there when you don't see any lights. There was satellite dishes everywhere, and TV antennas. People, the reservation, a lot of those people have more than one vehicle in their yard. I was just saying I didn't.... When I was growing up, we didn't even have a vehicle. There was only one man out there north of where my mother lived that used to have a truck, and he would come down and anybody that wanted to go to the trading post would be standing on the side of the road. They'd wave him down and he would give 'em a ride down there. And then the same coming back. If someone was coming up, he'd pick 'em all back up and drop them off again. Sometimes my mother would make special arrangements, because she went to the trading post maybe once a month or once every two months. She would make arrangements with someone to take her so she can get a month's worth of groceries or whatever she needed to get. But there's so many vehicles out there anymore. Used to see horse- drawn wagons at the trading post, when you'd go to the trading post. Even when I started working at Dinnebito there were still people with wagons and on horseback that used to come to the trading post, but you don't see any of that anymore. 

Cole: What trading post did your mom used to travel to?, when the guy would pick her up in the truck. 

Burnham: Oh, she went to Dinnebito Trading Post, which is where my husband used to work. And then there was another one, <Oraibi> Trading Post. I guess that was owned by the Hubbells. There was a different trader there before Lij Blair. He was really good friends, became really close to the Navajo people, just like Lij and Bruce did. My mother used to say that these traders.... When she was trading before, I knew very much about the trading business, when I was younger. She'd always talk about saying, "I want to go see my friend, the trader." So she'd go down and she may not have any money, but they would let her charge, I guess, for whatever she needed, because in those days she would bring home I don't know how much money's worth of groceries, but it was a lot of groceries--all the staple items. She would bring a lot of stuff back. I guess what she did was, she charged on an account. And then when shearing season came, she would take her wool back to that trader, and then they would weigh it up and deduct her account and pay her whatever was the price of that wool. And then she would charge again from there until the next time when it was time for selling lambs. And then she would pay her bill and get whatever was coming to her in cash. And then they start all over again, just charge until maybe she might sell some cattle. That's what I learned later on, after. Sometimes I used to wonder where my mother got money when we're out there on the reservation. She didn't weave, all we had was sheep and stuff. I guess that's what was happening this whole time. She always said, "I'm gonna go see my friend, the trader." So they would trade with her, and that way. From what she said, she has become really close to a lot of the traders out there on the reservation. She was very close to the Hubbells, and that's who, I guess, gave her the start-up in her trading post. And then with some other traders that were out there, one of them was Lij Blair, and she always had nothing but good to say about them, because she said they were, in a lot of ways, they were the mailmen, they bought the cattle and sheep. And then whenever there was a death in the family or something like that happens, they go to the trader and the trader lets them get whatever they need. And then lots of times even the traders would help them bury their loved ones. And if there was somebody sick, the trader would help them out. On these spur-of-the- moment things that happened, the trader was there to help them in a lot of different ways. And that's something that my mother always said, was, "That's why he was a good friend. He's always giving."

And another thing that I guess the traders have made opportunities possible for them. If it wasn't for the traders, they would not have any place to sell even hides that they used to--you know, when they'd butcher a sheep, they'd save all the hides, and the trader takes it and sells it. The trader finds the market for all the products that the Navajo people have. The rugs and any kind of art that the Indian people have, the traders, the one that found the market for them outside of.... You know, out there, there's no transportation. At the time I was growing up, you couldn't afford to go around trying to sell a rug to somebody, or anything else. So they went straight to the trader, and he's the one that took their stuff and took it out other places, or shipped 'em out, whatever they did. So he just kind of took care of everything and made opportunities for them to continue with their art. The silversmithing, they bought the jewelry, they bought the rugs, they bought the baskets. I guess if the trader wasn't there to do that, they wouldn't be where they're at today. 

Cole: So how do you feel about the changes that have happened when you drive around the reservation? 

Burnham: I guess it's good in a lot of ways, for being a trader myself. We've lost a lot of really good customers: Where they used to trade with us, now they have a vehicle, so they go to town, or go some other places. There's still some really good, loyal customers that we have, but not as many as we used to. Whereas before all the vehicles, the people really depended on us here to have the merchandise for them to do the trading. But it's not so any more. They can jump in the truck and go to <Farmington> if they want to, which is good for a lot of them. 

Cole: What are some of your fondest memories of trading or growing up? 

Burnham: Since we've been here? 

Cole: Sure. 

Burnham: I guess a lot of it has to do with just rugs. When I first came here, I had never seen a vegetable dyed rug before. I thought all rugs were red, black, and greys. The western part of the reservation is where I came from, and that's what.... When I see a Navajo rug, those are the colors I have in my mind. When we came here, the first rug that we saw had real pale yellow and cream and light brown--you know, tan colors. I thought it had to be faded out or something--something's wrong with that. Another lady brought another rug, and the trading post that we got had a couple of rugs like this. And so then we had another lady that brought the rug, and it was similar colors, and I thought, "Something's wrong with these rugs. These people don't know how to.... I don't think they're Navajo rugs." And my husband said, "These are vegetable dyed rugs. They are hand woven." So that was very interesting. And when we started working with a lot of these people, I learned so much about weaving, and about the colors that you can get from plant dyes. And then just working closely with people like that, getting to know them. People that came to us for help, I've always enjoyed, even though we were just getting started and we didn't have a whole lot. My husband and I had rice and beans for dinner almost every night, but we kept our bills paid. People around us here in the area, just because we had the trading post, I guess in their minds we were very wealthy, just because we had the store. Lots of times we didn't have any money because all our money was going to.... You know, they were charging, and we had bills to pay and rent to pay, and then buying their merchandise, because we had to keep people eating. Some of these people would come in and they'd ask me, "Sister, I need a ride to Gallup. My son is very sick." Those are some of the memories of have of just saying, "Okay, I'll take you," even though we really couldn't afford it. My husband would give me enough money for gas and I'd take 'em to Gallup to the hospital or to wherever they needed to go. Sometimes they'd come in and buy groceries, just hitchhiking from the area that they live, come in, buy groceries and stuff, and they have no way of taking it back, so they would ask me if I would take 'em home. And so I load up their stuff and just visit with them. I got to know a lot of people.

We had adopted like a grandma here. There was an older lady [who] didn't have any really close.... She didn't have any kids of her own, it was just her nieces and nephews, and she was very old. Anytime I had anything extra, I would put it in a box and take it to her. And then my husband and I and our kids would go out and chop wood and take her a load of wood in the wintertime, haul her some water and stuff. It's just gettin' really close to these people. We've got really a lot of people that we're really close to, trading. They come in, they have a lot of respect for me and for Bruce and for our kids. You know, my daughter works here, and she hears a lot of things about me and how (chuckles) some of the kids her age come in, and I guess their mother talks about us, how we've become really close. It's just a very interesting life in this trading business. (pause for customers to see rugs, tape turned off and on) 

Burnham: Do you remember what we were talking about? 

Steiger: Seems like you were talking about helping your neighbors, helping these people. I think you had just talked about somebody showing up, saying, "I need to get to <Farmington>," so you get in the car. And that had to do with.... ( 

Cole: Some of your fondest memories.) Yeah, memories of trading and like that. 

Burnham: Ask me something else. 

Cole: I'll ask you our favorite question here. If you could change anything about your life, would you do it? 

Burnham: Probably not. I've been pretty happy with what I'm doing. It's been a very interesting life with Bruce and the trading business. We've met a lot of people, I have learned a lot about all kinds of arts--not just Navajo, not just this area, but I've learned a lot about arts from other tribes, even the Northwest coastal, from Ojibwa to just all over the place. We have traveled in a lot of different places. I've also learned a lot about, have met lots of people out there doing shows. We've made lots of wonderful, wonderful friends, just out traveling. So just about anywhere we go, we have someone that we're close to. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Burnham: I don't think so. 

Cole: How about Lew? Lew always has a couple good questions. 

Steiger: I can't say always! (pause) 

Burnham: That interruption kind of.... (chuckles) 

Cole: Yeah, that's what happens. 

Burnham: It made my mind go blank. 

Steiger: You said you have a brother who's Hopi. Did that kind of put you right in the middle of this whole land dispute? I know that's probably another can of worms, and maybe you don't even want to talk about that, but has that been difficult? 

Burnham: You know, actually not. My mother has--we've always traded with the Hopis. Ever since I was little, the Hopis came, whenever they came up to where my mother lives, they never come empty-handed. They always have buckets of peaches or apricots or melon or corn. They used to bring my mother stuff. And then my mother, in turn, when she goes down there, would take mutton. She'd butcher two or three sheep and take mutton down there to the Hopis. They did a lot of trading and became really good friends. That's where she met my father down there. And one of my aunts was also married to a Hopi. They've always been really close. A lot of the dispute that they were talking about was mainly among the people that don't even have a whole lot to do with the tribes. I don't know who's fighting. There is a little bit of, I guess, things like that going on--fighting among just a few people--but it's not the whole tribe. We still go to the Hopi Reservations and still communicate and trade. We have a lot of friends that are Hopis. In fact, just last year, we were invited by some people there to the dance.

This woman that I met at the show, she asked my family and I to come to one of their dances there on the mesa. She told us where she lived, and to come to her house. We got there and she had a feast--just everything--some really good food laid out. And then when we got there, about fifteen minutes later, my sister and her husband drove in. I didn't know that they were related to my brother-in-law. My brother-in- law's cousin, I think, was married to one of the Hopi women that invited us. And so it was really (chuckles) strange, really funny, that my sister and I met there. They're just wonderful people. We went to their dance and they made room for us right in the front. They're really good people, the Hopis are, and so are a lot of the Navajos. 

Steiger: I know I'll think of something about the time we pack all this stuff up and put it in the car. 

Cole: One thing, I never did get, what your father's name was. 

Burnham: My real father was Emerson Horace [phonetic spelling]. My great-grandfather was Horace Kwani [phonetic spelling]. My grandmother's name was Jenny Horace. She died a few years ago. That's on my father's side. My brother is Emerson Horace, Jr. He lives in Mesa. I have some nephews and nieces on that side. Then I have a stepfather. His name is Leonard Deal [phonetic spelling]. He's Navajo. So all of my sisters and my brother are full-blooded Navajo. 

Steiger: Well, I can't think of anything right now. I keep thinking I should. 

Cole: Well, thank you, Virginia, for doing an interview with us. 

Burnham: Well, thank you for the opportunity. 


