BILL MALONE INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.24

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're at the Hubbell Trading Post with Bill Malone, who's the trader-manager for the Hubbell Trading Post. It's Friday, August 14, 1998. Also present in the room are Karen Underhill from Northern Arizona University, and Lew Steiger, running the sound and camera equipment. 

Cole: Bill, let's start from the very beginning. When and where were you born? 

Malone: I was born in <Gallup New Mexico>. You want a date on that? 

Cole: Sure. 

Malone: November 9, 1939. 

Cole: And who were your parents? 

Malone: Odell James Malone and Thelma Malone. They're both still alive. My dad lives in <Lubbock Texas>. My mom lives in <Grants New Mexico>. 

Cole: Did you grow up in <Gallup>, then? 

Malone: I lived in <Gallup> 'til I can't remember, I'd say 'til I was about ten years old. My mom and dad lived on top of a hill overlooking the old Gallup Intertribal Ceremonial Armory Building where they used to have the tribes get together. Our house--maybe the reason I'm living out on the reservation--our house was kind of a hogan-shaped house, or a cluster of hogans put together. Maybe that's where I got that "I want to live with the Navajos" in me. 

Cole: What did your parents do? 

Malone: My dad was a railroader. My mom worked as a waitress in different cafés in town. I'm going to say about 1950 we moved to <Texas>. My dad got transferred to <Texas>, or else had to quit the railroad-- so we moved to <Texas>. From <Texas> it was there for a while. Then <Durango Colorado>. I finished school in <Durango>, went to college there about one year, and then joined the Army. Got out of the Army in 1961, and came back to <Gallup New Mexico>, and got a job with a trader named Al Frick at <Lupton Arizona>. At that time, my mom had remarried, and had married a trader by the name of Hugh Lee, who actually was a trader here in <Ganado> at one time, at Lee's Trading Post across town. I worked for Al Frick for about a year, and then quit that job, worked construction for about six months and then went to <Keams Canyon> for a short time, not even three or four months, and then went to <Piñon> for about eighteen years and worked for the McGee family--that'd be Bill and Cliff McGee.

In 1981, I came here to Hubbell's Trading Post. And it was like walking out of the back door of <Piñon> and walking in the front door here. There wasn't any hard change to me, except maybe you see more tourists here, because it is a national historic site. Here at Hubbell's I work for Southwest Parks and Monuments, which is a nonprofit cooperating association, and I kind of work under the thumb of the Park Service, so to speak. It's been a great time here. I've really enjoyed my stay. I hope I have another five or ten years in me, I don't know. I've enjoyed being a trader here at Hubbell's and also at <Piñon>. 

Cole: What attracted you to the trading business? 

Malone: I had a background in electronics, microwave technology, when I got out of the Army. I tried to get some kind of related jobs when I got to <Gallup> when I got out of the service, and I couldn't even get a job changing radio tubes in radios for Santa Fe Railroad, because there was an older guy like me behind the counter, and he said, "Sonny, you need fifteen years experience before you can get this job." So....

I got asked to work at the trading post, and I just kind of stepped into that and stuck with it. Along the way, I met a Navajo girl at <Lupton>, by the name of Minnie Goodluck, and I always use the pun that I took her good luck away. We've had five children, fourteen grandkids. We've just really enjoyed it. Most of my kids are married to Navajos. You might say they're gonna wash me out by remarrying a Navajo and thinning out the white blood, so to speak. It's been enjoyable, and I have some great grandkids, a nice family, I really enjoy it. My wife, along with being a postmaster at <Piñon>--she might have been one of the first Navajo postmasters on the reservation--she was appointed by Sam Steiger. When we moved here to <Ganado> you might say I lost her job for her, for being a postmaster. We've really enjoyed it on the reservation. Our only boy is a Navajo policeman in <Chinle>. Our first daughter is a teacher in <Gallup>. Second daughter is a postal worker in <Gallup>. Third daughter is married to a well-known silversmith by the name of Perry Shorty, and they live in <Tuba City>. My fourth daughter is married to a Navajo from <Sanders>, and they live in <Salt Lake City>. 

Cole: What was <Lupton> like when you [first arrived there]? 

Malone: <Lupton> was a pretty rough place. The trading post was nice, but there was a lot of drinking that went on at <Lupton>. They had a couple of bars there, and it was wild and wooly on the weekends. I didn't really miss it. I mean, now that the bars are gone from <Lupton>, it's a much quieter atmosphere down there, but it used to be pretty wild and wooly down there. 

Cole: So was that a bull-pen-type trading post, or a full service? 

Malone: It was a bull-pen-type trading post, and very small. They had a wareroom that wasn't much bigger than this room, and they had one little room that they stored the saddles and the file cabinet for the pawn. They did pawn in those days. The store was quite small too--it wasn't a whole lot bigger than this building right here. 

Cole: And you mentioned you worked for Al Frick? 

Malone: Al Frick. He was the trader. 

Cole: How long had he been a trader? 

Malone: He'd been a trader all his life. His dad was a trader down at <Houck>, and his brother and himself were traders at <Houck>, and then he got the trading post at <Lupton>. 

Cole: And how did you end up then moving on from <Lupton>? 

Malone: My stepdad, Hugh Lee, was workin' for the McGees at <Keams Canyon>, and he called and asked if I wanted a job at the gas station. Since I was unemployed, I said, "Sure, why not?" So I moved up there and worked probably three or four months at the gas station, and then Cliff wanted to know if I'd go to <Piñon>. So we packed all our belongings on the back of a stake-bodied truck--we didn't even have a car then that ran--and drove over to the hill, from <Polacca> to <Piñon>, and the first thing my wife said was, "I don't like it, there's no trees here." Eighteen years later when we were leaving, she was crying. I was too, in a sense. You know, I hated to leave, it was sad to leave, 'cause we really enjoyed <Piñon>. There were a lot of great Navajo people up there. It was a really nice place. 

Cole: Describe <Piñon> for us, when you first arrived, if you could. 

Malone: Well, there was a tall structure and a metal barn. Across the street was a boarding school, and a few hogans and what scattered around, but there was not much else there. About two or three churches. And that was about it at <Piñon>. I kept waiting, they kept saying, "Next year we're gonna have a school. Next year we're gonna pave the road." Well, after we left, they built a school, they've got a big shopping center there. They just got a couple other nice new things there. They've got a big housing project. So a lot of things happened after we left there. But it takes time for things to happen out here. 

Cole: Do you speak Navajo? 

Malone: (In Navajo) ___________________. I talk it a little bit. I talk it good enough to get around in the trading post. I do well enough with my Navajo. I guess you call it "trader lingo," but I do all right with it. 

Cole: And when did you start to learn that? 

Malone: I guess I started at <Lupton>, and I don't know if you've had any interviews with any other traders that said that they've accidentally said things wrong--I've done that many a time--said the wrong thing, thinking I was saying something else, and really said something off the wall that would send a lady out the door screaming, or something like that. I've talked with Bruce Burnham about things like that, and I guess he's made his trip-ups on occasion, when he was just learning and starting up. 

Cole: Can you give us any examples? 

Malone: No, I wouldn't give you an example. (laughter) I'd probably get whacked when I got home for giving you an example like that. (chuckles) But I'll comment in English about a story I heard about a couple of other guys making a bad comment. A couple of Navajo elders--in fact, they were at Bruce Burnham's store--were standing around, and they actually--what they thought they were saying to an older gentleman was that he had a real nice pretty belt on. And what they actually told him was he had a pretty penis, I guess you would say. (laughter) That's about as risque as I want to get there. So it's real easy to trip up. They should have said (in Navajo) _______________, "your belt is really pretty." But I'm not going to say what they did say. I could say it, but I won't. 

Cole: So do you have a Navajo nickname? 

Malone: Gosh, I don't know if I've ever had a Navajo nickname or not. Not that I know of. They just call me Billy. My real name is Billy Malone--not William Malone, but Billy Malone. A lot of 'em call me Billy. I don't know what they call Bruce, but when I lived at <Piñon> and he was just down the road, I used to hear about Brucie. I think he used to hear about Billy, but we never put any context to who each other was. I had gone down to the post once where he worked, and he wasn't there. Lij Blair wasn't there, and I don't know, I don't think Lij knows this yet, but there was a young trader I bought four or five old rifles from, and I heard later on from Bruce, he said, "You're the son of a gun!" in terms something like that. He said, "You're the son of a gun! They fired that kid for selling those guns." (laughter) But I wasn't doing anything wrong. I asked if they were for sale, and he said yes, and I bought 'em. Probably Lij's collection. I gave 'em away to some friends and kids and what not. I might have one of 'em left. Lij will probably come lookin' for it. (laughter) 

Cole: What were the living conditions like for you and your family at <Piñon> when you first moved there? 

Malone: It was sparse. I guess I lived in a trailer most of my life out here on the <Navajo Reservation>. At <Piñon> we lived in a trailer with an add-on. And then by the time I left <Piñon>, I think there had been about three more add-ons to that trailer. So you just went out both sides and out the back and out the front. You couldn't add onto 'em anymore. It wasn't like living in a grandacious old home, or a home that they'd built on the trading post site, because there wasn't really anything that nice at <Piñon>. There was a house in the back of the store that was kinda nice, but it wouldn't be a grander place. Some of the traders had some nice places out here, like down at <Nazlini> had some nice homes. A little bigger place like this would be nice. I mean, where could you find a fireplace with petrified wood and Anasazi pots stuck into it? Before the Antiquity Law, I guess you would say. 

Cole: How about the living conditions for the Navajos when you first arrived at <Piñon>? 

Malone: Well, actually they had some pretty nice homes at the boarding school, which were Navajo employees. Most Navajos at that time lived in the hogan out on the reservation or out in the hills or out in the woods, or whatever you want to call it. Most of the Navajos I knew then were in hogans. Since the joint use area thing--have you talked about that with anybody? about the joint use thing? A lot of people that lived on the wrong side of the Navajo-Hopi line, so to speak, have been awarded a payoff of whatever you want to call it, and have been built a pretty nice home. Some of 'em were fairly nice, some of 'em were done shoddily and started fallin' apart a few years after they moved in 'em. But a lot of new homes sprang up around <Piñon> because of that. And <Piñon> was kind of on the borderline of whether it would be Hopi land or Navajo land. And actually, the line was on beyond <Piñon>, over towards Black Mountain. When they awarded it, when they finally couldn't decide how to do it and just cut the land in half, the line actually went down towards Dinnebito. But a lot of Navajos were on the wrong side of the line. So a lot of 'em had moved, probably married a lady from <Piñon> or somewhere in there, had their home built around <Piñon> somewhere. And there were even a few homes here in <Ganado> from people on the joint use land that would be over towards Jeddito and Toyei. And a lot of them have had their homes built around here. When you drive around and see some of the nicer homes out here, you can almost--not in all instances--but most of the time figure that it's a joint use house that's been built on the Navajo side of the reservation. 

Cole: Was there much activism about that issue when you were at <Piñon>? 

Malone: It was very much talked about, and a lot of people were violent about it. They didn't want to move, and a lot of people still haven't moved. To me, I think our government made a harsh decision in how they thought that somebody was on the wrong side or right side of the line. It'd be hard to tell a Navajo person that's fifty, sixty years old, that has their grandpa, their great-grandpa, maybe their great-great- grandpa buried in the back yard, and tell 'em, "This is really not your land. You don't belong here." So it was a very tough thing for that to happen to a lot of those people. And I don't think the Navajo Tribe actually thought the ax would fall that way, but I think our government didn't know how to divide it up, and they just split the land mass in half. And if you happened to be on the wrong side of it, you were in trouble--especially the people around <Coal Mine Mesa> and what not. So there's a lot of Navajos that got moved. Living out here for thirty-five years, all the Navajos I know--I don't care where you're born out here, if it's in <Crownpoint>, where it's desolate, and there's just flat rocks and nothing; or if it's up here where you got a lot of cedars, or up around Crystal-- wherever a Navajo is born, that land is their land, they're inbred to that, and it's their home. And whether it's lush or not, they still are attuned to that land. Some people might drive through some of the areas of the joint use and say, "There's nothing out here," but the Navajos have it in their blood, their roots are there, and that's their homeland. It's hard to tear 'em away from it. 

Cole: Describe for us, if you could, sort of the trading at <Piñon>. 

Malone: Mostly we didn't see that awful many tourists, so to speak of. It was mostly what we would call the local people. A lot of people would come in to buy groceries, sell baskets, buy baskets, sell their rugs, sell sheep, sell cattle, sell horses. I can remember when the tribe was payin' ten cents a pound for horses to get 'em off the range, and they were probably only worth a nickel a pound. I can remember when--well, like anybody else growing up, I bought sheep and I bought horses and cows. Two instances I can remember. I bought this little calf one time, and I thought it was a little steer calf. It looked a little rough, but the cattle buyer came down, and I think I'd paid like eighty dollars for the thing, which was about what they would have been worth. The guy came down and looked at it and he said, "I'll give you twenty bucks for the dwarf." And I said, "The dwarf?! What are you talking about?" He said, "That's an inbred calf over there, and it's only worth twenty dollars." So I learned a lesson there. But we kept the dwarf and ate it, so we got our eighty bucks' worth of meat out of it.

I think I bought a horse one day, and it died the next. So I learned lessons about how to inspect animals and grow 'em. Here at Hubbell's we don't buy any animals. They would like you to, but economics don't work on wool and sheep anymore, because what the trader on the reservation can get for the product is not what they can get in <Gallup>. <Gallup> will always be a nickel more a pound, or ten cents a pound more, and you can't pay it out here, because you gotta sell it to the guys in <Gallup>, so you can't compete with 'em. I just don't want to be the bad guy for shortchangin' somebody on their animals.

Now, when we had the drought two years ago, I saw people comin' in and cashin' checks for sheep, goats, five bucks a head. And you know, that's ridiculous. But they really had no choice, they were gonna die on 'em anyway. Hay got up to ten bucks a bale out here, so you couldn't afford to keep buyin' hay to keep 'em alive. So it was tough on the people that had animals-- it was real tough. And the ones that did buy all that hay and what not, is for the love of the land or love of the animal, more so than economics, because economics didn't even fit into it. They were losing all the way on it. 

Cole: What type of store was it when you moved to <Piñon>? Was it a bull pen operation? 

Malone: It was a bull pen operation. It stayed a bull pen for quite a number of years, and then Cliff McGee, who was the owner, changed it. It seemed like every time we'd get somebody in there, like one of his brothers was there, and another fellow was there, they'd want to change it. We moved the office around a lot, but it stayed bull pen basically. I guess it was a bull pen up 'til about five years before I left. It really didn't change the amount of business you did, from the bull pen to open service, so to speak, because the numbers didn't go up significantly in money count-- it stayed about the same. 

Cole: Tell us about some of your favorite memories of different customers that you might have had. Were there any that really stand out? 

Malone: Oh, there's quite a few I could think of. I remember an old man named Tapaha Legai [phonetic spelling]. He was probably known as one of the richest men around <Piñon>. He always carried like two wallets on him. They said he had his money buried out behind his hogan in a can somewhere. I never went looking for that, but I know a lot of people were always after him for it. But I can remember when he would come in to cash his check. After he cashed his check, he would take out a wallet out of his back pocket and he must have had twenty rubber bands on that wallet, and take all those rubber bands off and look in there, look at his money, count his money twice before he put it in there with it. Then he put all the rubber bands on it and put her back in his back pocket. He was a really colorful gent. He had a lot of cattle. He'd come in with his wife, and his wife's name was Big Mary, and his daughter's name was Little Mary. They'd always come in with their cattle and sort 'em out. They'd bring in the whole herd and they're only gonna sell six or eight or nine, and they'd bring forty of 'em in so they could get the nine in that they wanted to get rid of, and run 'em into the back of the trading post, put 'em in the pens and sort 'em out, and kick the others loose and make the sale and go home. But he was a very colorful gent. In fact, he's been painted a lot-- mostly off of the photographs that Jerry Jacka [later corrected to Ray Manley] took out at <Piñon>. He did a series he called "The Vanishing Indian." He took some great shots of a lot of really old people that were at <Piñon> at that time. I think in that book of his, there was only one young girl in that book, and that happened to be my wife's niece. She's probably the only one alive out of that crew of people now. There were about thirty photographs there, and they're all gone. I wish I would have taken more photographs, but I was kinda in the fast lane, bein' a trader, busy doin' this and that, so we didn't get too many photographs when we were out here. 

Cole: What other types of services did you provide as a trader? 

Malone: Oh, I guess I've done all the things that traders did in that time--make their phone calls, write letters, go to funerals. I've even shot horses at funerals when asked by the family to do so. I had a hard time shooting a horse, too, sometimes, because it's kind of hard just to shoot a horse, but it's part of their belief in doin' the funeral. It's kind of an honor to be asked to do something like that, and I've done that. I can remember one family, I think I went to 'em three times with death messages, because the police department in <Chinle> couldn't get out, it was muddy, rainy, or what. And I can remember one daughter said, "Please don't come see us anymore, because we know when you're comin', it's something bad, bad news is comin'." So that was probably the last time I had to do that for 'em. But I think it was three times I'd been up to their house for something like that, and it was terrible.

Other than that, I guess I did just the usual things: went to squaw dances and fire dances and yé’ii bicheiis and things like that--which is fun. The healing ceremonies they have are very powerful. They have a lot of belief in 'em, and very expensive to have. So they're quite expensive. 

Cole: When you say "expensive," how? 

Malone: Well, I imagine a yé’ii bicheii today, a yé??ii bicheii ceremony, which lasts nine days, could cost you anywhere from $5,000 to $8,000, easily--just in things you have to do for the medicine man and to all the people that come by. You have to treat everybody, be nice to everybody, for the whole nine days. So it's a very expensive venture. 

Cole: Were there any expectations of the trader to be involved in that, or provide.... 

Malone: Well, I think I got asked today if I would help out with a squaw dance. I think the local traders are always asked, "(in Navajo) _________, help me," you know, to donate something, or in monetary ways, or a shawl, a basket, food. So you get that a lot out here. 

Cole: How would you describe the Navajo economic system as compared to the Anglo system? 

Malone: As compared to the Anglo? Well, it's changed a lot. The younger generation are like us. You know, they run their checkbooks, they have jobs, they know what things are. The older generation, like my mother-in-law, in fact, they know about getting their check on the first of the month, and there's a belief around among the Anglo community, I think, that every Navajo or every Indian gets a check. The only checks the Navajo get are the ones that are deserved of--whether they're on retirement, Social Security, disability, something like that--they just don't go in and pick up a check every month. It's like in the Anglo world: if we deserve a check for something, we get a check for it. But the ones that do, the older ones, during the month they might run short on cash, so they go to town with their nice jewelry and pawn it at a pawn shop. Then during the next month, they either go in and take it out, or they pay on the pawn. So they kind of have a different thing about money than we do. Their money, you might say, is tied up in their jewelry. We got our money tied up in a checkbook, so to speak. So they have a different sense of what money is. They would probably rather go out and buy a nice bracelet or a belt or some old beads, and consider that as their money, so that they know they can always go somewhere and get a quick loan on it. Where us, if we've gotta go get a quick loan, it's gonna take ten pages and three weeks of work before the bank's gonna okay it for us. We can't just walk in a bank and borrow $300 that easy anymore. A Navajo can take a nice concho belt to a pawn dealer and pick up $300 without any trouble. So they probably tried the bank thing, some of 'em, and they're not impressed with how much time it takes and the trouble it is, so they'd just rather go to a pawn shop and get their money when they need it, that way. 

Cole: I was sort of curious, when you were talking about the fellow with the two wallets. Was that kind of unusual that somebody would keep that much cash? 

Malone: Well, I don't know if he was around when the banks went broke or not, but he probably decided he'd better have it all in his back pocket, (chuckles) because he was his own bank. I never knew how much he carried at one time, but I know he had thousands of dollars on him at times.

(aside about backhoe, tape turned off and on) 

Cole: Bill, we were talking about your years at Piñon Trading Post. Were you just the manager there, or did you have a buy-in or anything? 

Malone: No, I was just the assistant manager, and then the manager. I didn't have a buy-in there, or I'd still be there, 'til about 2033, I think. Cliff McGee and myself talked about buying his interest one time, and I got to thinking, "God, I'll never be able to get this obligation off my chest," so I didn't go for the buy-in. 

Cole: And you worked for Cliff McGee? 

Malone: Right, Cliff McGee. 

Cole: And what was he like? 

Malone: He was really a nice fellow, well-liked by the Navajos. He was the kind of a trader that would fly in. He'd come in two or three days a week, and later on, maybe one or two. But always on paydays and things like that. I guess you might say I was there in the interim. But there were two or three of us at the trading post all the time, and quite a few Navajos there, too. I still do business with one of the Navajos that used to work at the trading post at <Piñon>. He and his wife come down here and sell me rugs and do a little credit now and then, a loan now and then. We do do some loans here at Hubbell, but we don't charge interest on it, because of the Federal Trade Commission money laws--it's just too much of a harassment to mess with FTC on the reservation. 

Cole: Were you at <Piñon> when the FTC hearings took place? 

Malone: I was at <Piñon> when the FTC hearings came out. I don't know how they picked <Piñon>, but I think they wanted to know who the biggest trader on the reservation was, and I think Cliff thought he was. And they just picked on him. I mean, they picked him, singled him out mostly, and they really ran him through the paces. I mean, they had a law in effect, and they waited about a year 'til after it was over, and they came back and everybody was out of compliance. They could have got the whole reservation. But they really picked on Cliff McGee, and he paid it off. He got fined, and he paid off his debts and what not. I think they went around.... I think they even came here to Hubbell's. I think Hubbell's had a little run-in with 'em, but not as much of a run-in as they did at <Piñon>. But the bad thing about what they did, they did a lot of what I call unethical reporting. If something would have been two dollars in the trading post, they reported it was four. Everything was out of context. It hit the national news. I got letters from little old ladies in <Cincinnati Ohio>, about what a mean old guy I was, or mean young kid I was, or things like that, and I didn't appreciate it, but there was nothing you could do about it. It happened, and it just kinda went by.

What really happened on the reservation was pawn went away. That really scared all the traders who were doing pawn on the side, to get out of the pawn business. All the pawn went to town, family heirlooms were probably lost. We were talking about Navajos and their pawn. A trader on the reservation would never, never kill somebody's good pawn, because they're gonna lose the whole family's business. So they would always keep their pawn for 'em a year, two years, three years. In town, when people go to town and pawn their pawn, they'd better get it out when the deadline is due. There's a few pawn dealers that would let a family keep their pawn over the time limit. I would say one would be Mr. Griswold in Tse Bonito. That's off the <Navajo Reservation> line. Probably Mr. Richardson in <Gallup>. But there are very few of 'em, that if their pawn is on a deadline and it's a nice enough piece to go for a lot of bucks somewhere, it's gonna be dead and gone. So when the FTC hearings were final, the traders on the reservation quit pawning. I only know one that is doing pawn now, and that would be Van Kuren [phonetic spelling] in <Tuba City>. And I think a Navajo owning the business doesn't have to adhere to the FTC laws--as far as I know. So that's probably their way around any FTC laws. And they do adhere to the law on the reservation, which is you have to keep it for twelve to thirteen months. And in business, if you're going to do 1½ percent, essentially what you're doing is loaning $100. At the end of a year it's accrued to $118. You probably figure you can do more with your $100 in business and make $18 profit in a year's time. So that's another reason there's no pawn on the reservation. 

Cole: What exactly.... You talked about Cliff getting put through the wringer. What specific types of things happened? 

Malone: They even do it today. If you go to town, you pawn something for ten dollars, there's an up-front 10 percent charge on the pawn. Well, with the new Federal Trade Commission law, that's illegal, you can only charge $1.80. Or would it be $1.80 on $10.00? No, it wouldn't be. What's 1½ percent? 

Cole: A dollar and a half, on ten. 

Malone: Yeah. So that's the legal limit. No, it'd be less than that, wouldn't it? 

Cole: Fifteen cents. Yeah, that's right. 

Malone: Fifteen cents. So that's the legal limit for the pawn on the reservation. And in town, they can charge you 10 percent and a chart set-up fee, and things like that, so it's pretty lucrative. I think even in <Flagstaff>, the lucrative thing to do in pawn is, I don't know, a $5.00 to $8.00 set-up fee on a pawned article. So just writin' up the ticket, you're $5.00 to $8.00 ahead right there, just for doin' the ticket on the pawn transaction. And that doesn't adhere on the reservation. So he was chargin' that. And then on cash loans, 10 percent was the norm out here. And when you say 10 percent at one whack, well that turns into 180 percent on a yearly basis, so that's where the traders were breaking the law, and that's what got 'em in trouble. But I know at the time that happened, every trader out here was still taking pawn. The Gap was taking pawn, I imagine Lij Blair was taking pawn, but I know when that all happened, everybody just "Whoa!" just backed up, closed their pawn doors, quit taking pawn. It just all went away. And the Navajos still had the need to pawn, and now they have to go off the reservation to pawn. And I've heard local people at chapter houses say, "We need to get the pawn laws changed," you know, as late as a year ago, two years ago, "because all of this money is leaving the reservation, and none of it's staying here. It all goes off, out of town." You go to town.... Well, if you need fifty dollars, and you have to go to town to get it, the first thing that happens is, "Well, we gotta put some gas in the car. We're hungry, we gotta go eat." You're lucky if you come back home with ten dollars of that fifty you needed to maybe pay your utilities or something. So it's pretty tough to go to town and do pawn. I mean, it's not tough to pawn, but it's tough to get home with your money, because all the glitters are there, all the needs. You need the money back here to pay UNTA, but yet you're gonna have to spend money to get home and probably money to eat while you're there. 

Cole: I guess you've described a little bit, but how did that then change Piñon Trading Post, not being able to take pawn? 

Malone: Well, I think it probably slowed it down a little bit, because after all, it's another money transaction that makes money. So it's just something that you don't have that amount of money to depend on. Although I know most pawn dealers that are in the business, it's an enormous expense just to build up the pawn so that your interest will start steam-rollin' along to kind of take care of things. But in the meantime, you've got this vast amount of jewelry or other items, whether you're doing rifles or saddles or shawls or things like that, and it takes a vast area to store 'em. So it all kind of works against each other. You think you're making money, but you've got to pay a lot of rent, or you've got to pay storage, or things like that. And then if you ever have a fire or something, you're liable for a big chunk of things like that, and it's quite an investment to carry insurance on things like that. But the thing that it did do to the whole reservation is it cut off any more cash pawn or cash loan dealings, and it all started going to town or off the reservation. So I'm sure it hurt all your local traders.

I've primarily been involved in trading posts where they were twofold: they bought rugs, they bought crafts, and you sell 'em. So I don't think a trading post out here, unless it's something like a Thriftway operation, that only sells soda pop, candy bars, and quick things, is gonna make it. You've got to have a flow of people around to keep that business going. If you're a trading post and you don't do crafts, I don't think you're going to survive out here. 

Cole: What kinds of arts and crafts were going on at <Piñon>? 

Malone: We bought jewelry from people--mostly rugs. Bought a lot of rugs, and big rugs. That was the home of the big rugs on the <Navajo Reservation>, actually. We did a lot of baskets and other things like that. And then during the rest of the year, in season, you bought wool in the spring, you bought lambs in the fall. If you had a good year with Piñons, which there hasn't been any around for a while, you bought Piñons when Piñons were comin' off the trees. It's pretty tough to go Piñon pickin' at less than a dollar a pound, because you gotta fill up your gas tank, buy some food, and go out there and sit in the hills and pick up those Piñons under the trees. And if it isn't a dollar a pound or more, it's not economical for people to go pickin' Piñons anymore. And it used to be kind of a fun thing. But on the other side of it, the monetary thing is there too. My wife and my kids have gone out picking Piñons, and you know, you'll be gone for a day and overnight, and you come back with two coffee cans full of Piñons and you can't relate that to money and time. You'd have to be frugal to make any money out of it, 'cause you're out there eating and spending money on gas and things like that. So it's a hard way to make money, on Piñons. 

Cole: Was the Piñon Trading Post, when you started, primarily a cash business, or was there still a lot of credit? 

Malone: No, it was primarily credit. In those days, I can remember welfare checks were like thirty dollars, and of course we're talking 1962, 1963. But can you imagine getting along on thirty dollars a month?! I mean, that'd be pretty tough. Of course, I think pop was probably fifteen cents then, but that still doesn't relate to what you can live on. I think in today's margin of the thirty-dollar check, it's probably built itself up to around five hundred dollars. I think people in control of those kind of things, personally--I've always been kind of a Democrat person all my life. When I went to <Piñon>, I was signed up as a Republican, but there were no Republicans out there. I got tired of not seeing anybody on the ballot, so I signed up Democrat, but I still vote however I feel or [for] whoever I want to. But I think every congressman or every senator or something, they should give 'em five hundred bucks a month, kick 'em out in the middle of a reservation somewhere, and let 'em see if they can live on that five hundred a month, see how tough it is. They might learn a lesson.

Most of the traders I know probably claim to be a Republican. I even used to tell my boss--he would complain about welfare this, welfare that--and I said, "That's how we make our living. Why are you complaining?" At Hubbell's, we're not really tuned- into making our living off of welfare--it's off of the crafts. 

Cole: And then how did Piñon evolve? Did it become more cash-oriented, say, after the pawn and stuff went out? 

Malone: I would say it became more cash-oriented, yeah. But there were still people doing credit when I left <Piñon>. Now they have a big Basha's Store there, and it's probably evolved into--the last time I was there, they had a café in what would have been the grocery store part of it. They moved the grocery store part out to the gas station, and made kind of a Quik Stop out of that, and they have where the office and yard goods used to be--the dry goods, so to speak-- turned into a hardware store. So it's really changed a lot. And it's the same thing in any of your businesses in town. It's kind of hard to compete if you've got Wal-Mart in town that sells everything, or K-Mart. And if you were the local TGandY or a little hardware store, or a little mom and pop store, it's kind of hard to compete if you've got a big Shop-o-rama right next door to you. So you have to change, or you just go away. 

Cole: Who are some of your favorite weavers from <Piñon>? 

Malone: Oh, golly. Esther Beck was a good weaver. Her daughter Phyllis. Lucille Silver. I guess the Bajis [phonetic spelling] who were just here today, from Whippoorwill. Darlene Baji. Ruth Todachini [phonetic spelling]. There's just probably hundreds of 'em. I can't name 'em all off. I could just keep rollin' names along. We even have a girl that used to babysit our kids that's turned into a fantastic weaver. Her name is Barbara Tso [phonetic spelling]. Her mother Ruby is a good weaver. There's just.... Eloise Geeshee [phonetic spelling]. Mary John Begay. Helen Shoney [phonetic spelling]. There's just a lot of good weavers in <Piñon>--lots of 'em. And there's a lot of 'em here at <Ganado>. I know weavers from <Cameron> to <Two Grey Hills> to <Gallup> to <Piñon>--lots of weavers. I mean, we've got a lot of weavers that come here. 

Cole: How do you go about buying a rug? 

Malone: I guess like today, I told you I had to buy two rugs that turned into four. I probably throw 'em down on the floor, look at 'em a little bit, talk to the weaver a little bit about what she thinks she wants, and make my offer. I got turned down once today. I bought six rugs and one went to town. The one that went to town was really a nice rug, but it had an eagle in the middle of it, and to me it'd be a hard rug to sell. Some people might like eagles on their rug, but it was such a big rug that it would have to hang on the wall to do it any justice. It was really made to be a floor rug. We were just a hundred dollars off. I could have bought it for $1,500. I think I offered $1,400 on it. It was one of those things where it's a judgement call, and I didn't know if I really wanted it that bad or not. But the other rugs I bought, I like, and I'll be real happy with. Like I said, I've bought so many rugs that I can throw a rug out and look at it and kind of tell if it's off center, if the sides are crooked, color changes or other things that happen with rugs. It doesn't take me long to look at a rug and figure what I can get for it. And I try to pay as much as I can for a rug. I don't try to beat somebody to death on the price. I want to be fair. If I can do it, I do it. And I've had a lot of ladies go to town and bring their rugs back when they didn't get the offer that I offered them here. (aside about light, tape turned off and on)

When I re-met Bruce Burnham, so to speak, he and his wife had come by one time down here when I'd just moved here, because that's about the time I met him, right before I came here. I asked them what they were doing, and they said they did the roadshows--went out and sold jewelry and rugs and baskets or whatever. I had a real rough pile of little rugs I'd bought from Mr. Jensen over at Crystal. Bruce didn't want to mess with 'em. His wife said, "I'll try 'em." And she took 'em out and sold 'em (snaps fingers) that quick. They came back and said, "We want some more!" I said, "I don't have any more. I mean, that's all I had," I said. "Besides that, if I sold you something that I got here at Hubbell's, it'd probably cost you a little more than these did. You're living right in rug country at <Sanders>. Why don't you start buying your own?" At that time he was kind of streamlined into jewelry. And I'd say that's probably when Bruce really started kickin' in the rugs again, 'cause he'd done rugs at Dinnebito, but he hadn't done rugs at <Sanders> or at Corina [phonetic spelling] when he was down there. But I would say that's probably when he jump-started rugs again, and he's really gone a long ways with it. But he's kind of gone through the Burntwater series, and now he's in the Germantowns. He's really doing some fantastic things with the Germantown rugs. 

Cole: Do you have any favorite memories associated with buying or trading rugs? 

Malone: I think one of my most favorite memories about rugs was when I was leaving <Piñon>, a grandma by the name of Helen Bly wove me a chief wedding blanket style rug and gave it to me as a going away gift. And that was very dear to me. I mean, it still is. I still have the rug, it's stored away somewhere. But I don't know too many traders that when they left town, somebody gave 'em a $1,500-$2,000 rug and said, "Here's a gift, take this with you as you leave." And I bought a lot of rugs from her even after I came here. She died a while back of cancer, and it was very sad. But that's one of my most favorite times of buying a rug. And I buy a lot of rugs. I buy rugs from weavers here.... You buy rugs, and then you buy rugs that are, "Oh, gosh, this is really nice. This is something I'd like to own." But you can't own all the nice rugs that you see comin' down the trail, because you'd have to be a millionaire to do it. So you could just say, "That's mine, that's mine." But I do buy a lot of nice rugs that really make me feel good inside when I buy 'em. And I hope I make the weaver feel good too, when she sells 'em. 

Cole: You mentioned that at <Piñon> you bought baskets, too. Was that.... 

Malone: Well, mostly you might say I bought baskets from medicine men. We bought a few new ones, but the basket capital of the <Navajo Reservation> would be like Navajo Mountain, Inscription House, up in that area. That's where they really make most of the baskets. They do a few around <Kayenta>, and they do some up in <Utah>, but not down here, as a rule. There's only one lady I know in this whole area, down at <Steamboat>, that makes baskets. They're not as nice as the ones I see coming in that come in from the northern reservation. But most of the baskets we bought, or the baskets I buy now are mostly from medicine men. It's part of their ware, or part of their monetary gain of doing a ceremony. And when you do a ceremony, you need a basket. If it's a three-day ceremony, you might need three baskets. That becomes the property of the medicine man. After he gets it, he usually goes out and sells it to a trading post or somebody he knows. He will sell it to a Navajo if they say they need a basket, but a lot of times he doesn't want to dicker with 'em on the price, so he just comes in, "Bill, I got three baskets. You want 'em, you look at 'em, you buy 'em." I've probably got more baskets than anybody else on the reservation. I sold one this morning, two yesterday. They just come in all the time. So we've got more baskets than we need. When I first came to Hubbell's, they had a stack of baskets on the stove-- about four or five of 'em--and there was a sign there that said, "These are for Navajos only. We cannot sell these to Anglos." And I didn't even realize the sign was there, but somebody asked me about it, and they were mad as heck about it and said, "How come I can't buy that basket? I've got money. What's the deal here?" I asked one of the girls who said, "Well, we just can't get any baskets." I said, "Well, I'll get the baskets." So you just put the word out, and here they come. 

Cole: What about jewelry at <Piñon>? 

Malone: They had two styles there. They had what we call old style and then about that time the chip inlay, the Tommy Singer style of jewelry kicked in, and everybody in town--he had some relatives there, and everybody in town was makin' 'em. We bought Tommy Singer stuff at the trading post 'til it was just hangin' out of drawers and what[not]. That style of jewelry kind of came and went away. Now it's back to either contemporary or traditional style. There's a lot of craftspeople in the area. I won't call 'em craftspeople--they're artists, they're master silversmiths. We've got some of the biggest names in the world that live right around <Ganado> or were born here. Ray Tracey is from <Ganado>, and he's well-known in the jewelry business. Raymond Yazzi lived here. He's really from south of <Gallup>, but he lived here for a number of years. Tommy Jackson. My son-in-law, whose name is Perry Shorty. Eddie Begay lives here. There's just a myriad of artists that sell their jewelry here at Hubbell's. Phil and Fannie Russell-- they do contemporary things. And he bounces back and forth. He'll do contemporary, and then he'll do traditional. We just have a lot of silversmiths here at <Ganado>--more than you can find money to buy their jewelry with. 

Cole: What would some of your favorite memories at <Piñon> have been? 

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with Bill Malone at his home at the Hubbell Trading Post National Historic Site. It's August 14, 1998. [This is Side 2.]

Bill, you'd talked about a photographer earlier. 

Malone: Right, I made a misquote on a book that was full of photographs of old people from <Piñon>. I used the name Jerry Jack. I should in fact have used the name Ray Manley, as the person who [took] those photographs. 

Cole: We were sort of wondering, when you moved to <Piñon> and you were recently married, apparently you had several children there. What was life like for your family at Piñon Trading Post? 

Malone: I think my kids liked it a lot. They might or might not have fond memories. I know when we left <Piñon>, my kids didn't want to move to <Ganado>. They wanted to stay in <Piñon>. Part of 'em went to school in the boarding school there, because they were half Navajo. And then later on they started runnin' buses up from <Chinle> to take 'em to school in <Chinle>, which was a forty-eight-mile one-way drive, which is a long drive, but it's not the longest out here. I think there's some longer drives around than that. I think the one from <Greasewood> to <Holbrook> is farther. But my kids spent a lot of time on the schoolbuses, just going to school and coming back. I guess they had a lot of fun. They used to go horseback riding, they had a lot of Navajo friends that they played with, they grew up with Navajos.

I can remember, oh, a couple of instances. One time the wife and I were out driving around, looking for our kids, and out in the distance there were three kids going by on horses, and their hair was just straight back. I made a comment about, "Those kids are crazy. One of 'em might get killed. I wonder whose kids those are?" My wife said, "You'd better look again. Two of 'em are our daughters." But they used to go out and ride horses, like kids would anywhere.

I remember another instance of one of our daughters getting sick--our oldest daughter--and my wife took her to the hospital, and she was gone and back. I didn't put a time on it, but I knew it was awful quick to go to <Keams Canyon> and come back. About two days later the daughter cleared up and was real well. I stuck my foot in my mouth, "See what the white man doctor can do for you?" And she said, "Well, I hate to tell you, but I took her to a medicine woman." So the Indian healers do have knowledge of how to heal a lot of sickness out here, and can really do some neat things with people. I suppose most of 'em, after they have a ceremony or something, will tell you, "After my ceremony is done, why don't you go see the white man doctor now, and see if you can get a second opinion," so to speak. But I was really surprised, my daughter was deathly sick, and she cleared up that quick. And it was just some herbs that a lady knew what to use for. And they worked real fine. It's things like that, that people out here wouldn't expect that to happen. They might associate a medicine man with a witch doctor or something like that, but not true. They have fantastic healing capabilities--for certain things. Some things might be beyond their realm, but for a lot of things they can handle things like that.

I guess it's hard to bring back a lot of those memories because it seems like there were so many good things happening that I can't remember that there were any bad things. Everything was real nice. All my kids loved their time at <Piñon>, and they really liked it. We've got fond memories of 'em goin' to the fair every year. Of course, being doting parents, we had to dress 'em up and hang 'em out in Navajo beal, the rug dress, and put the jewelry on 'em and everything. And when they got old enough to tell me, "Dad, we really enjoy going to the fair, but we didn't like to have to wear those scratchy, hot dresses," 'cause it was in the summertime and it'd be real hot. So when they got to be thirty-fourish, they told me how hot and scratchy they were. But they like their pictures that they were in. It's really neat for the way they grew up. They all grew up good. 

Cole: What about your wife? Did she ever work at the trading post? 

Malone: My wife became a postmaster at <Piñon>, so she didn't really work at the trading post. The kids worked around it sometimes, on things like helping me stock. The oldest daughter worked at the trading post 'til shortly after I left there. She married a Navajo who became a policeman. They lived there for a while, and then they moved to <Cottonwood>, and then on down to <Chinle>. As far as working there and getting wages, no, they didn't work there and get wages. They were just kind of, like most kids around a trading post, free help. And I think a lot of kids that got that, traders' kids, got too much of it, and they went away from the trading posts and never came back. But I know a lot of kids that are that way--or a lot of traders-- their family didn't care about the trading post, they went somewhere else after they got away from it.

I hired my daughter when I first came here, but I got the.... What's the term? 

Cole: Nepotism? 

Malone: Nepotism slapped on me. So I said, "Daughter, I hate to do this to you, but I gotta fire you." So she didn't work here anymore.

Out here on the Navajo side, I would say just about everybody's related. You can probably go down to the store and find a lot of people that are related to each other, but it's hard not to find that happening on the <Navajo Reservation>, because you've got four clans that you can work off--two on your dad's side, and two on your mom's side. With those four clans roamin' around, you can run into relatives real easy out here. 

Cole: How did your wife come to be the postmaster? 

Malone: When we first went to <Piñon>, there was another lady who was the postmaster, and they moved away. She became interim, so to speak, and was later.... At that time, congressional people would appoint a postmaster in an area, and Sam Steiger is the one that appointed my wife to be the postmaster at <Piñon>. I don't know, she might have been the first Navajo postmaster on the reservation--could have been, I'm not sure. 

Cole: I'll jump back one more time. Did you and your wife have a traditional wedding ceremony? 

Malone: When my wife and I got married, we probably didn't think about a traditional marriage. We were gonna get married at a church, and for some reason or other--this was a preacher she knew--he didn't want to perform the marriage. I don't know if it was because she was marrying a white guy or what, it didn't happen. So we got married by the magistrate court judge in <Gallup>. There weren't too many mixed marriages when we first got married. There were a few around. I guess Bill over at Torch Cavern had been married for quite a while. I think I beat Bruce to the punch--I know I did. I don't think Hank had been married yet. Hank would have been after he got out of <Vietnam>. So there's not too many out here that were, but there's a few. 

Underhill: How were you treated as a mixed couple? 

Malone: I think we had problems with both our families for a while, but we probably became the most stable out of everybody. I've been very well accepted by Navajo and everybody else out here, actually. So we don't have any problems, we never did. And probably the reason was we lived the farthest away from everybody. They had to come see us, or we had to go see them. But everything worked out real fine. And everybody else I know that's married Navajos has seemed to get along real fine. I mean, marriages, like anything else, it works for some, and [doesn't for others]. It's that way on both sides of the fence--it doesn't matter what world you're in, if you're in Navajo world, Hopi world, or what. I think Navajos accept a mixed marriage more so than a lot of other tribes do. All my kids have census numbers, all my grandkids have census numbers, so technically they're Navajos. And most of my grandkids are three-quarter, because my kids have married Navajos. So the kids are three-quarter. They're more Navajo than my kids are. 

Cole: And what would be some of your best memories of <Piñon>? 

Malone: Oh, I don't know. I don't know about best memories, but I can remember when we had the big snow one year, and we were stuck in the front yard for about two weeks, couldn't go anywhere. We were snowbound. The Navajos that did get around were coming in on horses. And even when they had the constant rains during the spring--when it should have been snow, it was rain--and the ground was three feet deep in mud, the only way you could get around was to come in on a horse. Helicopters were flying around everywhere. It was a trying time. I guess it was a hard time. But it all turns into fun if you go out and play in the snow or have a mudball fight or something like that. 

Cole: Do you remember what years those were? 

Malone: The big snow was in the sixties--I think the late sixties. And the muddy time was a couple of times, and that was in the seventies. 

Cole: And when did you move to Hubbell Trading Post? 

Malone: We moved here in 1981, about May of 1981. 

Cole: And what attracted you to change? 

Malone: A man named Art White, for the Park Service, came out and asked if I'd interview for the job. And I didn't want the job, really. I didn't want to move. Everything was at <Piñon>, I hated to move, my kids were entrenched in school in <Chinle>. But I told him I'd interview for the job. I came down and interviewed and was selected for the job by Southwest Parks and Monuments. I said, "Uh-oh, now I gotta move!" And it seemed like I left lots of memories and lots of good things, and a lot of stuff at <Piñon> because I just didn't have anywhere to store it or anywhere to pack it. I went back and got some of it and lost some of it. It was sad to leave, but I still see a lot of the old friends we had at <Piñon> come by and see us here. Just like two of the ladies who came in today--well, three of 'em actually. They were from the <Piñon> area. I knew 'em there, and I still know 'em here. 

Cole: You mentioned that Hubbell and <Piñon> were sort of similar, but what are some of the differences, working here? 

Malone: Well, for similar, they were both Hubbell posts. <Piñon> was a Hubbell post, which I knew. About the only thing they had left of Hubbell when I was there was the safe inside. "John Lorenzo Hubbell" was on the safe in the pawn room. I guess the only reason it's still there is the safe door is smaller than the safe, so you can't get it out of there. But the similar things were they're both rock buildings, they were built in the early 1900s. Actually, this was the first store, so to speak. Actually, it was the second store.

The first store for Hubbell was across town here in <Ganado>, by the lake. Somebody died in that store. The story goes that a Navajo that died there was being chased by some other people for being a witchcraft person. And they killed him or shot him right in the doorway of the store. So that became ch’íidii to the Navajo, they would not go in that store, they would not buy any of the groceries in that store. They didn't want anything out of that store. And I don't know what Mr. Hubbell did with all of the stuff he had in the store. I don't know how he could have brought it across town, 'cause the Navajo in those days, knowing that something like that would happen, wouldn't want any food or anything from a place like that. So I don't know what he did about that. But he came to this present site, and there was a man named William Leonard here. And he bought in and bought him out, and Mr. Leonard left. And then out of the old trading post, he started the post we have today. The jewelry room and the rug room would have been the first two new buildings on the site, which would have been the grocery and the wareroom. And then he added on the grocery store, bull pen, the wareroom, the barn was goin' up. There's an old photograph that shows all of that with the old, what they called "Leonard Building," which would have turned into the home. And then later on, I know, like most women, Mrs. Hubbell said, "I want a new home," and she got the grandiose home that's there right now. And I guess the Leonard buildings were used for a few years, probably as storage or what[ever], and they finally caved in and went away. They had dirt roofs, so they probably didn't want to go to the expense of putting a tar roof on it, so they just caved in. They tore 'em down and hauled 'em away.

The things that would have been different about Hubbell's here at <Ganado> and <Piñon> would be <Piñon> was primarily a Navajo store where you worked with Navajos. You had a few visitors come, or a few dealers to buy rugs and things like that--but not so much as it is here at Hubbell's. It's probably just the exact difference here. You have mostly people coming to buy rugs, and less people coming to buy groceries. 

Cole: And you still buy rugs in the same manner here? 

Malone: Same manner as what? The way I've been doin' it for thirty-five years? 

Cole: As <Piñon>. 

Malone: Yeah, we still buy rugs kinda the same manner. But it's a lot different. In 1963, I could buy a rug that would fill the floor of this house--I'm talking something that would have been a twelve by eighteen or something like that. They were only $350- $500 dollars in those days. Today, to buy a rug like that, they could run anywhere from $15,000 to $20,000-- a big rug. So things have changed. And little rugs, I know weavers that get $2,500 for a small tapestry rug, $4,000, $5,000. Nobody ever dreamed that rugs were gonna cost that much in those days. And it's a demand, as long as the public will pay that for a rug, for a nice work, the demand will be there. And I know weavers that have quit weaving because they say, "I can't get the price I used to get for my rug. I'm not going to make any." But a lot of other younger weavers step up and fill that demand there--maybe not for the price that their grandma got, or their mom got, but they're still weaving. 

Cole: What is the future of weaving? 

Malone: I think weavings will be around for a long time. They are getting smaller and more expensive. It's probably gonna weed out a lot of weavers. I think a lot of traders--I don't know, a lot of traders will probably say there are a lot of rugs around still--and there are, but there's less of us buying rugs now. You've got Hank Blair--and he's at <Lukachukai>. You've got really nobody buying rugs in <Chinle>. I would say really nobody buying rugs in <Kayenta>. Navajo Mountain is gone. Inscription House, they buy rugs. Shonto kinda used to, but I don't think it's like it was. <Keams Canyon> buys rugs. <Piñon> buys a few--they're not buying as many as they used to, or they would have bought the three I got today from that area. Bruce buys 'em down south here at <Sanders>. The Navajo Tribe buys 'em in <Window Rock>. <Two Grey Hills>, <Toadlena>, <Shiprock>, and that's about it for the reservation. So all the weavers you have on the reservation now either have to hit the few places that buy 'em, or they have to go to town, or go to <Santa Fe>, <Albuquerque>, <Sedona>, <Flagstaff>. I know there's a lot of rugs around, and there's not that many that are of collector quality. I mean, everything is collectable, but some people want the most fantastic thing they can find. And of course, along with that, they want the best price they can get too, so it's a twofold thing. 

Cole: What about the difference between Ganado-- rugs that are produced in <Ganado> versus <Piñon>? Are they a different style? 

Malone: Well, being in the rug business for as long as I [have], it's real hard to generalize and just go right through the different rug styles. Here at <Ganado>, there's a lot of weavers that can cross over and do a lot of different weavings. Like, if [they] can weave a Ganado, they can do a good Burntwater, or they can do a good Two Grey Hills, or they can do a Klagetoh. I think the rug I find that's harder for any of 'em at all to do is the Wide Ruins rug, which comes from down south of us. And there's no Wide Ruins Trading Post anymore, so those rugs are kinda just goin' everywhere. But I find that an exceptional weaver that does a Wide Ruins rug cannot be duplicated, so to speak, by a weaver from another area. So that would be one of the hardest to do, I think. But <Ganado> has always been known for its Ganado Red rugs. But the <Ganado> area, because of Mr. Hubbell, was a big area. I mean, <Piñon> was a Hubbell post, so they did a lot of Ganado style weavings from the <Piñon> area. And I think everybody kinda does what's really hittin' it right now. Of course, I can always sell a good rug of any area weaving--whether it's Two Grey, Teec Nos Pos, yé’iis, Wide Ruins, Ganado--any of 'em. Probably two of the newer innovations on weaving lately are the raised outline <Coal Mine Mesa> rug has been converted over with the Teec pattern. And that's really helped that rug a lot. The Burntwater rug came into being, and has really gone through the paces. There's two other types of weaving around right now. One is what Bruce Burnham is doing in <Sanders> with the revival of the Saxony pre-plied Germantown style of wool that the Navajos wove with when they were taken by the government to Bosque Redondo. He's really doing a great job with revivals on the Germantowns. There's some other rugs comin' around into being, primarily caused by a fellow named Professor or Dr. Lyle MacNeal [phonetic spelling], Utah State University, with the Chair-ell [phonetic spelling] wool. And there are some great Chair-ell wool rugs comin' out now that are exceptional. I mean, they're a fine quality and they're really great rugs, and we have a few of 'em down at Hubbell's.

What else can I say? 

Cole: What do you think makes a good trader? 

Malone: I think the number one attribute is honesty. Second would be you have to be a little benevolent. Third, you just have to have.... I've seen good traders go sour because they get too cross, too cranky. And maybe that comes with old age. But when you get somebody that gets to be cranky all the time, you start losing your customers. And honesty--I mean, you can do somebody bad once, but they're not comin' back for seconds. And especially in this day and age, they're not tied down to anybody. They're on four wheels, and that truck can take 'em wherever they want to go--whether it's <Gallup>, <Flagstaff>, <Phoenix>, whatever. If you're not right with 'em, they can get in their car and go. Like in the days of old, where they were in wagons.... When I first went to <Piñon> there were probably fifteen wagons there. I'm not saying people were tied down, but they would have a harder time traveling somewhere. But the people in pickups don't have trouble traveling. If they were at Dinnebito or wherever they were, if the trader wasn't right with 'em, they just got in their car and went.

I think most of the traders that have been out here have been pretty nice with the Navajos. I mean, you don't hear that many bad trader stories around. You might hear a few, but there's always two sides to a story, and most of the time people just take one side. I suppose there's been some rough guys out here. I've known some rough guys that were.... I've been around when I thought traders were rough, like visiting another place, and I thought, "Boy, I don't know how that guy stays in business." And pretty soon that place is dried up and gone, or he left. So if a trader wasn't right with his clients, he wasn't gonna last too long in an area. 

Cole: What do you think you've taught the Navajo? 

Malone: I hope I've taught 'em some good things. I mean, it's just nice to.... Well, like the other day, I went into <Gallup> and I had to go see a guy, a trader, Shash Yaz [phonetic spelling] in <Gallup>, Don Tanner. And I walked in and I must have seen thirty people that I knew, and everybody comes up and handshakes with you, gives you a hug. And that isn't because.... I mean, that's because they like you, and you've made an inroad somewhere, so they still respect you. I hope I go down as a trader that had respect with the Navajos I know-- and I know I will. 

Cole: What have you learned from the Navajo? 

Malone: I'm still learnin'! I've learned a lot of things. I mean, I've learned to respect their culture, learned about their religion, learned what nice great people they are. I think along with learning from the Navajo, I've watched a change, probably associated with that thing [indicating satellite TV disc] right there. I mean, even in a remote place, you see satellites now, and Navajo kids growing up today, probably the thing that's gonna hurt not the culture, but things like weaving and what not, is Navajo kids want to be like the guy next door, or the people next door. They want a nice car, they want a nice job, they want a nice house. And if you live out here entirely, sometimes it's hard to do it. So I've seen more Navajos in the fields that they never were in before, like nursing, teaching, superintendents, principals. They've just really come up. And when I first came out on the reservation, you were lucky to see a Navajo working as-- there were no Navajo teachers, there were a few working at boarding schools, maybe as an aide or something like that. They didn't have any jobs of supervisory capacities. So that's all changed, and it's changing fast. Down at the trading post there's a couple of girls going to college on the side. I have a fellow working there, who is a Hubbell descendant, by the way, on the Navajo side, that is a medical technology person in college. He's in his senior year in college. So you've got these kind of kids coming up these days. Even like my own, some went to college, some didn't want to. One of my daughters said, "Dad, please don't send me to college. I don't want to go." Two of 'em are goin' to college, one has a good job with the postal service, one's been to college and is teaching. So things are changing for Navajo kids out here on the reservation. And the older Navajos, a lot of 'em have already--when I say "older," most of 'em about my age have retired from working at schools or things like that. So it's a little different now than it was thirty-five years ago. 

Cole: Let's switch gears a little bit. Were you ever a member of the United Indian Traders Association? 

Malone: I was associated with 'em through Cliff. I mean, I went to a couple of their meetings with Cliff McGee who is tied-into the United Indian Traders Association. Hubbell's was also a member of the United Indian Traders Association. I guess I went with Cliff because he was a member of it, and I was his right-hand man, so to speak. It was just kind of a gathering once a year, and everybody said their piece and complained and moaned and did their thing, and everybody went back home and waited for next year to come. 

Cole: Do you remember some of the bigger issues they grappled with? 

Malone: I think they grappled a lot with the Federal Trade Commission thing. Other than that, it was always the other things that were around, like whatever the social service things were gonna do or weren't gonna do, or what Social Security was doing, or what the welfare programs were gonna do. But I think probably one of their big issues would have been the Federal Trade Commission thing. And that was probably what I would call the nail in the coffin of the Traders Association, because it kind of split everybody up and got 'em goin' ten different directions, and it just kinda died out. It turned into a thing of there was no way anybody could help anybody, and so the organization just kind of went away. But they did have a nice coffer of money that was laying there in trust, so to speak. 

Cole: Did the Association help Cliff out when he had his problems? 

Malone: I don't think they did. I think they probably said that they couldn't. Not that I know of, if they did help him out. I think he asked for some help, but I don't think they helped him. 

Cole: And then you said you attended a few annual meetings. What were those like? 

Malone: I'm thinking they were around September, October. They were in <Gallup>. They usually held the meetings in <Gallup>. It was just kind of go to town and have a night out and have a meeting on Sunday and go home. Stay overnight in <Gallup> and be back to work the next day. I can't remember that much about 'em, because I wasn't that involved with 'em. I was just like the assistant. 

Cole: And why have you stayed in trading? 

Malone: I don't know, I look at it, and it's kind of like, "God, I don't know anything else! What would I do?" I'd hate to have to go to town and be a car salesman. I suppose if I ever went somewhere else, it'd have to be something associated with the arts and crafts or something: selling jewelry, selling rugs, something like that. There's a couple of times I thought, "Well, I'll bail out of this and go do something." But I never really got that intent about doing it. I just like it out here. I go to town occasionally on a Friday night to see my girls in town, and I'm back on Friday night. I'm kind of a workaholic trader. Sometimes I'll work thirty days in a row. I just love my job. I get up to go to work. I know traders.... I've always said I wouldn't be the kind of a trader that moved to town and just drove in and did five days, or did three days or two days. I just like it out here. Every day's a challenge. There's something new that happens every day. 

Cole: And if you could relive your life, would you do anything differently? 

Malone: No, I wouldn't do anything differently. If I would have known what was the hot spot to buy something, I might have said, "I'll buy that trading post," or something. I can even remember when the Park Service bought Hubbell's Trading Post, and I thought, "That much money for that place?! Why?" And when you're young and brash, you don't really go around and look at a collection like they have that was amassed here. I mean, it is probably truly one of the better Southwest art collections in the world. I don't know who else would have something to rival it, but it's really a great one.

Even when I lived at <Piñon>, I probably only stopped here about three or four times. We used to get off at noon on Saturday, and it's one o'clock before the store is cleared out and empty. It's a two-hour run to <Gallup>, and in those days, <Gallup> shut its shutters down about six o'clock. They didn't have the malls or any of that. So if anybody here is married, they know how much the wife wants to get to town to do her shopping. So if anything, I used to come across the old board bridge here, pull in, stop and get a few cold sodas, look around real quick, and head on out. And I didn't even often stop at other trading posts. Once in a great while, go on a trip, but not too much. I mean, you know, once in a great while I'd make that journey and go up to like Navajo Mountain, or over to Crystal or <Shonto> once in a while. Not too often did I go out and away. Even like down to Dinnebito, I think I only went there twice in the fifteen, eighteen years I lived at <Piñon>. Just went there twice. So if you're a working trader, you kind of stay where you're at. And even like today, this is kind of a rare occasion for me to take this much time away from the trading post. 

Underhill: If I can interject a second, I wonder what the relationship with the National Park here is, for you to have a different sort of boss. 

Malone: Well, the National Park Service owns the site, and I work for Southwest Parks and Monuments. So it is a nonprofit cooperating association to the point of after your wages and expenses, my organization donates the profits back to the Park Service. So it's really great because it gets spread around. Trading is a rough thing. If it was so lucrative, there would be more people in the business. But it's a pretty tough thing. I mean, people think that traders are rich. I think that's a long, long ago thing. Traders today are havin' it just as tough as people that are in any other kind of business. I guess it's the nostalgia or the thing about it. I mean, everybody thinks you can come to Hubbell's and it really grows on you. But it's a rough business. You're in competition from everybody up and down the world, so it's tough to get along. You just kinda have to slide along and keep things goin'. And the thing that's nice about it, I think, is if you don't keep things goin', how's the grandma gonna be able to teach her granddaughter how to weave and keep these kind of things going for a long time. How's a grandpa gonna teach his grandson how to be a silversmith? A lot of this all.... I know a few artists who can make it on their own, just in doing the weaving or doing the silversmithing, but a lot of them have to have a job on the side to support all this.

Did I mess you up anywhere there? 

Cole: Actually, I have one question from a long time ago. You had mentioned the tribe at one point was buying horses to get 'em off the range. (

Malone: Right.) Were wild horses like that a problem? 

Malone: Well, I think out here, if you drive around, and as you're going across the reservation, you'll see fifteen or twenty horses in a pile. It's like everything else--we kind of accrue these things. A lot of Navajos don't ride their horses like they used to. They only have one or two that they're using, and the rest of 'em are dóó bíláahdi, kind of "and beyond" or "and others." It's just some more they have that they don't use, but they're their property, so they want to claim 'em as theirs. And really, horses are probably a prominent thing to the overgrazing we have on the <Navajo Reservation>. I mean, I think a lot of the younger Navajos have accepted that there's a lot of overgrazing, but if you try to tell an elder that "you've got to cut back on your herd, you've got to cut back on your horses," they don't like it. And mostly from the John Collier days, when they just rounded up everything, shot 'em, killed 'em, didn't pay 'em for it, just said, "You're overgrazing, we're gonna get rid of 'em." They killed their sheep, they didn't get compensated for it. So they have all these extra horses. It was that sort of a situation when they were roundin' up horses to get rid of 'em, 'cause they had too many around. And even when the JUA thing came up, the Navajos didn't know why, but people like yourselves, and another Navajo as an interpreter would go around to different hogans and, "Do you have a sheep permit? How many sheep do you have?" Well, most of the Navajos felt somethin' funny was up, so they probably would lie. If they had 300 sheep, they only [admitted to] 150. So these guys went around and got all these statistics for a while, or all the numbers. So when the JUA started buying sheep from the Navajo at 1½ [times] what the sheep was worth, when they bought the first 150, the Navajos said, "You know, this is a pretty good deal, I'm gettin' good money for my sheep." I even know of some that probably went to town to buy some sheep to bring 'em back out here and make a profit on 'em. But when the number come up to 150 and they still had 150 more, they said, "Well, this is all the sheep you're supposed to have." So that didn't work out right. And the people who didn't know what it was about cut their sheep herd in half, but probably would have cut some more, but they didn't know what the situation was. But it did help reduce a lot of livestock off the range when they did that. But I mean, it's kind of generally known that there's overgrazing out here. The drought we just had the last two years overcame a lot of that. I mean, people had to sell 'em for nothin'. A lot of 'em probably won't get back into the sheep business. And it's a tough business to be in, if you ever document it. I used to help some ladies out in <Piñon>, and some other rancher types. And by the time, if you document what they put into the business of raising the sheep, really all the enjoyment you're gettin' out of it is eating your own meat. I mean, the wool, the lambs, by the time you pay the herder, by the time you pay the other bills along with it, you're losing money big-time on running sheep out here. And especially now since they don't have the incentive on the wool like the government used to kick in, it's really down now. And wool's probably at an all-time low. I mean, it's been low before, but it's hard for me.... I don't know any trader out here that could buy wool and make a nickel a pound on it. But by the time you pay for the bag, and by the time you pay for the guy to jump on it and put it in the bag, and by the time you pay for the guys to put it on the truck, you've lost money on it. So that's why there's not a big turnout for wool anymore. At <Piñon>, we used to buy 300 bags, 600, 700 bags of wool a year. Maybe 300 bags of mohair. It's just not there anymore. No money in it. 

Cole: Any other questions, Lew? 

Steiger: I'm sure ________. Let's see. 

Malone: Well, I hope I do this for ten more years. I feel like I got another ten years in me. I want to be here 'til I "die with my boots on," so to speak. And most of the traders I know probably would do that. I mean, I don't know what Hank would do, or Al Townsend, or Bruce Burnham. I hear Bruce once in a while saying, "I'm gonna sell my store. I'm gonna do this...." But I think eventually one of his daughters will get into the business. And I have a couple of daughters that will probably get in the business if I had a business on the side somewhere that they could run that wouldn't be a conflict for me to be into. 

Steiger: Working here at Hubbell's, has that led you to really explore the history of trading here? Hubbell's real famous--was he really the first trading post ever out here? 

Malone: Well, he was one of the first. Most of your traders all float into the country when the Navajos come back from signing their peace treaty. They had been acclimated to coffee beans, sugar, flour, yard goods, canned goods, and here came the trader-- just like anywhere else. And I'm not sure how many traders were here previous. There doesn't seem to be too much said about the traders here previous to the peace treaty thing. And I don't think there were too many around, because this was Indian country. You could get an arrow stuck in your back or anything like that. And really, it was, you might say, the settlers coming through the country that complained that "the Navajos are stealing our horses, or oxen, or sheep," or whatever, that got the ball rollin' for the Army to go pick up the Navajos. 

Steiger: Take 'em on the Long March and all. 

Malone: Right. And in those days, the government wasn't very nice to Indian people. I mean, you know, it was pretty rough on 'em. 

Steiger: I wonder what would have brought Hubbell out here to start. 

Malone: Well, Hubbell was workin' kind of as a calvary scout, and he dropped out of that and he hung out around <Fort Defiance> quite a bit. And he dropped out of that and went into the trading business. He was twenty-three years old at that time when he started--a little older than I was. How'd you like to be twenty- three again? (laughter) 

Steiger: So he just came out and just started.... 

Malone: Right. He'd already roamed through the country. He'd been up into <Utah> and whatnot, and this must have been the site he liked, was the <Ganado> area. And he had a great relationship with Ganado Mucho, which was a Navajo head man here in this area. In fact, he was saved by him one time. I guess some Navajos kind of got hostile with him, but Ganado Mucho stepped in for him. But he was well-liked by the Navajos in this area, and his sons were too. He had two sons, two daughters. One of his sons, the oldest one, John Lorenzo, Jr., went over to the Hopi side of the reservation, like <Keams Canyon> and <Oraibi>. And Ramon stayed here in <Ganado>, worked with his dad and took over after his dad couldn't handle the business anymore. They had a great empire. They had I can't remember how many trading posts, but Gino's [phonetic spelling] the man to talk to about that. And I think anybody that came by, if they were a relative, a friend, or a guy lookin' for a job, he would outfit 'em with a wagon and some grub and whatnot and said, "Why don't you go up to <Salina>, why don't you go to <Nazlini>, why don't you go to Black Mountain, why don't you go to <Piñon>, and start a trading post?" But the one thing everybody needed was water. So wherever they went, they had to have water. 

Steiger: When they started then, do you get the sense that it was predominantly a barter situation? 

Malone: Well, I've heard a lot of old stories, and they're probably true. It was mostly a barter system. I think when you started out the year, you counted the money in the cigar box, and it was essentially about that way when the year ended. It was how much money was in the cigar box. Of course rugs and things like that, they would have had to been inexpensive, but money was at an all-time high in those days too. I mean, $300 in those days is probably like gone to heaven, probably like $30,000 today. So most of the trading posts, even when I worked at Piñon, we ran tabs with our wholesalers. We got our Coke for six months at a time. We paid bills off twice a year. We paid it in the spring when we bought wool and sold it, and then we paid it in the fall when we bought sheep and sold 'em. If you had a good year with Piñons or something, that was just extra. But I guess I would say when I first started in trading, it was mostly running up a tab on both sides--the store would run a tab with its dealers, and the same way as Hubbell would have done with C.N. Cotton or Gallup Mercantile or any of those people that supplied things. And in those days, I've talked to different people that come out. One guy said traders were pretty crafty too. They'd call a guy in town and say, "I've got 1,000 pounds of freight. What would you charge me to haul it?" And without asking what the freight was, they'd roll out a price. Well, when they'd come out to Hubbell's, the 1,000 pounds of freight was a big pile of skins. We were talking about sheep skins and things. And you know, in those days, or even today, they're rough, they've still got a little meat on 'em, so the flies are runnin' around, the maggots are runnin' around. And they kind of have a bad whiff to 'em. So he said, "I hauled 'em to town, but I had to put 'em on top of the bus and tie 'em down through the windows."

There's stories like that--all these traders can tell stories. I was talkin' to John Kennedy, whose dad built <Salina Springs>. They were comin' over the mountain from <Window Rock> to here. Have you ever been over the summit? Do you know what I'm talkin' about? 

Cole: Yeah. 

Malone: It's quite a long hill. Well, they were comin' up one winter morning, and they'd had breakfast and loaded the wagons up, hooked the horses to 'em and everything, and had gone 'til lunchtime. Somebody said, "It's lunchtime, shall we stop and have lunch?" His dad said, "Why don't we just walk back to the breakfast fire?" 'cause they hadn't gone a hundred yards all morning. That's how bad the hills could be, goin' around.

Of course, when I came out here, the primary roads were all paved. I think the only dirt roads I can remember that were rough was from Inscription House up to Navajo Mountain, from <Fort Defiance> to <Wheatfields>, to <Tsaile>, around to <Round Rock>. The pavement used to end at <Round Rock>. Of course the road from <Many Farms> to that cutoff to <Kayenta> was all rocky and rough. I've been on that road. And the road from <Piñon>, back over the back, was dirt 'til they put a little paving on it. But most of the roads out here had already had pavement. So I'm not that old of a trader that I can reminisce about the dirt road days way back when. Probably some of the Foutzes or some of them.... 

Steiger: When Hubbell started, what would he have started with, aside from money? Would he have just gotten a bunch of beans and flour? 

Malone: That's right. He would have had flour, beans, coffee beans, tins--if they had peaches and pears and tomatoes and things like that--sardines. I've eaten many a what we call "trader's lunches"-- either bologna and cheese or sardines and crackers--on the back steps at <Piñon> with some of the old guys that used to come by. They would have had to freight 'em all in from either <Gallup> or somewhere.

I know a Navajo here in town, his name is David Kirk, and he was instrumental in what they call the Black versus Lee decision. It was in the days of when somebody didn't pay you a bill, even in the Anglo world, you would go garnishee their check. Hugh Lee or Lee Trading Post garnisheed a Navajo's herd of sheep. Anyway, it went all the way to the Supreme Court, and the decision was that the State of Arizona had no jurisdiction on the <Navajo Reservation>.

(phone rings) And I'll bet that's a girl calling to say.... I'm past my time, I might have to go to lunch. 

Cole: Well, thank you very much for taking the time out. 

Underhill: We really appreciate it. (tape turned off and on) 

Malone: This is my last granddaughter. This is Briana Jewel Pete. (to child) Look over there. Oh, she's not interested. 

Steiger: She sure is a cutie. 

Underhill: She sure is. 

Malone: Thank you. 

Cole: When she's thirty, she'll probably hate this tape! (laughter) 



