KATHERINE HICKMAN INTERVIEW

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A]

Maxwell: I've got this turned on now. Is it okay with you if I tape record this?

Hickman: Yeah, that's fine with me.

Maxwell: That's just to keep everything as accurate as I can.

Hickman: Oh, yeah.

Maxwell: I guess the first thing to ask you is, where did you live before you came to <Flagstaff>, and when did you come here?

Hickman: Well, I lived in a little place called <Alco Louisiana>.

Maxwell: What was that like?

Hickman: Well, it was a logging job, what they call a sawmill town. There was no other industry there but the sawmill and the logging woods. Some of the men worked in the logging woods. Now, my husband worked in the logging woods, he cut timber. My brother and also my father were loggers. None of them ever worked in the sawmill. And then so during the draft, my brother and my husband were drafted, and they went off to the war. And of course my father was still alive. My mother had recently passed. And so my sister and myself lived with my father. It was a fairly good-sized -I don't remember how many people were populated there, but it was a pretty good-sized logging camp. And so we lived there. The company had houses, they built houses, and people lived in the company houses. And what they would do, the rent was very cheap, so you could rent -I think we had a three-bedroom house, and of course you had a kitchen. There was no dining room. And of course there were no inside baths or anything-we had outside toilets. But there was a man that was -his job was to go around every so often, and he would keep the toilets clean. You know, they were the dug-hole toilets, but he put some kind of lime and chemicals in there, that kept the toilets -you know, you couldn't smell the odor or anything.

Maxwell: Oh, really?!

Hickman: Oh, yeah! Yeah, that was his job. He had a little cart, and he'd go all around, all through the quarters, and put these chemicals, every so often, in the toilet. And so it wasn't anything smelly or anything. But there were no inside bathrooms, and these houses rented for about--I think my dad had our house rented-- I think it was about twenty dollars a month.

Maxwell: Do you remember when that was, which war they went off to?

Hickman: Oh, that was World War.... In 1940. When did the war start?

Maxwell: World War II?

Hickman: Yeah, World War II.

Maxwell: And was twenty dollars a lot then? I mean, it sure wouldn't be a lot now.

Hickman: No, that was reasonable, for the wages that they made. See, it wasn't like now. That included everything, you know -your water, the water was in the house and everything, and the lights, there was electricity. So you didn't pay anything but the twenty dollars. So that was really cheap. (phone rings obscuring comments)

Maxwell: Why did you leave there?

Hickman: Well, the job cut out.

Maxwell: Oh, the timber mill closed. (phone rings, obscuring comment)

Hickman: Yeah, the timber mill closed.

Maxwell: Was there a thousand people there, or 10,000 people?

Hickman: Oh, no, it wasn't like 10,000 people. It must have been at least 1,000, I would think so -with white and Black. See, everything was separated. You had the colored quarters and you had the white quarters. The colored quarter was kind of down the hill -that's the way people would call it "down the hill." Or rather, down the track. The railroad track divided the town. And so the whites lived up on the hill, and the Blacks lived down the hill.

Maxwell: Why was that?

Hickman: Well, everything was segregated at that time. You know, that was before the sixties or anything, and so everything was segregated at that time.

Maxwell: Why up on the hill, and why below the hill?

Hickman: Well, that was the way they built it, I suppose.

Maxwell: It just happened to be that way?

Hickman: Well, I don't know, I imagine. I could never see where it was any different up on the hill. Maybe it was because I grew up in it, you know. And I didn't see where it was any prettier up there than it was down there.

Maxwell: It just had to be divided?

Hickman: Yes, it was divided -always, as far as I can remember, it was divided.

Maxwell: It sounds so silly!

Hickman: Well, it does.

Maxwell: But I guess that was the way it was here.

Hickman: Oh yeah, that's the way it was.

Maxwell: So you grew up there?

Hickman: Oh yeah, I grew up there.

Maxwell: So it was there a long time, then?

Hickman: Oh, yeah. I wasn't born there. I was born in a little town called <Forest Hill Louisiana>. And of course my parents were living at Alco, but at that time most young women went back to Mama's when they got ready to have their babies.

Maxwell: Oh, did they?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, most people did. And so my mother went back to the old home place with every one of us. All of us were born at Forest Hill, but we grew up in Alco. I guess it was a distance of maybe thirty miles. And that's where we grew up. But, yeah, everything was segregated and everything was separated. The company had one great big store, and it was called the commissary. And you could buy everything that you needed at that commissary. But a lot of people, as years went by, went into the next little town, which was Leesville, and they shopped in Leesville.

Maxwell: Why was that? Why did they go there?

Hickman: Well, it was a larger town, more variety of things, you know. And that's why people did that. And then maybe things were a little bit cheaper. You see, this commissary was owned by the owners of the sawmill. And even though they had everything there that you needed, and a lot of people shopped there because all you had to do was charge your stuff. You didn't have to have cash money to buy. And so people that weren't very thrifty and didn't kind of know how to manage their money were almost to the point where they had to shop at the commissary because they could go there and charge, see. You'd charge whatever you needed. And clothes, there was clothes, food -everything -things for your car. Everything was there that you needed at that commissary, but the prices were a little bit higher. If you weren't pretty smart, to know, you know, then there were a lot of people that were really enslaved, really, to that commissary because they had to get everything there. And then when your draw date -what they called "draw date" -came, they were indebted so to the commissary, until they really didn't draw any cash money.

Maxwell: Gee.

Hickman: So that made you continually have to go back there and trade, see, which made a lot of difference.

Maxwell: Yeah, like an indentured servant or like you said, like a slave to the company.

Hickman: Oh, yeah! Well, it was a favor to you if you, you know, if you didn't budget your money right, and be able to go and shop somewheres. It was a privilege to be able.... At least you didn't have to be in want because you could get all you wanted. And even, say, for instance, I can remember families that were not very thrifty, that if they went there and they were large families, and if they went there and traded, at draw day time, the amount that they owed, their purchases, were more than they had money to pay for. So, see, that was no problem to the company. They would just take whatever you had on the bill, and you could still charge towards your next payday.

Maxwell: You end up never getting out!

Hickman: Well, there were people that never -I'm sure they never got out. You know? I'm sure there were people that never got out, because I know some people that were very -just kind of thriftless, like people, and they didn't ever get out, I'm sure. I'm sure some of 'em owed money when the company went out. But even at that -the company was pretty nice because, even at that, if a person had more on the book than they actually drew, then they would always -well, they tell me, I don't know, because I never experienced that -but they could ask, "Well, you know, I need ten or fifteen dollars," whatever they needed, and they would always advance 'em that.

Maxwell: Wow.

Hickman: It was an advantage-type of thing, but still it was something that was a blessing for the person that really needed it, you know.

Maxwell: Oh, yeah!

Hickman: Oh, yeah. So it kept things going. But we didn't have that problem because my mother was a very shrewd person. My dad was the type of man that he worked, and that was all he did. My mother took care of everything. And so, see, we raised hogs, we had cows, and so what we did, we furnished milk and butter, we sold all that. We had chickens. We had kind of like a little farm. You could have it because, see, it wasn't, you didn't have to worry about inspections and all that stuff. You had enough room around you, land around you, you could raise a big garden. And if you were industrious enough to get up and work, then.... (brief interruption from grandchild)

Maxwell: Did your mother then raise all the cattle and hogs and stuff?

Hickman: Oh, yeah! Well, see, there were.... To begin with, there were five of us children. And of course, as the older kids graduated from high school, then they would go off to other places, you know -they wanted to get away from there. (chuckles) So they went to Houston and different places. Mama had sisters in Houston, and she had a brother that had been there for years and years. And so different ones of them went to live with them. My sisters and my brother never left home, and I never -well, I was the baby, so by the time it was time for me to leave, I had married and all. So then I was a different family. But my sisters would go. My older sister had a godmother that lived in Houston, and so she went there after she finished high school. And then my next sister went to Houston. And of course she went to school in Houston. But there at <Alco>, conditions were just about the same, even when we left there -it was about the same. You see, after my brother and my husband went off to the war, then there were not many young men left in Alco. In order to run the sawmill, then a lot of the women took on those jobs. Yeah, I worked at the sawmill.

Maxwell: What did you do there?

Hickman: Well, I used to stack track, stack lumber, and that was an interesting job -quite an interesting job. It was no problem for me because I was pretty strong. Maybe that's why my legs are so weak now 'cause I used to do a lot of heavy work. But that's what we did, we worked at the sawmill. Kind of took on, after my mother died, we got rid of -'cause one of my sisters had married, and she was living in <New Orleans>. So her husband went off to the war just about the same time mine did. And so when he left, she went to live with his relatives down in <New Orleans>. Well, she stayed about six or eight months, and then after Mama died, she decided to come back and live with me and my dad. So she and her two children came back. After she came back, we were going to get rid of the cows and the hogs and all of that stuff, 'cause as I say, my dad was not very much on that kind of stuff. He'd go do his day's work, and that was it. That was pretty much my mother into that kind of business, you know. And that's how we didn't have to get too involved with the commissary, because we always had extra money coming in, see, from the eggs and the chickens and the milk and the butter. It was hard work, you know, to churn all that milk and buttermilk, and save the cream to make the butter and all of that stuff. But we grew up doing it, because at that time you didn't ask kids how much they wanted to do, the chores were there, and you just got with it. (laughter) You know, that was all [there was] to that. But I never did like it too well, but see, I knew what I had to do, what my responsibility was, so I never had any problem with it. But after my mother died, and my sister that had gone to live in <New Orleans>, she and I talked over the phone, and I was telling her that we had gotten rid of some.... (brief interruption from pet) So she said, "Well, Kat, I'll come home. No, don't get rid of everything! Keep a couple of cows. I'll come. You know, you like to work out of the house, but I don't, I like to be home." And I said, "Well...." (tape turned off and on)

Maxwell: You were saying that she asked you to....

Hickman: Yeah. Well, you know, she mentioned that she liked being at home. She said, "I'll come and take care of everything." I said, "Well, that's fine!" So she came. And of course she enjoyed doing that, see. She enjoyed milking the cows. Now, sometimes I would help her, if I had a few minutes before time to go to work. I would run out and milk one of the cows, but that wasn't my job, that was her job. But she took care of everything. She did the cooking. Of course I had two little girls at that time, so she kept the kids 'cause she had two little girls. She was home all day, she took care of the kids. She would have the meals ready when I got home from work and everything, so I enjoyed that. You know, once in a while, I would enjoy churning the butter or washing it up for her, or putting it in the mold, or something like that. But basically, it was her job, and she got the proceeds from it. She would sell the butter and stuff, and that's how she got her money 'cause I was working at the sawmill. And what I would do, that I felt would be fair, I would get some of the feed for the animals. I would buy that, and then I would just let her.... And even my dad, sometimes he would. As I say, this commissary, you could buy everything right there. Sometimes he would charge a bale of hay or something. That way, that would be something she didn't have to pay for out of her money, and that gave her an income. 'Cause really, she was taking care of everything. Now the washing and ironing pretty much I would do that -I'd wash once a week, keep up my kids' clothes. I didn't leave that responsibility for her. But she took care of the kids and feeding them and all of that because I wasn't there.

Maxwell: Did she have children, too?

Hickman: Yes, she had two little girls.

Maxwell: Oh, so you both had two little girls?

Hickman: Yeah, we had two little girls, and so she just kept them right there, the four kids, right there. She was a person that -well, she did a lot of things. I would wonder how she could do so many things because she sewed, she would take in sewing for people in the quarters because there were a lot of people. She would do sewing, and she'd fix tears. So she was busy, she was a busy woman. (chuckles) Yeah. When I went down to <Louisiana> in June, that's what I went, for her funeral. She died, so I went to her funeral. And that's one of the things that I was telling her kids. She has two girls and a boy that live in <Louisiana>. Well, one girl lives up in <Milwaukee>, and the other one is still in <New Orleans>, and her son is in <Los Angeles>. And I was telling them about -well, during the funeral, several people talked about the kind of person she was, how she always liked to fix big meals, you know, and invite people from the church and the community to eat, and all that kind of stuff. And I told them she was that way all of her life. She was always that way because her husband and my husband and my brother were all overseas, and boy she would get me busy! bringing boxes to send fudge, sending cakes. Boy, those men really had themselves a lot of packages from home because she liked to do all that kind of stuff. And so that's the way we lived. And we lived together there until the job cut out. And when the job was about to cut out, how we came to <Arizona> was my mother had three brothers that lived here in <Flagstaff>. One of them, Uncle Sandy, ran that logging camp out at <Happy Jack>. And so when the job was about to shut out, my dad contacted him and told him that the job was.... Down through the years, my uncle had tried to get my parents to come out this way, and of course my mother never wanted to come. My dad, I think, would have come. But she never wanted to leave <Louisiana>, so we never came. And we really hadn't seen Uncle Sandy -we had never seen him. But Uncle Son had come home one time, so we had met him. But anyway, my dad contacted Uncle Sandy, and told him that the job was cutting out, and that there were quite a few guys there that would be out of work, and [asked] if there was any work out this way. And so he wrote right back and told him, yes, that they could use as many good cutters up there as they could get, out here.

Maxwell: Had he already come out here?

Hickman: Oh, Uncle Sandy? He had been out here since -oh, he had been out here for years, many years. In other words, he came here with the old <McNary> Company that came to <McNary Arizona>. And I don't know how he got to <Flagstaff>, but he came out with the group that came to <McNary Arizona>.

Maxwell: Where's <McNary>?

Hickman: It's in <Arizona>.

Maxwell: Is it a ways away?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, it's not too far from <Flagstaff> because a lot of people from here go to church in <McNary>.

Maxwell: Oh!

Hickman: Uh-huh. Down by <Snowflake>, down in that area.

Maxwell: Okay. I'm not real familiar....

Hickman: In the White Mountains. It's in the White Mountains.

Maxwell: Oh, it's that way, then? Down the Mogollon Rim?

Hickman: Yeah, I guess so -beyond Winslow and Holbrook.

Maxwell: Oh, yeah, okay.

Hickman: It's in that area.

Maxwell: It's a good ways away, then.

Hickman: Yeah, it's a good ways.

Maxwell: So he was out there in <McNary>?

Hickman: Well, that's how he got to <Arizona>. He came with the company that came from.... See, there was a company in <McNary Louisiana>, that came to <Arizona>, and they brought a lot of the workers from there, here. And so that's when Uncle Sandy came out. He must have come in -it had to be around 1921 or something because he was out here, my mother said, before I was born, and I was born in 1923. So they must have come about 1920 or 1921. Oh, yeah, he had been here for years and years. I don't know how he got from <McNary>, here 'cause I never did ask -but he was here. He was the woods manager, he was over the logging woods.

Maxwell: Oh, so he was in a good position to tell them to come on, then?

Hickman: Oh, yeah! Yeah, he had jobs for 'em. And then not only that, some of the guys, like I say, some people, like we are today, are not very thrifty with finances, you know. He told my dad, "As many of the guys that need a ticket, let me know, and I'll send the tickets." Of course my father didn't need him to send him a ticket, but there were guys that he did send tickets to some of the guys, and they came to <Flagstaff>.

Maxwell: So what did they think when they heard about this job out here? I mean, was it hard on everybody when the company in Alco closed?

Hickman: Oh, God, yeah! It was devastating, just like it is now, with jobs that are cutting out, and people have no other way, some of them, of getting other jobs -don't know if they're gonna get other jobs or not. So yes, it was pretty rough. But for the logging men, see, it wasn't bad, because they had the offer to come to <Arizona>. But some of their families didn't want to relocate this far. Many of them went to Leesville. And at that time, the war was just getting started, they were just drafting men for the Army, and they were building up the Army post there in Leesville, which was just eighteen miles from Alco. So a lot of those people went in to get jobs on the post. So that was a blessing, really -especially some of the men that worked in the sawmills, you know, they went in and went to work at Camp Polk Louisiana.

Maxwell: Were the men in your family still away at war when the Alco company closed?

Hickman: Oh, yeah. Yeah, they were still there, and they stayed there until even after we came here. Now, see, I came here in 1941. Let's see. I hate to give you dates, because I don't remember well on dates. But anyway, I came here in 1944. Now I know when I came here! July fifth, we got here. They were celebrating the Powwow when we came here. My sister and I came. My father came the first of June -he came out here. And then my sister and I had to get rid of everything there, you know -the cows and the hogs.... Oh, boy, we....

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

Hickman: ... and get ready to come. And so we came in 1944 because the war was over in 1945.

Maxwell: But why was it that you and your sister moved?

Hickman: Why did we move? There was no reason for us to stay there! (chuckles)

Maxwell: Did you have your job at the mill?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, but you remember everything cut out -the mill cut out. And so people had a length of time that they could stay there -you know, if they could maintain themselves. But there was no reason for us to stay there because my dad had already come here and got located, and then we came, you know, to be with him.

Maxwell: Do you know why the Alco company closed down?

Hickman: Well, one of the reasons, they said, was that the woods part, the forest part -you know, you can just cut so many trees, and then you can't cut 'em after they get to a certain distance. They have to be a certain growth, you know. And so there was no more timber there to be cut. It was kinda like this mill: In order to operate, they would have had to bring logs in from such a distance, until it wasn't feasible for the company. Kind of the same situation as here. See, that's kind of what happened here. I think they would have had to bring timber from Heber or somewhere, I heard 'em say, in order to run this mill. And that wasn't a feasible operation. So that was the reason they cut out.

Maxwell: And so your dad came here, and then you and your sister sold everything?

Hickman: Oh yeah, we sold off everything and came -got on the train with our little girls -and we came to <Flagstaff>. We got here on July 5, 1944, just as they were celebrating the Powwow. We couldn't imagine what was going on! We got here at night, and boy, was it raining when we got here!

Maxwell: And they were still having the Powwow in the rain, huh?

Hickman: Oh, yeah. Well, it was night, so I don't know what they were having out at the park. But they couldn't have been having too much, though, 'cause it was really raining that night. And my sister was kind of a devilish person (chuckles), and she knew that I was a little bit frightened, you know. And she would tell me when we got here at the station, there used to be, God, just groups of Indians that would be around the train station. And my sister kept telling me there were so many of them. And here we were trying to hold onto what luggage we had in our hands, and our two little girls -'cause she had two and I had two. And she was telling me, "Oh, Kat, you're gonna get scalped tonight!" (laughter) And she knew I was afraid, see. I was afraid of those Indians. If you've just seen pictures of Indians in books and things, and never seen anything that looked kind of like what you were seeing -boy, just scared me to death! And she's just saying that to me. And boy, I don't know if I believed her or not, but gosh, they had some great big Indian guys. And they were more traditional then than they are now.

Maxwell: I'll bet they were.

Hickman: Oh, yeah! They had their hair all balled up, you know, and some of 'em with the bands. I don't know what they had on. They may have not had on as much as I thought they did, but it was just that I was frightened. She scared me to death. So finally, we got from the train to inside the station. I don't know why at that time they allowed so many of 'em. The station was just full of 'em, they were all outside. Oh, I bet it must have been a couple hundred of 'em. That don't happen now, you don't see that, but at that time, that's where they hung around, around the train station.

Maxwell: Right down here where (inaudible)?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, the station was in the very same place.

Maxwell: Huh! That's where you came into <Flagstaff>, then?

Hickman: Uh-huh, yeah, when we came into <Flagstaff>. And I don't know, for some reason I thought about that afterwards. I don't know why the train would stop so far down the track 'cause we were coming in this way. But the train stopped much further down. In other words, the passengers didn't get off exactly where they're getting off now. You know, they get off right directly in front of the station. But it seemed like to me, maybe it was because I was so afraid, seemed like to me we walked a mile (laughs) before we got to that station where I could kind of halfway feel secure. But yeah, that's how we got to <Flagstaff>.

Maxwell: Did your dad meet you there?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, my father met us. My dad never did much driving. Well, he didn't have a car, anyway, because we sold our car when we left there. But my uncles, they were there, and some of the people there knew my mother. Mrs. Bright was there, she came to meet us. They took us on over to her house. And there was a woman here that I had never met, but she had christened me when I was a baby. What was her name? Hm. But her husband, I guess he had a hearing problem, and they called him "Dummy." I can remember his name. I can see her face, but I can't remember her name. But anyway, supposingly, she was my godmother. So she had prepared a place for my sister and I to stay at her house. And so we lived there with her for about three weeks, until my uncle secured a big building. It was on O'Leary Street -it burned a few years back. But he rented that place for us.

Maxwell: It was on O'Leary?

Hickman: Yeah, it was on O'Leary Street. There's a house right on the corner, just as you turn off of....

Maxwell: Butler?

Hickman: Uh-huh, to go on O'Leary Street. It was the second big house there. It was a great big house.

Maxwell: Kind of across from Fresco's? [phonetic spelling]

Hickman: No, no, no, not from Fresco's -further up.

Maxwell: Oh, up by Franklin?

Hickman: No, it was on O'Leary Street. Let's see, O'Leary is the street where that little Jalisco Store is.

Maxwell: Oh! that's what I meant to say.

Hickman: Yeah.

Maxwell: Was it across from Jalisco?

Hickman: No, it was further down near the end of the block, coming this way. There was a house there that the people owned that I think they're still there. And then next to that lot was this big house that burned. And my uncle had rented that house because, see, I told you, he had sent for those guys to come and stay. (laughs) I told you that my mother was that kind of person, kind of always liked some kind of business, selling something, or doing something, you know. And my uncle, that was her brother. They were all kind of in the same frame of thinking. So, see, what Uncle Sandy had thought was these guys that came, well, when they first came, you know, they didn't bring their wives with them. And so he had intended for my sister and I to cook [for] and board these guys, see -which would have been an income for us. But I had my two little kids, and I wasn't too hot on cookin' no way. Now, my sister was, but I wasn't. But after she said she wanted to do it, I said, "Well, I'll help you, but you have to have the responsibility of it." And so that's what we did. There must have been about six or eight men that lived there. This was a two-story house, and it had a great big living room and dining room to the side. The kitchen was kind of small. And then there were three bedrooms down here, off from the living room. And then the other rooms were upstairs. Must have been about eight or ten rooms upstairs.

Maxwell: Wow, that was a big house.

Hickman: It was a great big place. And so I had the first bedroom. My dad didn't want to be upstairs, so he said, "Well, there's a small room in the back. I'll take that room, and Bernice, you can take the second bedroom down there." And I had already claimed the first one, so I was here. Of course, I was near the bathroom. There wasn't but two bathrooms in the house, one on each floor. There was one upstairs, and there was one down here. From that first bedroom, there was a bathroom, and then to the side here was the kitchen. And then from the kitchen there was one little room, a small room, right on the back, which would have been about the size of a sewing room, I would say. But after my brother came out of the service, he wanted that little room, 'cause he wanted to be able to get out of the back door without anybody knowing (chuckles) what he was doing. So he took that little room. So he was in this little room at the back of the kitchen, and then come through the kitchen, and here was the bathroom. Then the big bedroom, I was in that, me and my two kids. Then the second room, my sister was in there with her kids. And my dad was at the little room in the back. And then the guys all were upstairs. There were stairs that went up from the kitchen. It was a well-built old house -pretty nice house. We lived there.

Maxwell: Who did he rent that from?

Hickman: He rented it from a woman, her name was Mrs. Gomez. I don't know, her property is still there. I don't know of her, if her daughter.... (brief interruption by grandchild, tape turned off and on) ... see her anymore. I don't know if she still owns that property or now, but I'll tell you where the property is at. (aside to grandchild)

Maxwell: So you lived there with your dad and your brother and sister?

Hickman: Oh, yeah.

Maxwell: And you did the cooking? You helped with the cooking?

Hickman: Yeah, helped my sister. Yes, she did the cooking. What I'd really help her with was in the afternoons we would pack the lunches for them to go. And they would be gone all day. And so then all she had to do was cook the evening meal. Well, she cooked the breakfast, though. She made breakfast, had a great big, nice dining room in that old house. I hated when that house burned because it was really a nice old house. It had those great big whatever you call those windows, those great big windows all around the back.

Maxwell: Big tall ones?

Hickman: Yeah, all around the living room.

Maxwell: Oh, how nice!

Hickman: And then it had a sun porch. It was a beautiful little house. But this woman, Mrs. Gomez, she owned quite a bit of property in that area. She had another house -I'll tell you the house she owned. It's right where the freeway comes, as you go off of Butler, where the freeway goes, going toward the South Side. In other words, you know where that Baptist church is, First Baptist Church? It's on the right. It's on the left side. This house is on the left side. There's a house that sits up here on the hill, just across from the Baptist church.

Maxwell: Mr. Williams? John L.?

Hickman: Yeah, Mr. Williams' house, the house that's right down from him. She owned that house also because, see, this old big house that we lived in was just across the street from that house. And so she owned that house, too.

Maxwell: Was she good to the people who rented from her?

Hickman: Oh, she was a really nice person. Yeah, she was really precise about, well, she had the property to make money off of, and she wanted her rent on time. And of course she had no trouble from us, you know. That was the only thing. She had some little houses right behind the big house that we rented. She had a lot of little houses. I think they tore all that down when they remodeled the Murdocks', and I think they tore all those little houses. I don't think those little houses are back there now, but there were a lot of little cabin houses all back there.

Maxwell: Not those ones that Mr. Pat Kelly owned?

Hickman: Oh, no, no, not way that far over.

Maxwell: More on the north?

Hickman: Yeah, right on O'Leary Street 'cause this big house was on O'Leary street. And I suppose this was O'Leary because they were between the Murdock Center -you know where the Murdock Center is -well, there was a row of little houses right....

Maxwell: Oh, I think I know what you mean.

Hickman: Yeah, right in there, in that area.

Maxwell: Yeah, I think there's one left, maybe.

Hickman: Just one little house left.

Maxwell: A little stone house.

Hickman: Yeah. But see, there were a whole group of 'em back in there at that time. So she had lots of property. But now, her property, now where her daughter -I don't know if she's still there -it's still on O'Leary, but it's way down O'Leary, just almost to.... What is that place? There's a business place. Now, that might be called Fountaine Street.

Maxwell: Towards the tracks?

Hickman: Yeah.

Maxwell: Where the salvage yard is?

Hickman: Uh-huh, yeah. You notice there's a big house that sits there. Well, that was where she lived. That was her home. And of course her daughter, the last time, has a lot of fruit trees in the yard. And it's just across from what you're talking about, that salvage place -right across the street there.

Maxwell: Did they build those houses for the timber workers who came out here?

Hickman: Oh, no, no, no, those were privately-owned houses.

Maxwell: They were already there?

Hickman: See, the houses that were built for the timber workers [are out at] what they call <Happy Jack>. Have you ever been in that area?

Maxwell: I've been by it -I haven't really seen the houses.

Hickman: Well, I don't think there are many there now because, see, most of the people that lived out there, when the job cut out, they did like they do most places that are in that kind of situation -most of 'em moved into town. And see, I didn't go out there very much. Now, my kids did, because one of the men that came out here with my dad, his name was Bennie Wafers [phonetic spelling]. When his wife came, they moved out there, into one of those houses. And of course I'd go out there sometimes just on Sunday evenings if Sandy wanted just to go riding or somethin', we'd ride out there, but I really didn't know much about <Happy Jack>. But my kids, this couple was the godparents of one of my girls. But they only christened one of 'em, but for some reason the other one took up with 'em too. So those two girls would be out at <Happy Jack> a lot. They loved it out there because Mr. Bennie Wafers' wife loved to fish, and the kids loved to do all that stuff. So they stayed out there a lot. But I don't know what's at <Happy Jack> now. But I know I have met -there's a guy that lives just right down the street, around the block there, that worked with Sandy in the log woods all those years -Mr. Baker. And he still -well, Sandy did it--would fix his soles, you know, when he was able, before he got too sick. But even now sometimes, he comes by. He came by this year to tell me -he has a lot of apple trees -but he came by to tell me that the trees didn't bear well this year, and that was why he hadn't brought me any apples 'cause he always brings me plenty of apples. But he didn't bring any this year. He said he didn't get very many, no more than what he needed for himself.

Maxwell: So some of those friendships from those days have lasted fifty years?

Hickman: Oh, God, yeah. Sandy, with all of those guys there, friendships lasted through those years, you know. (tape turned off and on) Okay, what were we saying?

Maxwell: I'd like to kind of go back to when you first came here, and you were helping cook. About how many people were boarders in that house with you?

Hickman: Oh, I guess about ten. Must have been about ten.

Maxwell: Oh! quite a few, plus you and your sister and brother and dad and four kids.

Hickman: Well, my brother now, you remember, he was in service, he wasn't here at that time.

Maxwell: Oh, he didn't come 'til after the war?

Hickman: After he got out of service.

Maxwell: Was there a large African American community here when you came?

Hickman: No, very small.

Maxwell: How big, would you say?

Hickman: Well, there seemed to have been quite a few people that were on San Francisco, and that crowd of people. But see, I didn't have any association with those people. Pretty muchly what my association was with, the people that were at the church -see, at the little church there on San Francisco -the same one I go to now. But there was quite a few, even there because that must have been -it was a larger membership than we have now. We must have had around a hundred members at the time that I came here. And that was my association, you know, in that circle. But there was a lot going on up on San Francisco Street.

Maxwell: What was it like?

Hickman: Up on San Francisco? Really, Carol, I can't tell you too much about it because I didn't associate, see. But there was a lot of crime.

Maxwell: Really?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, there was almost if a month went by, and somebody didn't get killed. It was almost something that everybody would talk about, "Nobody's died on San Francisco!" (laughter)

Maxwell: Is this still south of the tracks, the same area where the Grande is now?

Hickman: Oh yeah, it was in the very same place. It was just a bigger building.

Maxwell: The Grande was there?!

Hickman: Oh, yes, the Grande was the Grande at that time. But it was a bigger building, and it seemed to me to have been an upstairs part to it because once in a while they would have -you know, you'd hear 'em talkin' about the gamblin' that they busted so many people from gamblin'. It seemed like it was kind of divided, where they had a place up there where they could go back in there and gamble. I don't know that 'cause I didn't visit it, but I know that's what was said. And right across from the Grande was Charlie Scoto's Place.

Maxwell: And what was that?

Hickman: That was a pool hall.

Maxwell: Is that over where the restaurant, Hasib’s is now?

Hickman: Yeah. It was directly, though, on the corner -more on the corner than where that restaurant is.

Maxwell: Was it a big building?

Hickman: It was a huge building. Yeah, it was an upstairs, and they had dances. Now, I did go there because they would have live bands and dances and things, and I went to one or two of those. But the Grande was a bigger building than it is now. I don't remember if the old building had a fire in it, and that was the reason it was torn down, and that smaller building put there. I don't remember. But I know it was a bigger building than the one that's there now.

Maxwell: Was gambling illegal then?

Hickman: Yes, it must have been because you would hear of them getting busted for gambling. They'd catch 'em up there gamblin'.

Maxwell: Did they have a lot of prostitution up there, too?

Hickman: Yes, there was. I'm trying to think, was it later years? When we first came here -I'm sure it must have been, even at that time, because I know in later years, there was prostitution. Because, you know, you'd hear everything about these guys bringin' these women into town. I don't think they did too much livin' here. I think they were kind of brought in here, you know, and they would just be here for short periods of time -they weren't like some places where they were on the street all the time, you know.

Maxwell: What a strange life for them, huh?

Hickman: Oh, yeah. Yeah, I know several of 'em. And you know, the amazing thing about that, several of those women -which I wouldn't call their names because they're still in <Flagstaff> -some of 'em met men and got with them, and I guess they got married. They've been together for years. You know, they're still in the community.

Maxwell: So they left the prostitution?

Hickman: Yeah, they left that way of life.

Maxwell: I've heard of that in olden times in the West, that a lot of women would be a prostitute until they met a husband -then they'd be out of it. It was like a temporary kind of thing.

Hickman: Oh, yeah. Yeah, I'm thinking of one now that's really, really busy in the church. Of course I wouldn't name her, but the first time I saw her, I saw her on San Francisco Street. And coming from a little place like I came from, I didn't know what prostitution really was -had never heard of it. But then people would tell me, "Oh, she's workin' the streets," and not knowing her or nothin'. But to see her now, then she got with this guy, and I suppose they got married. Anyway, they have a home here in <Flagstaff> on the South Side, and she's active in the church.

Maxwell: So that's been a long time now?

Hickman: Yes, it has been a long time.

Maxwell: It makes you curious what her background was like, huh?

Hickman: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: How did she come to be in that particular....

Hickman: In that position, uh-huh. Yes, it does.

Maxwell: Were the people around there on the South Side, south of the tracks there, around the Grande -was that mainly an African American community then at that time?

Hickman: There were quite a few Mexicans.

Maxwell: Mexicans too?

Hickman: Yeah, there was quite a few Mexicans.

Maxwell: How did people get along -Mexican and Black people get along?

Hickman: Well, it seems like they got along pretty good. I never had no problems with any of 'em. The only thing that I have ever encountered in <Flagstaff> was at the El Charro Restaurant. Well, I didn't encounter anything, but you see where it is now, the church is right there. El Charro is right here. So they didn't serve Blacks at that time.

Maxwell: Oh, really?!

Hickman: No, no, no. No, they didn't serve Blacks in there. And I don't know how it started -I don't remember how it started -but it started from somebody at the church went over to eat, to buy something or something. They refused to serve 'em. And so then at that time the NAACP had gotten started in <Flagstaff>.

Maxwell: What year about was that? Or what decade?

Hickman: Oh, what year was it?

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A]

Maxwell: So it was maybe early fifties?

Hickman: Yeah, it was in the early fifties. So I think it would be safe to say. And then you might even ask somebody, and they might remember exactly because everybody here knew when the city and the NAACP, on a Sunday evening, had a sit-in at the El Charro, from that incident.

Maxwell: What happened with the sit-in?

Hickman: Well, it was peaceful, nobody.... You know, I don't really know how it happened. The only thing I know, that I went with the group from the church, and we sat-in at El Charro.

Maxwell: Old people? Young people?

Hickman: Well, we were all young at that time 'cause I was just.... What was I? Twenty-two when I came to <Flagstaff>? I think I was twenty-two. So it was all people about that age. There really weren't any real old people in the church. When I came, we were all about the same age. Maybe some of 'em might have been thirty, but no more than that. But even the minister was a woman minister when I joined there, and she was no more than about thirty-five, I'm sure, 'cause she was young.

Maxwell: She must have seemed older, though, to you, when you were twenty-two.

Hickman: Well, they did. I mean, the reason being was because these people were friends of my mother's. See, you remember I told you this group of people came here from <McNary Louisiana>. And see, that's where my mother and dad lived there. But when they brought them out here, my mother wasn't a person to be led too much by anybody. (chuckles) So if she would have come, she'd have come on her own. She definitely would not have come with the company. No, she wouldn't have done that. So see, she didn't come -that's when her brothers came out here, with the company from <McNary Louisiana>. And so remember now, that a lot of the people that were here knew my mother -like Sister Rawls [phonetic spelling], she knew my mother; and Mrs. Bryant [phonetic spelling] -and they did seem older to me because of their relationship with my mother, see. Then I kind of associated them, I looked up to them, as being older people, but they really weren't that much older than me.

Maxwell: What happened with the sit-in?

Hickman: Well, it went peaceful. I don't remember, I don't think the police came down. I really don't know how it really happened. If I had thought about that, there was a person I could have called and asked because she was with the group, and her mind's sharp, she would have known exactly the details of who said what, and what was done, if I'd have asked her. But she's not a person that would be open for an interview.

Maxwell: So did they let Blacks into the restaurant?

Hickman: Oh, yeah! They made it very public. There were articles in the paper and everything, what had happened, and that this would not be tolerated because the NAACP was behind it. I don't know of any other place in town that had that kind of problem. I never heard of any place else but El Charro's.

Maxwell: What were the Black and white relationships like?

Hickman: I don't think it was very much of a relationship, I don't think.

Maxwell: Real separate?

Hickman: I don't.... I know I didn't have any relationship with anybody other than the doctors, you know, going to the doctor. The stores and everything, you had no problems there. But I don't think there was any relationship between, like, church groups. Well, like it is now, it ain't too much. Now there's not too much communication, even today, between church groups.

Maxwell: How about friends, personal friendships?

Hickman: Oh, I don't know of anybody.... Now, wait a minute, I'll back up a little bit because there were two, a couple that belonged to our chapel when I came here. It was a man and his wife, they were members there. Their daughter played the piano for the church. But then after I was here just a short period of time, she went as a missionary somewhere overseas, so she left.

Maxwell: And they were white?

Hickman: Yeah, they were white, and they were members there when I came here. Evidently they must have had Miss Bryant and some of the older ones, you know, that were here, must have had a pretty good rapport. They were a very good, faithful couple -very devout Christian people. I can't remember their names, but they were members there when I came to <Flagstaff>.

Maxwell: Were you able to shop in any stores you wanted to go into?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, the stores were wide open -drug stores and everything. That [El Charro] was the only place that I knew of, and that was.... Of course, I had my family, I never did do a lot of going out eating. But I didn't hear of any other place but that El Charro's.

Maxwell: How about as far as grocery stores and markets and banks? Could you go anywhere you wanted to, or where they segregated at all?

Hickman: Oh, yeah. Yeah, all of that was open, there was no problem with banks. Those were places that I went.

Maxwell: It sounds like then that officially there wasn't a lot of segregation, but socially (

Hickman: Uh-huh.) people were pretty separate, at least as far as Black and white went.

Hickman: Oh, yeah. The schools were segregated.

Maxwell: Oh, the schools were segregated?

Hickman: Oh, yeah.

Maxwell: And how were they segregated? I mean, who went to what school?

Hickman: Well, pretty muchly, on the South Side where we lived, the kids went to -maybe you heard of old Dunbar School.

Maxwell: No, I haven't.

Hickman: That was where the childcare center, right there at the fork of the road, you know....

Maxwell: Oh, yeah.

Hickman: Yeah, that was old Dunbar School.

Maxwell: And who went there?

Hickman: The kids from the South Side. Now, I don't know if there's any.... (addressing someone else) Junior, were there any Mexican kids at old Dunbar School?

Junior: No.

Hickman: It was all Black, wasn't it?

Junior: It was all Black.

Hickman: And the Mexican kids went to South Beaver, didn't they?

Junior: Right.

Hickman: Okay. Yeah. I know it was segregated, but I didn't know if it was Mexican and Black, because there were a lot of Mexicans in that area.

Junior: At that time, though, not too many Mexican kids went to school.

Hickman: Didn't go?

Junior: No.

Hickman: But I mean, the ones that went, went to South Beaver.

A fourth person: Dunbar's an all Black school, Momma.

Hickman: Yeah.

Maxwell: Did most of the Black kids go to school?

Hickman: Oh, yeah.

Maxwell: But a lot of the Mexican kids didn't go to school?

Hickman: That's what Junior says. I didn't know that.

Maxwell: What about the white kids? Did they go to....

Hickman: Oh, no, they didn't go on this side of town at all.

Maxwell: So it was really, really separate?

Hickman: Oh, yeah, it was definitely separated.

Maxwell: Was that a legal requirement, or just that people chose to separate their children?

[<Flagstaff> first desegregated its schools in 1954.]

Hickman: No, I think it was a legal requirement. Well, and then I can't say, Carol, because most of the Blacks lived, predominantly, in that area, so that I don't know. There weren't any Blacks that lived in what you might call the upper part of <Flagstaff>. There weren't any Blacks that lived up there.

Maxwell: No Blacks? How about Mexicans? Were there Mexicans up there?

Hickman: I don't know. I really don't know.

Maxwell: I'll have to look into that, and see if I can find out anything 'cause you'd think if Blacks and Mexicans lived on the South Side, then why would their children go to completely different schools, unless it was a legal thing.

Hickman: Uh-huh. Yeah, I think it would have been a legal thing.

Maxwell: That's pretty strong, if they were separating people like that.

Hickman: Uh-huh, I think it was. (phone rings)

Maxwell: Shall we just talk about up until the point where your husband came, and then stop for today? I don't want to tire you out, and I think you're getting a little tired.

Hickman: Well, it's not that, but as I say, I don't....



