MACK JONES INTERVIEW

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A]

Date of interview is September 9, 1999. Interviewer is Dr. Carol Maxwell. Camera operator, Kim Kliewer, also makes a few comments. 

Maxwell: I’m Dr. Carol Maxwell, and this is....Say your name. 

Jones: Mack Jones 

Maxwell: You were telling me you started out in <Mississippi>? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What were you doing there in <Mississippi>? 

Jones: Well, I was a sawmiller and back in them years, sawmillin' was good in the state of <Arizona> -a lot of timber over here. 

Maxwell: How'd you know about that? 

Jones: Well, I had an old friend, an old man, he was raised up with my father, and he come over here. Then he notified my father how good it was in the state of <Arizona> for sawmillin', so then I was a young man then, I come on into <Arizona>. 

Maxwell: You were doing sawmill work in <Mississippi>? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What part of <Mississippi>? 

Jones: A little town betwixt <Jackson> and <Memphis Tennessee>, called <Durant Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: What was it like there? What was life for you like there? 

Jones: Well, it wasn't too bad. You know, we just wasn't makin' very much money. You know, <Mississippi> is a poor-payin' state. 

Maxwell: Is it? 

Jones: Yeah. But we didn't have any trouble back there -my family didn't -with the white folks. You know, in that time it was a prejudiced state, you know back through the South. But we didn't have that much trouble with the white peoples andgt;cause my dad, he was a hunter, and I was a hunter. Well, my dad and them would hunt at night, and I hunted in the daytime. A white guy there called Darren Musclewhite [phonetic spelling], he was a bird hunter, and he learned me how to kill birds. We didn't have too much trouble with the white folks back there, not our family. 

Maxwell: Not your family? 

Jones: No. 

Maxwell: Did other people around you have trouble? 

Jones: Well, lots of people did, you know, but we didn't. 

Maxwell: What kind of trouble did they have? 

Jones: You know, just stremination,1 all beatin’ and knockin' each other around. 

Maxwell: Oh really?! Violence? What would bring on trouble like that? 

Jones: Well just stremination against Black and white. 

Maxwell: Was it frightening to have that going around you? 

Jones: Well, not bad 'cause we lived right close by some white people. This big wheel, he had a bunch of youngsters, and we youngsters fishin' and huntin' together all the time, so it didn't bother us. 

Maxwell: So you had friends, your family mixed back and forth with the whites, too? 

Jones: Yeah, huntin’ and fishin’ and all stuff like that. 

Maxwell: What kind of stuff did you hunt? 

Jones: Birds. Quail, they called it. 

Maxwell: And what did your dad hunt? 

Jones: He hunted coons and squirrels, and stuff like that. 

Maxwell: Night time animals? 

Jones: Night time animals. 

Maxwell: Did you say you did sawmill work there, too? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What did you do in the sawmill there? 

Jones: Well, I hauled logs to the mill. 

Maxwell: What'd you haul 'em with? 

Jones: We had a truck. 

Maxwell: How'd you get 'em on the truck? 

Jones: Well, we had horses to pull 'em up on the truck. 

Maxwell: Make a pulley up high and....? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: Get it up on there. Tell me what it was like working there. 

Jones: Well, it was pretty good, just work makin' fifty cents an hour or so. Back then, everything was cheap, that was pretty good. 

Maxwell: Is that where you were born? <Durant>? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did you have brothers and sisters and all that? 

Jones: Yeah, I did. I got two sisters over in <Williams>, and one in <Durant Mississippi>. And I had two brothers who's dead. 

Maxwell: And you all lived there in <Durant>? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: With your folks? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: Were you living in the folks' home before you came here? 

Jones: Yeah, I was livin' with my mother and father. 

Maxwell: How old were you then? 

Jones: Let's see, I believe, as far as I can remember, I was betwixt seventeen and eighteen years old when I come to the state of <Arizona>. 

Maxwell: Were you single or married? 

Jones: Single. 

Maxwell: What made you want to come here? 

Jones: Well, sawmillin' was good. 

Maxwell: The pay was good? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: And this friend of your dad's was already here? 

Jones: No, unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Well, tell me again how you learned about <Arizona>. 

Jones: Well, a fellah -he dead and gone now -called James H. Thorton [phonetic spelling], he come over in <Arizona>. He had some relations here. And then he come back on vacation, talkin' to my father about it. And I got interested in comin' out here to the sawmill. 

Maxwell: So you heard them talking? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: And you decided to come. So tell me how'd you get here? 

Jones: I rode a Continental Trailway bus. 

Maxwell: Oh, really?! 

Jones: Continental Trailway, but it was just only.... I can remember that pretty good. I think it cost me about thirty-one dollars and a few cents, from <Durant Mississippi> to <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: That's a lot if you get fifty cents a day wages. 

Jones: Well, everything was cheap. You could get a pair of blue jeans for about twenty-five cents. And gas was about ten cents a gallon, and regular was five cents a gallon. Well, you could take a hundred dollars, a good vehicle, and go clear across the country. 

Maxwell: Not anymore! 

Jones: No. 

Maxwell: So it seems to me that $31.50 would be a lot of money to spend at that time. 

Jones: Well, it would be, but it's quite a ways over there. 

Maxwell: So it didn't bother you to spend that? 

Jones: No, it didn't bother me. 

Maxwell: So tell me about the trip. What happened on the trip? 

Jones: Well, I was real, kind of discussed it bein' a young man, but I said, AOh well, I know Mr. Thorton over in <Flagstaff>. When I get there, we'll be all right." So his wife met me at the bus depot. The continental didn't have a bus station in <Flagstaff> at that time. They had to park at the railroad station, Santa Fe there. The Continental and the Santa Fe was combinin' there together. That's where I got off the bus at. 

Maxwell: This was in 1951? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I forgot to ask you just some basic stuff like what year were you born? 

Jones: October 27, 1930. 

Maxwell: There in <Durant Mississippi>? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So you got off the bus and what did you see when you got off the bus? 

Jones: Well, nothin’ but trees and smoke from the sawmills, and I'd see the smoke from the sawmill and that made me feel lots better. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Jones: Well, I know I could get a job. So I stayed around. Flag, it's pretty hard to get a job andgt;cause Southwest Forests and Saginaw managed a lumber company named Kaibab Lumber Company was here. But it was pretty hard to get a job ready at the time, so I went over to <Williams>, and I got a job about the next, I'd say, about three days. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's pretty fast! 

Jones: About three days after I got here, and I went to work for a white guy called Ted Thompson. He's dead now. He had three young sons that we all would buddy around together. He come and started me [as a] millwright. What it is, is mechanickin', on sawmill. He started me out. I can say it, he give me an education. I worked there for about eighteen years. 

Maxwell: Wow, that's a long time. 

Jones: And then that outfit went out of business, and I come back to <Flagstaff> then. I didn't move to <Flagstaff>. I come back and put in an application for Southwest Forests. It really was stremination against Black people doin' them skilled jobs at the Southwest Forest, but we had a guy there, he was a saw filer, was named Tom Rybald [phonetic spelling]. He got in with the maintenance foreman, and he got 'em to hire me over there. 

Maxwell: Well, tell me about the problem with the Blacks and the skilled jobs. 

Jones: Well, you know a lot of them guys come from back out of the Deep South. They were still, you know, with a stremination against you. But you'd meet upon some good white people 'cause, like I said, Mr. Thompson give me an education. 

Maxwell: How did you meet him? 

Jones: Well, I commenced to work for him over in <Williams>. 

Maxwell: How did you meet him three days after you got here? How did you run into him? 

Jones: Well, some old guys was workin' over in <Williams>, was transferrin' from <Flagstaff> to <Williams>, and I went down with 'em, and I met him and got a job. 

Maxwell: Did you go down on the train? 

Jones: No, we had a truck. 

Maxwell: Where did you stay when you got off that first day when you got to town? 

Jones: I stayed with Mr. Thorton, James H. Thorton. He was livin' over at 605 South O'Leary. 

Maxwell: Which one is 605, where is that? Which house is that now? 

Jones: That's on O'Leary goin' over toward Brannen Homes. 

Maxwell: I know the road -I was trying to think of which house it is. Who's living in there? 

Jones: Well, you know where the little store is over on O'Leary? 

Maxwell: Yup. 

Jones: Okay, you get up there, there's a stop sign up there. Well, there's a house right there on your right, and then the second house there is 605 South O'Leary. 

Maxwell: Next to Miss Sally V.'s [phonetic spelling] house? 

Jones: To Miss Smith's house. 

Maxwell: Okay. And that's where you stayed, huh? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Stayed with them. Were you just staying with a family, or did he have a boarding house? 

Jones: Well, he didn't, say, have a boardin' house -he just had a big house there. He said, well, I could just stay and pay board with him. 

Maxwell: How long did you stay at his house? 

Jones: Oh, I guess possibly about a year. 

Maxwell: So it was a place you could stay a long time then? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So you were eighteen, nineteen, by the time you left his house. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: When you looked around at the town -you were telling us before we started the tape recording -what the town looked like to you. 

Jones: Well, <Flagstaff>, right where the Liquidated place is on Santa Fe, the Kaibab Lumber Company was there. They had a little sawmill there. Right over here on Butler Avenue, I guess there's a bill factory in there, a machine shop and all this stuff there. We had a sawmill there, too. And then right off of Butler there, Southwest Forest was there, they had a big mill there. And over here where the Holiday Inn, West <Flagstaff>, Saginaw managed a lumber company that had a big sawmill there. And therefore the city limit of <Flagstaff>, went where Kit Carson's Trailer Court and stuff is, that was the city limit of <Flagstaff>. Out there where we're livin', there wasn't nothin' but woods. We only had two car dealers here then-- the Hutchinson-Johnson used. You know where the barbecue place is on 'Frisco Street, right before you cross the railroad track? 

Maxwell: Not Martan’s? 

Jones: Comin' up 'Frisco Street. 

Maxwell: Oh, comin' up! Yeah, yeah, yeah. 

Jones: There used to be a store there. I used to_____ Western Liquor Store. 

Maxwell: Yeah, Western. 

Jones: Well, there's a big buildin' right across there from the Western Liquor Store. That was Hutchinson-Johnson's Pontiac there. And over here where the.... Let's see, they sell old army surplus here. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah, that Peace Surplus? 

Jones: Yeah. Arrowhead had a garage there. And right over there where AI Do@ is, where they sell weddin' stuff is, that's right there at the underhead pass, Church and Moore had a big garage in there. 

Maxwell: Huh! 

Jones: And all out here, where we is, like Sleepy Hill, that wasn't nothin' but woods, with no roads through here at all. 

Maxwell: It was just forest and meadows and that sort of thing out here? 

Jones: Yeah. And we did have.... Let's see, I guess the police department, and the county, and the hospital, then the railroad station, and business places, Southwest Forest furnished heat, steam heat for them. But the rest of the thing, we had wood -burned wood and kerosene stove. Was no natural gas. 

Maxwell: Oh? No gas at all? 

Jones: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Or propane or any of that? 

Jones: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: And you made a remark about the size of <Flagstaff>? 

Jones: Yeah, <Flagstaff> wasn't as big as <Williams>. 

Maxwell: It wasn't as big as <Williams> is today? 

Jones: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: How big was <Williams> then? 

Jones: Well, <Williams> was just -I'd just say it's just a flag stop. 

Maxwell: Really? That small? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So when you went out to work for Mr. Thompson, you were goin' out to a really tiny little place. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: What was it like for you to be out there? 

Jones: Well, it was nice. He's a good man. I go to see his wife on occasion. She's still living. When I'm over in <Williams>, I usually stop by one occasion to see her. 

Maxwell: So you got to know them as people? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Became friends, would you say? Was he a friend to you? 

Jones: Oh, yeah. His kids is, all of us was just friends. You know how us youngsters get in jail and stuff, drinkin' beer and stuff. When he come paid his boys out, he come paid me out too. Yup. 

Maxwell: (laughs) That's nice. Did people drink a lot back then? 

Jones: Well, yeah, but it wasn't as much trouble then as it is now. 

Maxwell: What was it like? 

Jones: Well, it was just real nice. Everybody, you know, would have lots of fun, go home, and stuff like that. It wasn't no shootin' and cuttin'. There wasn't very much of that. <Flagstaff> was hard on a person -you know, murderin' people and stuff like this back in them years. Now, I guess it still is. Of course I don't have that to be involved in. But anyway, we had, I believe, as far as I can remember, it's been so long, he was a Republican, hired sheriff. He was from <Texas>. He was a bad guy against Black race of people, too. 

Maxwell: When was he the sheriff? 

Jones: His name was Peery Francis. [J. Peery Francis was elected sheriff in 1940 and was re-elected until 1954.] 

Maxwell: And when was that, in the fifties? 

Jones: Yeah, way back in the fifties. He spent years, a deputy hired sheriff for the Coconino. 

Maxwell: Can you tell me about him a little bit? (aside about positioning) 

Jones: Well, Black peoples only had one place they could go in, (

Maxwell: Where was that?) and that was the El Rancho Grande. That was the only one. And then in later years, let's see, I believe there was.... I get so mixed up, I get Joe Richardson and Cecil Richardson mixed up. After Francis and them went out, Cecil Richardson come in for hired sheriff. But we get to run back to Peery Francis. He did have two colored womens -let's see, Judge Miller. Yeah, we had a Black Jewish woman here, and Miss Stenett [phonetic spelling] was some kind of big wheel up there at that courthouse. She's a Black lady too. I don't remember what it was. 

Maxwell: What did this Sheriff Francis do? 

Jones: Well, he was just, you know -colored people couldn't go in certain places. Just one place, like I say, you could go into. 

Maxwell: So that was because of him? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So it wasn't a law, it was just him? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: Oh, my gosh! So he made his own law. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: He was prejudiced. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: Boy, that sounds pretty tough. What did people think of that? 

Jones: Well, a lot of people went along with it. He had a lot of people, you know, I can say that. When election time come, they would campaign for him. 

Maxwell: Do you think that's why? Or did they know about this? 

Jones: They knowed about it. 

Maxwell: What about the Black people? What did they think about that? 

Jones: Well, a lot of 'em voted for him. 

Maxwell: Really?! 

Jones: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: Why?! 

Jones: I don't know, but they did. 

Maxwell: Huh! So he just made his own law?! 

Jones: Right, he made his own law. 

Maxwell: Boy! And a lot of the Black people voted for him?! 

Jones: Yeah, I guess that happened about a year before I come into the state of <Arizona>. The Grand Canyon Cafe, right on Santa Fe, he shot a Black guy through that window. But that was some years, a couple of years, before I came here -as far as I recall. 

Maxwell: Do you know why he did it? 

Jones: Well, they got into it about servin' him.... Somethin' that they made a say. You know, some places done.... Since then I don't recall exactly what did happen. 

Maxwell: It was because he was in there? He shot him because he was in there? 

Jones: Yeah. They got to arguin' up there about servin' him in there or somethin'. The way I understand, he was a soldier, too. 

Maxwell: Gees! And nothing happened? 

Jones: No. 

Maxwell: Wow! So it sounds like everybody backed him up on this -the town. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: That's pretty sad. 

Jones: But then after Sheriff Cecil Richardson got in there [Richardson succeeded Francis in 1954], he went to hirin’ some deputies. Brother Felton Comb [phonetic spelling], he was the first deputy sheriff that we had in Coconino County. And then the city.... 

Maxwell: Was he a Black man? 

Jones: Yeah. Yeah, he work out at the highway department. 

Maxwell: And that was right after Sheriff Francis? 

Jones: Went out, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: That's quite a change! 

Jones: Yeah. And then we only had one Black police[man], and he couldn't go uptown. He was down on South San Francisco Street. And that was Mr. Garland Niel [phonetic spelling]. He was the first Black, colored, police they had in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: And the man who was the first Black deputy sheriff, how did he treat Black folks? 

Jones: Oh, he was real. He was just as sweet as he could be. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Jones: Yeah. I mean, we go to church over there together. He's still around here. If you probably be at the highway department, you don't remember seein' a colored guy in there, kinda short-like, heavy? Sell driver’s licences. 

Maxwell: You know, I haven’t been up there very much? 

Jones: Well, he's nice. He's still here. Oh, yeah he was a nice person. 

Maxwell: Could you tell me his name again? 

Jones: Felton Comb. 

Maxwell: Huh! I would love to talk to him, too, find out what it was like for him to be the first Black man ever in the sheriff's department. 

Maxwell: Let's see, then we.... When I first went to work for the Southwest Forest Industry, they hadn't been.... The Black race of people done the skilled jobs. You know, makin' money, as much money as the white person. But we had a superintendent come in here from <Oklahoma>. His name was Henry Weaver [phonetic spelling]. And I done such a good job, you know, with the maintenance, bein' a Black man, Old Man Henry Weaver said, well, he's gonna put some more Black guys to doin' them skilled jobs. 

Maxwell: Maintenance was a skilled job? Right? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did you make the same money that a white maintenance worker did? 

Jones: Right. Old Man Henry Weaver was a white guy. He might have been stremination, but he had been a workin' man hisself, and he knowed what a workin' man would be up against, see. And he seed that everybody got justice. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Jones: Yeah, I ain’t never, out of all the years I worked, that was the best white guy I ever worked for in my life, Old Man Henry Weaver. 

Maxwell: It sound like you had two good bosses then. 

Jones: And then late years then, my wife passed away, so I said, "Well, it's gonna be real bad on me." But it wasn't. Old Man Henry Weaver and them took care of all of that. 

Maxwell: Really? What'd they do? 

Jones: Well, they give money and stuff, and I didn't have no trouble at all. 

Maxwell: That's amazing. Why do you think they did that? 

Jones: Well, you know, when you be a good fellow and work, you can get more help than you think. In the meantime, lady, you have to know how to talk to people. You don't talk to peoples any kinda way. I get more help than a little bit. About a month ago I was up to Safeway. I went to pay the lady, I think thirty-seven dollars and a few cents for some groceries up there. And I looked in my pocket, left my wallet back in the house. I said, "Well, you'll have to set this back. I done got to go to the house and get my money." She said, "Well, if you're gonna come back and pay it, just take it on with you." And I come here to the house and got my billfold, went back there and paid it. You have to know how to talk to people. You can get more help than you think. I never will forget it-the guy is dead and gone now -way back in years, I think that was in, let's see, it was pushin’ '60. We were traveling on our way back from <Arizona> to -well, I was goin' to <Mississippi>, and two guys that I was with was goin' to the state of <Louisiana>. We got lost on that turnpike there in <Fort Worth> and <Dallas Texas>. So we made a circle around. The white folks were runnin' a big dance there right off the interstate -well, the street there. I told 'em, "Well, you pull over here. I'll go over there and talk to them guys." One of 'em said, "You goin' over there?" I said, "Yeah, I'll go over there and talk to 'em." I went on over there, and I said, "Say, Mister, I'm lost. I need somebody to supervise me outta here." He said, "Well, which way you goin'?" I said, "I'm goin' to the state of <Louisiana>." He said, "Well, I'm goin' ten miles to Shreveport. Where's your car?" "Down the street there." He said, "Well, just wait, and when you see this pickup come out, then you follow me." All right, you have to know how to talk to people. You go bulldog your way, that don't get you nowhere. Talk to people like they people. And then we had Old Man Henry Weaver. Then he hired colored sawyers, all the electricians -everything over there. 

Maxwell: That really changed the whole thing, didn't it? 

Jones: Yeah, it did. <Flagstaff> have come from a long ways. But you know, now, so far, we can't blame the white folks for a lot of these youngsters, not workin’. 

Maxwell: Why do you think that is? 

Jones: Well, a lot of 'em don't work, ain’t goin’ work, they're on drugs. They ain’t goin’ work, well, just say you run a business up there, you don't want me up there full of drugs, half doin' your work. And you don't want me up there. You couldn't blame the people. 

Maxwell: Yeah, not to do with color -just the drugs. 

Jones: Right! And then it could affect me and Debbie and them. What if you payin' tax or somethin'. They take the money and do somethin' else. Well, then you got a big problem. You can't blame the people. And lots of 'em around here, the Black race don't wanna work, don't wanna do nothin'. 

Maxwell: Why do you think that is? 

Jones: They're on drugs and don't wanna work. I got a son, he's nineteen years old. He's goin' to.... He's down to Arizona Western, down at <Yuma>. But he's doin' pretty good. I wanted him to take up pilot, or either a radar technician, so he took up bein' a radar technician. I got an older son, this birthday he'll be forty years old. He's a pilot in the Air Force, fly helicopters for the Air Force. 

Maxwell: So your sons have done well. 

Jones: Yes. 

Maxwell: Are doing well. 

Jones: So I set a good example for 'em. 

Maxwell: Tell me about the church since you're a minister. When did the church start, how did it get started? 

Jones: Well, down in <Williams> there was very few.... Well, for late years it was so bad on us. Then my sister, she come from the state of <Mississippi> -her and her husband -so they said, "Well, we'll just move on out to <Williams>." We were workin' down there. 

Maxwell: This is when you were working for Mr. Thompson? 

Jones: Yeah, right. And then in late years, the sawmill went to gettin' bigger and bigger, and then more colored people be movin' in there. And then we built the church that way. 

Maxwell: What kind of church was it? 

Jones: A Baptist church. It's still there. Reverend Clayton -you've probably heard of him -he's my pastor. We all built that church, and he's still pastorin' over there. 

Maxwell: Were you a Baptist before you came to <Arizona>? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Were they Baptists, too? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Maxwell: So everyone was a Baptist first and then they came over here and started a Baptist church? 

Jones: Yeah. 

(Side conversation about the tape) 

Maxwell: So it wasn’t like they were converting, they were becoming Baptists when they got here. 

Jones: Right, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What was it like founding the church? How did that happen? 

Jones: Well, just people stickin' together, singin' and prayin'. 

Maxwell: Did they start that before they had a church? 

Jones: Well, no. A lot of 'em were used to goin' to churchs, but there wasn't no church there for 'em to attend. 

Maxwell: Could they attend the white churches at all? 

Jones: Yeah, sure. 

Maxwell: They were allowed in? 

Jones: Sure. Well, I tell ya', back in the South, lady, we had a minister there -he's dead now -called ______Baron [phonetic spelling]. He was--others whilst was makin' quick and short-- he's the big wheel. He could really preach, you know. And he used to go to the white folks' churches back in <Mississippi> in the thirties and the forties and stuff, and we'd go out there. Now, they'd let you come in their churches down in the state of <Mississippi> -yes, they would. 

Maxwell: Huh, I didn't know that. 

Jones: Yeah, sure we could. But you know, they had sets of seats for us to sit in the back, but that wasn't no big deal, wasn't no skin off my nose. All we wanted to hear preachin'. 

Maxwell: And so when you came here, did people go to the white churches here first? 

Jones: Yeah, they could, but a lot of 'em didn't. It wasn’t many Black folks was in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: How many would you say were here when you came? 

Jones: Oh, I would say about, as far as I know, about 1,700-1,800. And now you take First Baptist Church over there, it wasn't even enough members then for 'em to have Sunday school. 

Maxwell: But 1,700 or 1,800 Black folks in <Flagstaff> when you came? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: About how many people in <Flagstaff> all together, do you recall? 

Jones: Now? How many here now? 

Maxwell: No, were in <Flagstaff> when you came. 

Jones: Well, that's just about what it was in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: Oh, 1,700 or 1,800 folks in <Flagstaff> of all colors? 

Jones: Yeah, of Black folks. 

Maxwell: But then of all colors, how big was <Flagstaff>, would you say, when you came? 

Jones: Oh, it was lots more white folks than was Black. 

Maxwell: Okay. 

Jones: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: So then you went to <Williams>, and there were folks there that they'd all been Baptists. They were used to going to church, but there was no church? 

Jones: No, there wasn't. But we could go to the white folks' church if we wanted to. 

Maxwell: But did anybody go? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did you go? 

Jones: Sometimes. 

Maxwell: Who had the idea of starting a Baptist church here? 

Jones: Reverend Clayton did. He was workin' down there some, too, and he said we'd just go ahead and build a church there. 

Maxwell: So it was his idea to organize it? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Do you remember how people got together? Did he have meetings? 

Jones: Yeah, they got together, and then they sold dinners, and then with a lot of us workin' at the mill, the company would donate a lot of lumber, and then we'd buy so much far as we could, and we built it. 

Maxwell: So the lumber company helped out? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: So people cooked food and sold dinners to raise money? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: I've seen people do that here for funerals and stuff like that. Did they buy the meat, or hunt the meat, or how did they.... 

Jones: Well, they bought it. 

Maxwell: 'Cause I know some of the families hunted a lot. I didn’t know if they might have been selling venison dinners or something. 

Jones: No, them we know there didn't.... Well, you could go, a lot of 'em went around to a lot of them big-shot white people over at <Williams>, and they would give money to help out. They've done that. 

Maxwell: So kind of as a community effort a little bit. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: Whether people meant to or not, they helped. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: How big was <Williams>, and how many people would you say were there? 

Jones: Oh, let's see, as far as I can remember.... One, two, three.... When we moved to <Williams>, we made about four families. 

Maxwell: Four families out there? 

Jones: Yeah. Well, no, let's see, some people there, they were from <Texas>. They was Black folks. Jackson and.... Yeah, me and my sister and her husband, we made the third Black family in <Williams>. 

Maxwell: And the other ones were a family of Jacksons from <Texas>? 

Jones: Yeah. And they had one guy there, and old man -he's dead (inaudible) called Bill Hatcher. Then he made the fourth family of Blacks in <Williams>. Then they just kept comin' in. 

Maxwell: What was your sister's and her husband's names? 

Jones: Simmons [phonetic spelling], Eleanor Simmons. 

Maxwell: That's pretty small, to be the second and third families. 

Jones: Yeah. And then we built the church. After we built the church there, people kept comin' in and comin' in. We built 'em a Masonic hall on there, too. 

Maxwell: Did they have a white Masonic hall and a Black Masonic hall? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Why was that? 

Jones: Well, back when the Masonic first began, it started in England, and it separated in <France>. So now most of the white folks is Scottish Rite Masonics, which they carry four letters. And then most of the Black folks, is York Rite. We just get three letters. 

Maxwell: What's it called? 

Jones: Three letters. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. But what is it called? 

Jones: York Rite and Scottish Rite. Now, most of the whites, well, the biggest white folks is Scottish Rite, but all us Black folks is York Rite. 

Maxwell: That's why it's two different groups? 

Jones: Yeah. And I don't see how it can be. We all had the same passwords and same signals and all that, but then I'll be just.... That started way back. It didn't just start late years -this started way back, when this was gettin' together from London, England, to <France>. That's started way back there. Well, and then after the sawmill went bad, went out of business, then folks commenced to movin' out of <Williams>, goin' to <Phoenix> and different other places to get jobs. So we had to close that Masonic hall up. But we still affiliated with <Flagstaff>. And then the same thing happened down to <McNary>. You've heard of <McNary Arizona>? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Jones: The Southwest Forest sent us, and they had a big sawmill down there on the reservation. All the Masonics, they moved into <Holbrook>. 

Maxwell: So you consolidated with bigger towns? 

Jones: Right. See, there's no more sawmill in <McNary> now. 

Maxwell: Were you a Mason? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: My dad was too. 

Jones: Yeah But I got part of the white folks degree. You probably get your dad to talk about, oh, whatchacallit, the Royal Arch. That is part of the white folks' degree. 

Maxwell: He died when I was little, so I don't know much about it. You have part of the white folks' degree, you said? 

Jones: Yeah. I'll show it to you when she takes the tape off 'cause it's a violation here. 

Maxwell: Tell me about how you met your wife. 

Jones: Well, right where the Navi-Hopis got this station, one side of that used to be Greyhound, and the other was Continental. So I happen in <Flagstaff>, we workin' in <Williams>, and I had some friends, Spencer Washington, he was workin' down there, so we drove into <Flagstaff>, and I come up with him, and I was headin’ back up to <Williams>. The guy was there with me at the bus station, told me, "There's a nice-lookin' lady on that bus." And I said, "Where's she goin'?" He said, "<California>." "Well, I'll get to see her when its time for the bus to go.@ Sure enough, I did. So I got talkin' with her, and I asked her for her address and things. I said, "Well, I'll come over to visit you sometime." Sure enough, I did. 

Maxwell: In <California>? 

Jones: Yeah, <Oakland California>. She was livin' on 1086 Sixteenth Street, which is that street that goes right on in to San Francisco. She decided to come back to <Arizona> with me, and we stayed together twenty-one years. 

Maxwell: Wow! 

Jones: I guess we'd have been together now, but you know, if God take your family, ain't nothin' you can do about it. Ain't nothin' you can do about it. She was a real heavy lady, she's taller than this lady here. Well, just a little bit heavier than she is, too. 

Maxwell: How tall are you, Kim? 

Kliewer: Five seven and a half. 

Jones: Well, she was taller than you, and a little bit heavier than you is, too. All her people died with heart trouble. Doctor said she had too much weight, the doctor said, and just kept on 'til she had a heart attack. But we stayed together twenty-one years. 

Maxwell: What year was it when you first saw her? 

Jones: Ah, let's see, I was lookin' at the license again, about three months ago. I was lookin' for some papers. Now, I don't recall what year that was. But I know we stayed together twenty-one years. 

Maxwell: Was it soon after you came here that you saw her, or met her? 

Jones: Yeah, when I come here, I met her when I come in. 

Maxwell: Were you married when you went to <Williams>? No, no, that was three days later. (laughs) So you were single when you went to <Williams>. 

Jones: Right. Right, I was livin’ with my sister and her husband. 

Maxwell: So it was your sister and her husband and you were one family. Then there was the Jacksons. Who was the other Black family? 

Jones: The Hatchers. 

Maxwell: Maybe some kids might recognize their family names when they hear your story. 

Jones: Well, I know lots of 'em is young. You see, you is young, both you should have heard of the Hatchers. 

Maxwell: Oh yeah, I've heard of Hatchers. 

Jones: You know, one of 'em played professional baseball, called Billy. 

Maxwell: When was that? 

Jones: I guess he's still up there in Cincinnati, I guess. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? 

Jones: Yeah, he played professional. He's from <Williams>. Some Hatchers around here, they're related in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: I've met some Hatchers. I know I have. I recognize the name. 

Jones: Jesse Hatcher. 

Maxwell: That's Destiny's daddy, isn't it? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that's who Lisa married. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: That's why I recognize the name. 

Jones: Yeah, there's a bunch of Hatchers here. 

Maxwell: I didn't know they had one playin' professional ball. 

Jones: Yeah, they have got one, he plays professional baseball. 

Maxwell: So you married your wife, and how many kids did you have? 

Jones: One. 

Maxwell: Just one? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I thought you had two boys. 

Jones: Well, yeah, but one boy, the boy nineteen years old, he's out of wedlock. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. Who's his mama? 

Jones: Minnie Mayfield. 

Maxwell: I recognize that name. I think I must of met her somewhere. Minnie Mayfield. What's your son's name? 

Jones: Mack Jones, Jr. You've seed him up on television, playing. 

Maxwell: You think so? I don't see T.V. very much. 

Jones: Yeah, he was running back for Flag High. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? 

Jones: The Flagstaff Eagles up there. 

Maxwell: Gosh. 

Jones: There his picture is, up here. Number twelve. 

Maxwell: What did your wife think of that? 

Jones: Well, she was passed away. 

Maxwell: Oh, it was after that. 

Jones: Oh yeah, after. 

Maxwell: So you married your wife and had one son. 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: That's the one in the Air Force? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: And then you and Minnie Mayfield had a baby together? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did you live together? 

Jones: Well, not really. 

Maxwell: Who raised that baby? 

Jones: She did, and then he stayed here with me about three years until he got ready to go to college. 

Maxwell: Where did she live when she was raising him? With her parents, or by herself? 

Jones: With her parents on West Coconino. 

Maxwell: How old was she? 

Jones: Oh, imagine she was about twenty-eight or twenty-nine years old. 

Maxwell: When she had the baby? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: She was a lot younger than you then? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Let's see, you were a minister in the church? 

Jones: Yeah, I've just been now about eight months. 

Maxwell: Oh, this is a new thing? 

Jones: Uh-huh. It's real good. I got the whole Bible back there on tapes, and before that tape runs out, I'm gonna get my wife's picture and show it to y'all, let her run that on there. 

Maxwell: Oh, that'd be good. That's a good idea. Tell me, what was it like being part of the Masons in <Williams>? 

Jones: Well, it was real nice. You know, it's something like religion, but it's somethin’ different. But it's sort of like religion. All of it is built up out of the Bible. Let's see, I believe Ezekiel and King Solomon. In King Solomon's day.... Well, when Moses lived at (inaudible), Israel, that's the only place they had for him to stay, was King Solomon's temple. And when they were buildin' that buildin', they had some trouble with it, in the east corner of that buildin'. And they used a square and compass and a little G to straighten that building out. They used that to straighten it out. That's the greatest temple in the world, that had been built on earth -even the streets was gold. Part of the walls were gold. 

Maxwell: Sounds pretty rich. 

Jones: Yeah. And then we'd usually have it on a Saturday night -there'd be a bunch of us up there -some arguin' over the book and -you know how folks is. And just good fun. That was fun up there at night, on a Saturday night. 

Maxwell: Was it just men? 

Jones: Uh-huh. Well, some women belonged to I imagine you heard your mother talk about Eastern Star, haven’t you? 

Maxwell: My grandmother. 

Jones: And the Heroine of Jericho. Well, that's the women's concern. 

Maxwell: Okay. I've heard of Eastern Star, because my grandmother was in that, but I haven't heard of Heroine of Jericho. 

Jones: Well, that's kind of off branch, you know. 

Maxwell: So they had their women's group and the men had the men's group? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: On Saturday night, you got together separately like that? 

Jones: Well, the womens usually meet during the weekdays. Then we would meet on Saturday night. 

Maxwell: Were you tired? How many days a week did you work? 

Jones: Well, I was the maintenance man. Sometimes I would put in eighteen hours before I could get home and get any sleep. 

Maxwell: That's a long day! 

Jones: And then sometimes I had to work seven days a week. 

Maxwell: When would you have to work hard like that? 

Jones: Well, when the machines break down, you have a major breakdown, we had to be there to fix it. 

Maxwell: Did you work year-round? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: The sawmill went all year long? 

Jones: All year round. 

Maxwell: So just might break down any time of the year? 

Jones: Yeah, you have trouble all the time, maybe thirty minutes or twenty minutes or fifteen minutes or somethin', it'd break down, you had to fix that. You had a full-time job. 

Maxwell: Did you fix the machines at one sawmill, or did you go from one mill to another? 

Jones: No, I didn't work the field, I just stayed in one place, at one mill, Southwest. 

Maxwell: Okay, 'cause you were saying there are all these different mills around town. I thought maybe they.... 

Jones: No, just different peoples, you know. 

Maxwell: Well, what was life like when you first came here? What did you do for fun? 

Jones: Well, I just went to work. 

Maxwell: Worked all the time? 

Jones: Yeah, sometimes six and seven days a week. 

Maxwell: Then, you lived with your sister and brother-in-law? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: What did he do? 

Jones: He was a sawyer. 

Maxwell: For which company? 

Jones: For the Haney Lumber Company. It went out of business. I got a souvenir out there in my yard. I know I never worked on one in particular instruments no more, and I probably won't even see one. 

Maxwell: Do they still use 'em? 

Jones: I guess in some places, but I don't know whereabout. And it looks simple to see it, but just a little piece. You see when you walk out there. I tore the tag off of one of 'em particular instruments. Six thousand dollars what that piece cost. There's one out there in the yard. I brought it for a souvenir. I know I won't work on that, or nothing. I'm liable to never see another. 

Maxwell: Well, will you be sorry you didn't see another one? 

Jones: Well, it brings back remembers, you know, how we used to have fun workin' on stuff. Yeah, we used to have lots of fun workin' on them machines. 

Maxwell: Did you? 

Jones: Oh, yeah. The fact is, pretty nigh all I've done all of my life, in the maintenance department. 

Maxwell: So you enjoyed the people you worked with then? 

Jones: Yeah, but... it's a guy--I'm surprised he ain't been here today-- a Mexican guy, me and him spent years together. Well, he was my helper. I'm surprised he ain't been here today. He was real nice. We could have more fun out of them guys. If somethin' happenin', we wanted to formally do somethin' about it the next day, get some parts or somethin', sometime he write that shorthand, and he couldn't read it. He could write shorthand, and he couldn't read it! (laughter) We had a lot of fun about that. Yeah, I enjoyed the people. But late years, we had -that bunch over to <Winslow>, they come over here. I don't know what happened over there to <Winslow>, that mill a bunch of 'em, come over here and went to work but they was hard to work with. 

Maxwell: How was that? 

Jones: I don't know what kind of guy they is, just somethin', somethin’ all the time. They tell me it was thataway over there around <Winslow>. My particular job, I just had one thing I do: somethin' break down, that was my job to fix it. Them operators and stuff, I didn't have nothin' to do with that. And we had a guy, he come from over there around <Winslow>, called Dunn Silas [phonetic spelling]. He come up there one night and told me, said I need help them operaters. I told him, "It ain't my job to do that. The union don't require for me to do that. That ain't my job. My job is if somethin' breaks down, I fix it then." And he told me, said, “Well, Mack, yous a Black guy." I say, "Yeah, I know. I know exactly that. My supervisor told me to take care of the mill when it break down. Now, if anything else, I go call him." So I just go call him, and don't I go call him now. I said I ain't gonna do it. So I did, and he hated me from then on. But I didn't have to worry about it. I didn't have to worry about him, 'cause he was just a little guy. But all them big wheels, well, I got along with the biggest portion of them big wheels. 

Maxwell: Did you? 

Jones: Oh, yeah. And then I got tired of that mechanickin', and they had a big wheel come out of <California> called Bob Nickerson [phonetic spelling], I see one day he walkin' through there. I said, "Mr. Bob, when that job come open again takin' care of the sprinkler system, workin' the field, I wants it." He said, "Well, can you do it?" I said, "I can handle it." Sure enough, the job come open, he give it to me. 

Maxwell: Oh! 

Jones: Yeah, that was a good job. All I done, drove the fire truck and kept the sprinkler systems up. That was a good job. Yeah, he was all right. But Old Man Henry Weaver, I still bet on him -he was a man. Yeah, Old Man Henry Weaver. They tell me he down there around <Payson>. Some of these days I'm back there, I'm gonna look him up. But he was a man, I’m tellin’ ya'. 

Maxwell: Sounds like. He changed the face of the whole workplace. 

Jones: That's right. 

Maxwell: That's pretty good. It sounds like this fellah that was your assistant, he's still a friend, that comes by, the Mexican fellah? 

Jones: Yeah, I'm surprised he ain't been here today. He's got two master's degrees, but the kids run him crazy, teachin' -nigh near crazy, teachin’ school. But he got two master's degree. He's a high educated man. I'm surprised he ain't been here today. 

Maxwell: He stops by every day? 

Jones: Yeah, sometimes every other day. And then I have some white guys stop here, too, I used to work with. 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

(Jones holds a picture of his wife and sister for the camera.) 

Maxwell: Now, say who that is? 

Jones: Jonetta Jones. Did you get it? 

Kliewer: Uh-huh. And your wife is the one on the right? 

Jones: Yes. 

Maxwell: Say your sister’s name on the left. 

Jones: Mary Louise Green. 

Maxwell: Is she an older sister or a younger sister? 

Jones: She's younger. 

Maxwell: What are your sisters?? and brothers’ names? 

Jones: Eleanor, Ruby, Mary Louise, and Lula B, and my older brother, he named Willie Morrison, and my baby brother, he named Danny. 

Maxwell: You've got the shortest name in the family. 

Jones: Well, I was named after my uncle andgt;cause I was always small like he was. He was a mechanic, too. (pause) 

Maxwell: How did you come to be a minister? Do you have to have been in the church a long time? 

Jones: Well, after you study your Bible so long that turns you to God which is right that turns you to him. And then it comes into your mind to go out and tell the people right from wrong, and then you go. 

Maxwell: So it just grows in you. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: So it's not a particular age? You don’t have to be a particular age? 

Jones: Well, some white guy over there that’s son got preachin’ as far as <Texas> down there said I done real good. I talked out of the Book of Genesis, which you all know about the Book of Genesis both of ya’ll do. Book of Genesis, the sixth chapter and the fourteenth verse of Genesis that’s when God was getting ready to destroy the world. Noah, he was a just man and a man that felt God. God walked with him, and he talked with him. He told Noah he was goin’ to destroy the world, and he wanted him to build an ark, and he wanted him to build it out of gopher wood, and he wanted him to line it with pitch. And he wanted him to put a window in the east corner and build it to third story andgt;cause its goin’ rain (inaudible). You take man builds all kinds of buildings, all kinds of instruments, but back in 1912, man built a ship called the Titanic which supposed to be an unsinkable ship. But the third month and the thirtieth day of the month, he commenced the rainin’ and God told Noah to take in several males and females, clean and unclean. Says its goin’ rain. After the water rise, the ark began to move. It was goin’ up. It rained twenty days, and the (inaudible), they said, AIs something wrong?@ Rained twenty days, and it ain’t quittin’. They went to the ark and knocked on the door, and they told Noah to open the door and let them in. Noah said, “I can’t do it. God done locked the door and got the key and gone on back to heaven.@ And as the water rise, the ark got higher and higher. And, I believe, in the fourteenth month, that arc landed on the mountain she’s goin’ to college; she probably knows about it landed onto Mount. Ararat. Well, Ararat is a mountain that’s in ______, <Turkey>, and <Russia>. Alright, the foundation like I said. They built that Titanic. It was an unsinkable ship. They was sailing in the Pacific Ocean, and they hit an iceberg, and the Titanic sunk, but God’s ark didn’t sink. It’s on the Mountain of Ararat. I wants to get down there and see that, but I don’t know where I’ll ever get the money. That lady there, she probably study the Bible some. Do you read about the eighth chapter of Genesis? It’ll tell you where that ark went to on the Mountain of Ararat which is the highest mountain in the world betwixt <Turkey> and <Russia>. It's the start of the eighth chapter of Genesis. And God left. He take Japanese, all them foreign nation people, that started back in Shem, Ham and Japheth's time them was Noah’s three sons. That's the way the races kept generating. 

Maxwell: You sound like you’ve been preachin’ some. 

Jones: Well, yeah, I don't feel too good today, you know, like doin’ that, but I get up in the church and I...Yeah and I got an article in there I oughta have let it run on tape. I got a tape back there. She coulda taped it. I imagine she would have enjoyed that. You know, sometimes we got to use what God gives us. We ain’t got this; we ain’t got that. But if you got a car or somethin’ God give it to you, use it. I got a tape back there. Back in 1945, during the North Africa campaign, there was a bunch of soldiers on that island, and they rides into a town on that isle called Catania. andgt;Bout the next day being Sunday, they all got up and went to the church. When the pastor took his text, the sergeant demanded all the soldiers to spread out their Bibles and their handbooks. There was one soldier didn’t have a Bible. He pull out a deck of cards. He pull out a deck of cards. And the sergeant saw them cards and said, “Soldier, put away them cards.” And when the sermon was over, the sergeant took him up to the Marshall, and the Marshall say he was goin’ punish him for playin’ cards in the church. And the soldier told him, “Well, let me have my say, Sergeant, then I’ll take the punishment.” And the Marshall said, “Well, you go ahead.” He said, “When I see the dace [face cards?] that represent one lord, one face and one baptism. When I see the deuce, that represent the Bible is divided into two different parts you know, the old testament and the new testament. And the fourth, card four represent the four evangelists. They were preachers. They were Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Have you heard? You people read Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. That’s what it represents. And the five represent the five wives and five foolish wives five were saved and five were left out. And the six represent the six days God created the heaven and earth. The seven represent the seventh. He worked on the seventh and then he rested on the seventh. The eighth represent the eight righteous people. God left (inaudible). There were Noah, Shem, Ham, Japheth and their wives. The ninth represent the nine lepers of God’s cleansing. Didn’t one thank him. The tenth represent the ten commandments. Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not have no other God's before me. And the eleven represent the eleven disciples. There were twelve, but one cancel out Judas cancel out and that left eleven. That’s a long way to go on there, but I am tired! (laughter) 

Maxwell: Well tell me what was it like to raise children here in <Flagstaff>? 

Jones: Well, his mother kept him. She mostly kept him, but I took care of him. 

Maxwell: I mean when you and Jonetta raised your son. 

Jones: Oh. It was alright. He wasn’t bad. He was real good. 

Maxwell: But did people help people, or did mothers stay home and raise their kids? 

Jones: Yeah. She wasn’t a working lady. She stayed and took care of the kid. 

Maxwell: So she didn’t go working? 

Jones: No. She’d just go to church and stuff like that and go on vacation up in <Chicago>, <Mississippi>, <Louisiana> and come back. 

Maxwell: Did you have any trouble with schools or what was it like having him go to school here? 

Jones: No. He wasn’t no trouble. 

Maxwell: What school did he go to? 

Jones: Williams High. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's right. He grew up in <Williams>, didn’t he? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: What year was it that you started working for lumber companies instead of working for Mr. Thompson? 

Jones: That was back in it’s sometime I don’t remember what day but sometime in the year 1951. 

Maxwell: When you worked for Mr. Thompson that was 1951, right? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: And then you worked for Southwest Lumber Company? 

Jones: Yeah. After they went out of business, I come back to the Southwest Forest Industry, and I stay there twenty-seven years. 

Maxwell: Wow. Do you remember what year you started with them? 

Jones: Southwest? I don't remember what year, but I know that I spent twenty-seven years there. 

Maxwell: Wow. That’s a long time! 

Jones: I held the job twenty-seven years. You know, I had to be pretty good to hold a mechanical job that long for twenty-seven years. That’s a long time. 

Maxwell: That’s right. If you can’t make the machine work, they’re not goin’ keep you on. 

Jones: We had a clock, lady, on them machines. When that machine stopped runnin’, that clock would stop runnin’. (laughter) That’s right. You workin’ on the clock all the time! (laughter) And you had to go and sometimes I would go thirty days, forty, forty-five minutes lost time. Sometimes I go thirty days wouldn’t use no parts, no used parts. That was savin’ the company lots of money. 

Maxwell: What did you use? 

Jones: Well, fix the old. And then, I never will forget. There come a guy you know, <Oregon>, some parts of <Oregon>’s a prejudiced state. We got a sawyer comin' there from <Oregon>, and they used to switch it off. You know, the day shift worked a Monday in the day, and they work a Monday night. It was rotatin’. So when it come the time for the night shift to come on my shift, at night -I worked the swing shift -this sawyer hadn't seed me 'cause he'd been workin' in the daylight, I worked the swing shift. So we got started up there one evening, and we had a hold to break up there on the rig, and he blowed four whistles. I went by whistles. When they blowed four whistles, that means somethin' broke down, for me to come. When they blowed the four whistles, I went on upstairs. I know I could tell -we had a left side and a right side -- I could tell which side it was by the sound of the whistle. I went up there on the right side and stood at -the rig was down, it was stopped. I went up there and the guy didn't tell me nothin'. He was a white guy. I stood there just about three or four minutes, he never telled me nothin'. I turned and went on back downstairs. And I heard five whistles. I told this Mexican was with me all the time, I said, "Well, the foreman will be in, in a few minutes." He said, "You ring?" I said, "Yeah, it's the right side. It was down." Five whistles. Here he come down there running. "Mack, what is it?" he said. "You hear them four whistles?" I said, "Yeah, I answered it. I went up there and stood on the catwalk about five, six minutes. The guy never told me nothin'." He said, "You mean to tell me you answered that whistle?" I said, "Yeah, so he didn't say nothin', I come on back downstairs." And he went and asked some more guys, did I answer the four whistles. They told him yeah. They said, "I don't know what happened up there, but Mack was up there." And see, this guy was prejudiced. He hadn't ever been used to Black mechanics, and he hadn't seed me before, see. I don't know what that foreman told him, but I was standin' over there on the catwalk, he's up there in the car pit. They had a glass cage where they were settin' in, and I couldn't hear what he was sayin' to him, but I don't know what he was tellin' him. He was pointin' at him and tellin' him somethin'. But from then on, they blowed that whistle, and I went up there. I bet he told him a whole different matter. Better knowed it 'cause they say when one of them rig machines down, was costin' the company ninety dollars a minute. 

Maxwell: I bet! 

Jones: And that's a lot of money. 

Maxwell: Yeah. 

Jones: Yeah. I had lost time with strang[ers], some of them guys comin' there. But you know we had them old white guys been there thirty, forty years, they would help you. We had a guy come called Russ Barkers [phonetic spelling]. He come way back in eastern <Oregon> back there. He said if it was left to him, he'd run all the Indians, Mexicans, and niggers away from there. So they had a bunch of white guys workin' at the machine shop, they got mad about it. They said, "Well, we'll fix him." He got to the place, he couldn't get parts, couldn't get nothin' there. The mill just commenced to fallin' apart, no production. And then them big wheels in <Phoenix> wanted to know, come up here to see what was the matter. And they left word to Mr. Barkers, said to straighten the mill up and make production or get out. And he couldn't do it, 'cause didn't nobody want to work for him. They wouldn't work for him, and he had to go. And then when he left, everything went back up. They would run you off from over there. Yes, they would! But if they like you, you know, they stick up for you. 

Maxwell: This is over in <Williams>? 

Jones: No, that was over here in Southwest. 

Maxwell: So he really pulled the business down, just because he hated people. 

Jones: Right, sure he did. But they run him off, and the business picked back up. They didn't want him there, wouldn't nobody work for him. You know, when folk go to workin' against you, you just might as well just go 'cause they gonna do everything they can to make it hard on you, and they run him away from there. 

Maxwell: So they ran him off, instead of him running them off. 

Jones: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: What kind of things did people do to make it not work? 

Jones: Well, you couldn't get parts, and then they would sabotage stuff. (

Maxwell: Pardon?) They sabotage. (laughter) Stuff fallin' apart when it wasn't supposed to be fallin' apart. That's the way folks do. 

Maxwell: That's what you get when you treat people that way, huh? 

Jones: Yeah, and they run him off. 

Maxwell: That's a wonderful story. I think we're gonna have to stop right now, because Kim has to go to school, she has to get to her class. (to camera operator) Is that true, is it time? 

Kliewer: Yeah. 

Jones: What you takin' up in school? 

Kliewer: I'm a humanities major, which is hard to explain. Right now I'm going to be going to a class on environmental problems. That's my class that's coming up. 

Jones: Well, I was a non-educated person, but I had instruments to tell how big something is. All that, all you have to do is open it up and clamp around in it, the hand. 

Maxwell: You could tell by holding things how big it was? 

Jones: Well, it had a hand on it, when you slip it around it, that hand was ready, see. It's an eighth of an inch, three-quarters, five-sixteenths, or sixty-fourths. All that, it'd register. 

Maxwell: That's pretty subtle. Did you go to school at all? 

Jones: Well, back then, you know, our parents had to do what the white folks said do. And you know, it just wasn't very much schoolin' back then, it wasn't. 

Maxwell: Not for a lot of people, all across the nation. How much school did you go to? 

Jones: To sixth grade. 

Maxwell: That's a fair amount, if nobody's tryin' to get you to go to school. 

Jones: Well, but I don't feel bad about it. With the education Mr. Thompson was givin’ mechanicin’, and stuff like that, I was making sometimes $40,000 a year. 

Maxwell: Wow. 

Jones: Making $11.83 an hour. Anytime I worked ten minutes over eight hours, they had to pay me time-and-a-half. And I had to go back over there on a Saturday, they’d had to come and pay me when I leave home. Just $150 for one day. On a Saturday, they had to pay me when I leave home. And I don't feel bad about it. 

Maxwell: Oh, no! (laughs) Did the white people not want Black kids to go to school? 

Jones: Well, it wasn't so much they didn't want you to go to school, but they want you farmin' and cleanin' up ditch banks and all stuff like that. They wanted you to work. 

Maxwell: So they kind of pull you out of school. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: It wasn't that they cared if you went to school, they just wanted you to work. 

Jones: Right. But like I said, we didn't have too much trouble with the white folk, andgt;cause abidin’ by their rulin' and stuff like that. So we fared all right. 

Maxwell: Did it feel different here, than it did there, as far as prejudice went? 

Jones: Well, some of it did, course you gals have probably heard your daddy and them talk about it. You know, it was separated back down in the South. In the railroad stations and bus stations and all places like that, they had a side for the white and a side for the Black. And when you ride the bus or train, when they had a line of andgt;em, a whole list of Black people would head to the back, they had a line of them. When you ride the train, when you get to <St. Louis Missouri>, they call that the Mason-Dixon Line. 

Maxwell: Oh, at <St. Louis>? 

Jones: Yeah, at <St. Louis Missouri>. Well, lady, you've heard of that this lady with the glasses on you've heard of Jim Crow law, ain't ya'? Well, there wasn't no more Jim Crow law 'cause see, you was ______ <Illinois> no, <Cairo>--<Cairo Illinois>. That's the next small town from <St. Louis Missouri>. And you be up in the northern part of the country, see. Well, when you get to <Tucumcari New Mexico>, you out from under Jim Crow law. But to take from <St. Louis>, clear up through to <Mississippi>, <Texas>, <Louisiana> and <Texas> -Jim Crow law. But I didn't fail too bad in a deal like that. 

Maxwell: But could you tell the difference? Did it feel different here? 

Jones: Well, yeah. You know, you wouldn't get lynched. Now, you take, just like, I wouldn’t even, lady, had to put my hands on you, wouldn’t have to put my hands on, you go up there and make false statements, say I attacked you or somethin', well, they come and get me and lynch me. 

Maxwell: Here? 

Jones: No, back in the South. Back in the South they would do that. And I wouldn't even be done talked to you. And I guess, I imagine I see them text books around here. You remember when they lynch Emmett Till back-- that young kid back down there in <Mississippi> some years back, called Emmett Till. I still see some write-up about that in them text books. They claim he whistled at a white woman. They lynched him over there. 

Maxwell: That's amazing. 

Jones: It was a bad situation, but like I say, we tended to our own business, deal with them young white boys. Fishin' and huntin' and stuff, we didn't have no trouble, nothin' like that. 

Maxwell: Did they ever have any lynchings here that you know of? 

Jones: Not that I know of. 

Maxwell: Somebody told me there was a lynching, but I don't know when. I haven't done an interview with him. I don't know when it was. I don't know how far back. But see, now, you told me about this sheriff shooting some man just 'cause he was in a cafe. (

Jones: yeah) That's pretty bad. 

Jones: Well, you know, when a person gets started, they're liable to do anything, you know, so.... We just have to look over people like that. But I don't know.... All this stremination.... 

Maxwell: Now, that's a word I never heard before. 

Jones: We supposed to love them people too. If you hate me, accordin' to my Bible in there, I don't supposed to hate you, I'm supposed to love you 'cause when Christ was hangin' on the cross, he told God, "Forgive them people," that they didn't know what they was doin'. And it's found in John 3:16, it said God love the world so much he forgive his own forgotten son. Whosoever believed also in me shall not perish, but have everlastin' life. (phone rings) 

Maxwell: Do you want me to get that for you? (tape turned off and on) I never heard that word, "stremination." It must mean like conflict? Tell me what it means. 

Jones: Well, that means that you against me and I'm against you. That's what it means. Now, we holler about the white folk crazy. A lot of Black folks just as crazy as the white folks is. 

Maxwell: Yeah? 

Jones: Yeah, they is. Now, I was lookin' on that TV here the other night, on I forget what that white lady's name. She's a prosecutor. Very nice-lookin' lady what was the woman’s name? [Later identified as Marcia Clark.] (pause) Her and this Johnny Cochran first started that show together. 

Maxwell: Do you know the name? (to camera operator) 

Cleever: No. I don’t watch that much T.V. (laughter) 

Jones: I forget her name. But anyway, she was up there, was talkin' about this O. J. Simpson deal 'cause her and this Johnny Cochran built that show, started that. Now, you take it, I don't doubt O. J. Simpson was guilty. I don't doubt he was. But what it was, this here lawyer, Christopher Dardin, he was a Black guy, he was a prosecutor. He made the opening statement, and then they had all Black jurymans up there. That was up there on that television. Then them jurymans got mad at Christopher Dardin, about he bein' a Black man 'cause he's gettin' O. J. Simpson 'cause all them colored jurymans up there. They was angry about that. And then they didn't like Marcia Clark, she was a white lady, and didn't like her, the way she talked to the witnesses. And they let O. J. Simpson win. And that shows as much stremination agin' the white -colored folk -as it is the white. Yeah, they let him win. I don't doubt he was guilty, but they didn't like for Dardin to make the opening statement, and then the way Marcia Clark talked to the witnesses. I noticed old Johnny get up there, he talked to them witnesses so nice and kind, and them jurymen give it to him. If you talk to people right, you can get further than if you try to bulldog your way. You don't bulldog your way no more with people. And gettin' back to this here.... Down South, you take it, a white guy can just walk along here and shoot me, ain’t nothing, that's it. You're just like a rabbit or somethin' out in the woods, lady. They wouldn't do nothin' about it. Unt-uh. I've seed whole lots of that happen right back there in the state of <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: How'd that make you feel? 

Jones: Well, it make you feel bad 'cause sometime you got to think, "That coulda been me." You get to thinkin' that, too. And it make you feel awful bad. They would just do what they want to do back there. But I told my old man when I got big enough, old enough, I was gonna leave that place. Course, I didn’t have no trouble, and I left. Right now I got some of them white guys I was raised up with, when I’m back in the state of <Mississippi>, them that are still livin’ I go by and see andgt;em. I was raised up that way. 

Maxwell: But when you were little, you saw that, and you wanted to get away? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I would have too. 

Jones: It used to be bad back there, but it's all right back there now. It ain't bad back there now. It's all right. 

Maxwell: It's time. 

Jones: I'd love to go back there and stay -it's better huntin' and fishin'. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Jones: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: When you came here, did you keep hunting? 

Jones: Yeah, and I do now some bird huntin'. 

Maxwell: Did you hunt birds when you first came, too? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: All along you've been a bird man? 

Jones: Yeah. Yeah, <Mississippi>'s all right now. It used to be, but it's all right now. I could go back there and live comfortable now. 

Maxwell: What about when you left that and you came here? You got out of the Jim Crow laws, but then here's the sheriff that.... 

Jones: Well, what you had to look on [was] you wouldn't be lynched, and you would get the same wages that the white guy got, which don't nobody care nothin' about. That, you know, just, "Oh, we lookin' for a living." And it was somethin’ better on me. 

Maxwell: So in <Mississippi> you wouldn't get the same wages for the same work? 

Jones: No, unt-uh. Sure wouldn't. 

Maxwell: So it was a little bit safer, even though this guy tried to run his own town. It was safer, at least you weren't gonna get lynched. 

Jones: That's right. 

Maxwell: So it felt a little better maybe? 

Jones: Yeah, it got a little better. Now, we got a fine sheriff's department up there now. 

Maxwell: Do you think so? 

Jones: I know they're good. Joe Richardson, he don't.... You know, now, if you violate, he don't send his deputies out there shootin' and knockin' people around. You don't hear Joe Richardson done that. But if they go to arrest you, now, they're sure gonna arrest ya', they will. Now, he gonna enforce the law, but he don't allow 'em goin' around shootin' people and knockin' 'em around just 'cause they can. He don't allow that. He's a good fellah up there. 

Maxwell: He's fair? 

Jones: Yeah, Joe Richardson, there ain't nothin' wrong with that guy. And well, the police here are not bad, unt-uh. A lot of people say they is, but let me make it short. When I was drinkin', drivin' around drunk, speedin' up and down the road, gettin' tickets, I stayed mad at the police. When I quit drinkin' and speedin' and stuff up and down the road, I seed it wasn't the police, it was me. It was me, 'cause if I hadn't been drinkin' and doin', the police wouldn't have been botherin' me. So it ain't altogether the police. It's the people what the police dealin' with. Course, it ain’t the police force. You know, they don't knock folks around, do they? They pretty good, the sheriff and the city both. I don't have no trouble with 'em. Sometimes they see me out there, they'll stop and pass a few words with me. Some that I know. I know two colored guys up there, one Mexican -well, three Mexicans up there. 

Maxwell: Do you know Ivory Washington? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Is he a good cop? 

Jones: Yeah, he's all right. 

Maxwell: He's not too hard on the Black folks? 

Jones: Nah. Some of 'em make hard on 'em. If he go to arrest 'em, he got to do his job. 

Maxwell: I think it's just what you're saying 'cause I've had other people tell me he's harder on the Black folks than anybody else. 

Jones: No, if they didn't violate the law, they wouldn't have to worry about it. 

Maxwell: They were violating the law. I think it's just what you were saying. 

Jones: But this white guy, he's from <New Orleans Louisiana> -he's a great big guy -called Bill Trummell [phonetic spelling]. One time I was goin' west on <Williams>, and drivin' along there, all the lights come on, and I said, "Wonder what did I done now? Lookin' at my speed often." I wasn't speedin'. He come on up ahead. And I looked back, here come Bill Trummell come walkin' up there, wantin' me to give him a cigarette! (Maxwell laughs) Yeah, he still around here. I seed him up here at the City Hall all the time. A great big guy. Yeah, west of <Flagstaff>. I don't have no trouble with the sheriff department, the city either. Pretty good. 

Maxwell: That's nice. So, that's a good change. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: What else should I ask you to know what it was like when you first came here? 

Jones: Well, it was.... Well, I just feel better just out from under pressure. You know, you're scared to walk the streets, scared to bump up aside a white woman or somethin’. That’s pretty serious matters, you know. You have to be all particular, you know. Got to be all particular. But then my daddy farmed there. We farmed there for some old man with the railroad. He's a fireman to the Illinois Central Railroad Company. And we farmed there with some white peoples, and this lady, I would drive her car to town on Saturday for her. She’d call us (inaudible), I’d get a basket, and tote the stuff for her, load the car, and drive her car. Well, them white folk wouldn’t bother me, no. 

Maxwell: They wouldn't bother you? 

Jones: Unt-uh, 'cause that white lady speak, that was it. Yeah, and they knowed ya'. See, they knowed ya', see you drivin' the car and keep it washed and cleaned up and all stuff like that. They know who you work for. They wouldn't bother ya'. 

Maxwell: But that sounds like you have to walk on eggshells. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: That would be nerve wracking to me. 

Jones: Well, yeah, but like I said, it ain't thataway back there now. It's mixin' up races and stuff, clear across the country. At least I don't believe in it too much, but I don't say too much about it 'cause you make too many enemies. Let folks do what they want to, and you run your business and let them run theirs. Yup. 

Maxwell: So you didn't have to worry about it if you walked down the streets here in <Flagstaff> when you first came? 

Jones: No. 

Maxwell: People weren't going to make false accusations and all that? 

Jones: No. It wasn't nothin' like that. That takes a lot of pressure off of you. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I would think so. I mean, I would think it would be kind of terrifying to think that if you accidentally bumped someone, someone might kill you. 

Jones: Yeah, that's the way they would do it, just like you ladies go up there and say I attack ya’ll, or done somethin’, here they come. They had some people back there called the mob crowd. They come lynch you, maybe beat you to death and throw you in the river or anyplace. 

Maxwell: That's a hard way to live. 

Jones: Yeah. Well, it did happen back there. I ain't tell you what I think or what I heard andgt;cause I was back in some of it, on vacation and stuff. One time, I flew into <Monroe Louisiana>, and my niece picked me up in <Monroe> and took me to <Ruston Louisiana>, so I said, "Well, I'll stay around here with you for two or three days, and then I'll continue my trip on to <Mississippi>." And we sittin' around there talkin'. The bus what I was gonna ride was gone, so I said, "Well, I'll catch the next bus, Jean." She said, "Yeah." So we went up there, the bus station was closed. When the driver come up out there, he said we could go ahead and give him the money, and when we got to <Monroe Louisiana>, he would go buy the ticket. So we did. So I give the man a twenty-dollar bill and when we got to <Monroe>, I asked him, went up there checkin' about it, and he wanted to say I didn't give him that twenty-dollar bill. And I just said, "Well, how’d I get from <Ruston> to <Monroe>?" He said, "Well, we’d had to buy a ticket there." I said, "Well it looks like you need that twenty dollars worse than I do, you have it." And I let him have it. Twenty dollars is twenty dollars. What you gonna get in a hassle about twenty dollars for?! It ain't worth it. I see him when I come back over this town again, I be so high, I was flyin' when I come back. And then one time I was, let's see, I believe it was in <Dallas>, we loaded on Delta Airline, it’s a big DC-8, big plane. But anyway, this white lady's seat and mine was -we had the same seat in the plane. So I went back and, she told me I couldn't sit there. I didn't argue with her. Two other white ladies were sittin' right ahead of us, said, "Well, you can come up here and sit betwixt us." So I reach up there and got my bag and stuff and put up there. I went all the way to <Mississippi>, and then this lady back there, she wanted to talk to us, but we wouldn't say nothin' to her. Sometime when you see people crazy, and you say somethin' to 'em, you're crazy as they is! You don't say nothin' to 'em, just let 'em go. Yeah. There used to be lots of stuff happened back there. I'm just tellin' you it used to be bad. People just ride along, white folks, could run over you, do anything. Wouldn't be nothin' done about it. But then President Eisenhower, he went to work on that, and then he took off of where Abraham Lincoln left. And then John Kennedy, he worked on it -him and Martin Luther King and got everything kind of straightened out. 

Maxwell: A lot better. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: What did President Eisenhower do that helped? 

Jones: Yeah, well, he started that, over at, I believe, in <Little Rock Arkansas>, President Eisenhower did. And they the segregation, Abraham Lincoln, left a bill, they had a bill of rights. 'Cause I was in <Mississippi> when they threw that old bill out, down there in the airplane, the Bill of Rights. And I guess he.... I don't know what if it hadn't been for Abraham Lincoln, I guess we'd have still been under slavery. 

Maxwell: Wow, surely it would have changed. 

Jones: I know he was against the white race, too, Abraham Lincoln. Well, he was a pilgrim anyway, Abraham Lincoln was. 

Maxwell: How do you mean he was a pilgrim? 

Jones: Well, that's what the history's sayin'. The white folk were pushin' the pilgrims out to the <United States>. And I don't know what went with the pilgrims. Abraham Lincoln's folks was livin' in <Missouri>, right off of that Sabine River. I know where Sabine is. Then Lincoln and them moved on up in <Ohio>. I believe that's where he took his high schoolin' at, in <Ohio>. And he said that he would goin’ to be power[ful] for his time. Well, I know he took his lawyer practice in <Springfield Illinois>. That's where, you see, he took his lawyer practicin'. Then the governor hired him for a state legislator. And then after then, he run for president, but he was a Republican president, Lincoln was. And then he began to clean the South up. He was began to clean the South up, but.... Well, God had that fixed, you know. He said the top rail would be on the bottom, and the bottom rail would be on top. So God just had that fixed up. So it just used to be bad back there, lady, I'm tellin' you now. We have overcome it. We didn't even have -we used kerosene for lamps; outdoor restrooms. We didn't even know what a bathtub, a shower, was. We had to use a number three tub. 

Maxwell: Here in <Flagstaff>? 

Jones: Well, yeah, back then, when I first come here, there was some outdoor restrooms and stuff. But then the city and the government went to straightenin' that up. 

Maxwell: Oh, it did? Got rid of the outdoor bathrooms? 

Jones: Yeah. No more outdoor bathrooms just sittin' there. Government thing got behind that. 

Maxwell: How about in <Williams>, did you have outdoor bathrooms there? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did you have running water? 

Jones: Well, some places you did, yeah. We had runnin' water, but no gas heat, and stuff like that. And they were havin' outdoor restrooms and stuff right here in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: How about in the house you and your sister and brother-in-law lived in? 

Jones: Well, we didn't have no bathroom -it was on the outside. 

Maxwell: How about water? 

Jones: Well, we had water. 

Maxwell: Was it well water, or what? 

Jones: No, it was from the city. 

Maxwell: Oh, the city had water? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. 

Jones: Well, biggest portion of the house had water in 'em, but no bathrooms and stuff like that. 

Maxwell: All in <Williams> it was mostly outhouses? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: How did you bathe? Where'd you take a bath? 

Jones: Well, you had a number three washtub and you heat your water on the stove and pour it in that tub, see. And then no sewage. When you're done, just throw the water out the back door. 

Maxwell: Put it on the garden? 

Jones: Yeah, just throw it out, dump it in the back. That's the way it was. 

Maxwell: Did you have a vegetable garden there? 

Jones: No, wasn't very many peoples had gardens then. 

Maxwell: Oh, how come? 

Jones: I don't know. 

Maxwell: I would have thought they'd have vegetable gardens. 

Jones: No, not very many people had 'em then. I don't know why they didn't. 

Maxwell: Any kind of berries or anything like that? 

Jones: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: How about chickens? Did you have chickens? 

Jones: No. 

Maxwell: Nothing like that? 

Jones: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Just a house. 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: How about cooking? What'd you cook on in that house? 

Jones: A wood stove. Did y'all ever see one of them? 

Maxwell: Oh, I've cooked with andgt;em. 

Jones: You're too young for that! 

Maxwell: It was my girlfriend's cabin. It was off in the mountains. 

Jones: This guy over here's got a big one out there. 

Maxwell: It's an art. You have to know what kind of wood to put in to get it to hold the heat and get the heat up. 

Jones: Mama and them used to use pine wood, and we used it here too. 

Maxwell: Pardon? 

Jones: Pine. Pine tree, cut it down and split it up. We used to use that here and in the South. And that'd make a stove hot, too. I didn't think y'all would know what a -too young to know what stuff like that was. 

Maxwell: When I was a kid, I'd visit my girlfriend's house and her mom cooked on a wood stove. 

Jones: And we didn't know what a 'frigerator was. 

Maxwell: What'd you do for keep things cold.... 

Jones: Well, it wasn't very much that people bought, they raised, like the swines and vegetables and stuff. They had gardens, you know. And what they did have, they would take, we had somethin’, like a spring. Like the milk and stuff, they'd take that, sit it in that water. 

Maxwell: In the spring? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: And then they had an old icebox. You could buy a hundred pounds of ice and put it up in that box, a wooden box, and set your stuff on there, too. 

Maxwell: Where'd they get the ice in the summer? 

Jones: Well, they made it at them ice factories back in the South. 

Maxwell: Oh, they did? 

Jones: Yeah, right. They had ice factories back in the South. 

Maxwell: How about in <Williams>, did you use an icebox in <Williams>? 

Jones: Well, let's see, not very much 'cause they had lights somehow, and them old 'frigerators was comin' out then. 

Maxwell: Oh, so you had 'frigerators when you got to <Williams>? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: But in the South you had an icebox? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Or a spring box. 

Jones: Yeah, just an old icebox. We didn't know what -like I tell my boy, he was gettin' ready to move -well, he wasted it on.... I paid two hundred dollars for a mattress for his bed, and he waste somethin' on it, and he didn't want to take it to <Yuma>. And I told him, "You oughta been comin' up when I was comin' up. It wasn't no mattress like y'all sleepin' on now." You either had to use cotton or feathers or shucks of hay. I'm tellin' you the truth. Ya’ll might look up and says, "The old man's crazy!" But I'm tellin' the truth. 

Maxwell: You made shucks of hay or feathers or cotton, and you made your own mattress? 

Jones: Yeah, that's what you had to make your mattress and stuff out of. Now, y'all think I'm kiddin'? Ask some old Black person, or some white people knew it 'cause some of them went up gettin' some of that stuff, too. Yes they did. Now, we sure did, now I'm tellin' ya'. My boy, he... We were lucky to get one pair of shoes a year, and he got shoes in there and then throw andgt;em away. I told him he shoulda been comin’ on when I was comin’ on. Lucky to get one pair of shoes a year. 

Maxwell: That's tough when your feet are growing! 

Jones: Yeah. I'm tellin' ya', we've had it. And they would kill the swine, and would fill the meat full of salt. Fill it full of salt, and then I don't know how many days they would let it stay there. And then they would take it up and wash it good -boil the water and wash all the salt out of it, and then hang it up and build the smoke under it. That's the way they kept it. 

Maxwell: (to camera operator) Did you know that? 

Kliewer: That's the smokehouse, right? 

Maxwell: Yeah, but you don't cook it, you smoke it. 

Jones: You build smoke under it, and that smoke would turn the meat brown-lookin'. (laughs) 

Kliewer: I've heard of those, I just didn't know how they worked. 

Jones: Yeah, that's the way they used to do it. You see, y'all, like I tell you and my boy and them, y'all come up the modern way, easy way. I come up the hard way. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that's a big difference. 

Jones: Yeah, I come up the hard way. 

Maxwell: You didn't raise any hogs or anything in <Williams>? 

Jones: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Jones: Well, the city wouldn't allow that then. In late years, they wouldn't allow you to do stuff like that. But we lived through it. Yeah, we lived through it. I noticed my boy's got some back there, some electric clippers. Back when I was comin' on, they had to work ‘em by hand. Did you see any of them clippers? Like what you cut hair with you work ‘em by hand. Debbie--I got a pair over there by Debbie’s. Debbie borrowed 'em and never did bring 'em back -them old clippers what you work by hand. 

Maxwell: That's a different time. 

Jones: Time sure has come a long way. Y'all come up the easy way. 

Maxwell: That's for sure. 

Jones: But takin' Debbie did, too. But me and Debbie's mama and her aunt and them, we come up the hard way. 

Maxwell: Sounds like when you went from <Mississippi> to <Williams>, you traveled in time andgt;cause you went from the spring house and the icebox to a 'frigerator, just by moving to another state. 

Jones: Yeah. Well, we couldn't do no better then, in the state of <Mississippi>. <Mississippi> is a poor-payin' state. Always was. But after this here integration and stuff got all settled, the government took over the biggest portion of that, and a lot of them people livin' good back there now. They got their own loggin' equipments and all stuff like that, since the government took it over. I don't know what went with all the white folks back there andgt;cause a lot of them towns, I go in them towns, I don't see too many white people there. I don’t know what it went to. 

Maxwell: And there used to be lots of white people in those towns? 

Jones: Yeah, in them towns. The last trip I was back there, I knowed where this place was. I went to get some tapes, and a young white lady was in there. I asked her where do you buy the tapes at? I told her the last time I was here, they were sellin' tapes in this place. So she said around the square. The courthouse sittin' right in the middle of the town. She was talkin' on the telephone when I left outta there. And I went over there and me and this man, medium--stood about that tall, and the sheriff come in. I walked on over there, lookin' for some tapes. After he come in there, I heard him ask this old man what was I doin' in there. He said, "He's all right, he's buyin' tapes." See, it was bad. 

Maxwell: Wow, that's even now? That was fairly recently? 

Jones: Well, it's some years back, but it's all right now. It’s all right back there now. 

Maxwell: But still.... 

Jones: Yeah, it's all right back there now. It was bad, lady, I'm tellin' ya'. I couldn't live under that pressure no more, scared all the time. I couldn't do it. I used to tell like my boy and them, see, they don't know nothin' about stuff like that. 

Maxwell: Right. (pause) I've heard some pretty bad stories about white men abusing Black women and females. 

Jones: Well, yeah, that happened all the time back there. Yeah, that happens all the time back there, back in them years. 

Maxwell: Well, I'm glad things have changed. 

Jones: Yeah. Well, I didn't have to worry about it. I wasn’t down there among 'em. I didn't have to worry about it. But peoples say what they want to, but there’s some good white people, you better know it, good white people. I've got more come down for big favors and help. I've got more help from the white folks than I have from my own color. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Jones: Right. 

Maxwell: You mean like after your wife died? 

Jones: Yeah, and before then, too. 

Maxwell: With the jobs? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Other help? 

Jones: Yeah, need money or somethin', or somethin' like maybe $1,000 or $1,500, I'd go to white folks and get it. They let me have it 'cause I couldn't borrow that from no colored person. So I says, there's some good white people. 

Maxwell: Yeah, good of any color. 

Jones: Yeah, I'm tellin' ya'. I know, I've been around among 'em. 

Maxwell: That's nice. 

Jones: And then sometime I go over there and the biggest portion down there is white folks, this here Baptist church down here on West Street. I go down there some Sundays. There's some good white people. 

Maxwell: So the church you're a minister in is the one in <Williams>? 

Jones: Unt-uh. No, there's a Mexican minister down there. 

Maxwell: Where do you go now? 

Jones: <Williams>. 

Maxwell: It is in <Williams>? 

Jones: Yeah, we got a Baptist church in <Williams>. I go over there to <Williams>. 

Maxwell: That's where you go? 

Jones: Yeah, that's my home church. 

[END TAPE 2, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Maxwell: So you stayed with that church even though you moved into <Flagstaff>? 

Jones: Uh-huh. Just thirty-three miles. That ain't.... You know, don't take no time to drive down there. 

Maxwell: How'd you come to move back to <Flagstaff>? 

Jones: Well, I got tired of drivin' back and forth. I said, "Well, I'll just move on up to <Flagstaff>. I ain't got nowhere else nohow -hunt down another job." I just said I was gonna stay there 'til I died, so I lived out of it. So I just moved into <Flagstaff>, but I wished I'd stayed in <Williams>. 

Maxwell: Why is that? 

Jones: Just do. Of course I've got good neighbors. There's a white guy live there, and a Mexican live there. And a white guy across the street. All of them are my friends. 

Maxwell: You've got friends here? 

Jones: Oh, yeah, me and them are good friends. Steve and Richard. Well, me and Debbie are the only one colored live right in here. I guess some more people live right there, they ain't been long moved over there. But I don't feel bad here at all. Good friends. 

Maxwell: But you wish you lived in <Williams> still? 

Jones: Yes, where my sister and them is, see. You know around where your folks is, you feel more comfortable. But I don't have no trouble. And since my boy's gone, there ain't nobody here but me. 

Maxwell: How long did you live in <Williams>? 

Jones: About seventeen years. 

Maxwell: You and your wife moved here, then? 

Jones: Yeah. I just only been in Flag ten, eleven years. 

Maxwell: That was when you were working for Southwestern? 

Jones: Yeah. Yeah, I was trainin' for 'em. 

Maxwell: Was there a sense of community when you were here, when you first came here? Was there a sense of there being a Black community? 

Jones: Black community? (

Maxwell: Uh-huh.) Well, they say it was, but more or less all the Black people was over there on the south side. Out here you know, you couldn't stay nowheres out in here, then. 

Maxwell: Right? 

Jones: No. 

Maxwell: How come you couldn't stay out here? 

Jones: Outside of here, you couldn't stay nowhere else, but more or less all the Black people were on the south side. 

Maxwell: How come you couldn't stay somewhere else? How did you know that you couldn't stay somewhere else? 

Jones: Well, I guess you could, if you had the money to rent it, you know. Now, that's me sayin' that. I guess the reason more or less was over there on that south side, it was just cheap rent and then stuff like that is me sayin' that. 

Maxwell: So you don't think people would have stopped you from living somewhere else? 

Jones: I wouldn't think so. 

Maxwell: It was just money? 

Jones: Money. Some people rented from a lot of Mexicans and stuff like that, back over there on that south side. Yeah. 

Maxwell: So was there a sense of community there? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Well, tell me about that. 

Jones: Well, you know, you have to have money to go into these higher uppidy places and stuff. If you ain't got the money and stuff, you can't get in there. 

Maxwell: What made it feel like a community on the south side? 

Jones: Well, just 'cause all the colored people was over there. 

Maxwell: 'Cause they lived next to each other? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Just by living near each other? 

Jones: Yeah, all up and down San Francisco Street and over on O'Leary. And then late years they built the Brannen Homes, and it's lots of white people stayed and lived back over there -I know it is. 

Maxwell: Yeah, it's kinda mixed. 

Jones: Yeah, over in the Brannen Homes. But late years, they built that there. 

Maxwell: Did people help each other, or did they know each other, talk about each other and stuff? 

Jones: Oh, yeah, they used to go do that anywhere. Yeah. 

Maxwell: How did they help each other out? 

Jones: Well, that's what I said. You could get more help around <Williams> than you can <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: How is that? 

Jones: I guess just 'cause of <Williams> is a small place and everybody know each other. I had some trouble with my vehicle, so I went down here and I think the guy wanted five hundred dollars. I got on the phone and called <Williams>-- Jimmy Walker. He used to work for me, and he told me to bring it down there and he'd fix it for $200. But these <Flagstaff> people, mechanics, garage, just a rip-off. 

Maxwell: That's an amazing difference. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did people help each other raise their kids and stuff? Did they help each other with food? Were there ways that people helped each other along, that you know of? 

Jones: Well, they never helped me. I don't think.... Like I say, it's more people more courteous about that out there around <Williams>, than there is in <Flagstaff>. Yeah. But then some people, they do all right when they.... Debbie's brother, he got drowneded out here, and a lot of white folks and Black, Mexicans, they done filled that school full of food and stuff. 

Maxwell: Yeah. Yeah, it was. 

Jones: You was up there? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah, I know that family well. 

Jones: Was you up there that day? Well, I got up and talked up there, that day. 

Maxwell: Did you? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: A lot of people talked. 

Jones: Yeah, I got up there. 

Maxwell: Okay, you said he was like a son to you. 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: That was you. Okay. Yeah, after his dad died. 

Jones: Yeah. Yeah, I got up there and talked that day. 

Maxwell: That's right. 

Jones: He was a good fellah. I don't know, I was out there fixin' to get in that tree to cut it down, about a week before he got drowned, and then he went over there to his sister's and come along out there, and told me to get out of that tree, I was too old to be up in there, let it stay there until he would be back in a couple of three weeks and cut it. So he got drowneded before he come back. And so I ain't gonna get up in there now, out there in that tree. 

Maxwell: I bet you could get his brother James to cut it down for you. 

Jones: Might do it, you know, me and Debbie's folks. 

Maxwell: It sounds like people helped each other in <Williams> by giving honest prices and doing work for each other. 

Jones: Yeah. And money, if you need some money, people takes up money and get it to you, if they knows itBif they know you well, you know. They ain't gonna take it up to no drunks and for drugs and all that stuff, they won't do it. Just like any sickness or death or somethin', they'll take and give you money. 

Maxwell: That's good. So you don't have to cook all the dinners and stuff. 

Jones: No, unt-uh. 

Maxwell: They'll just give it to you. 

Jones: There'll be food comin' from everywhere. 

Maxwell: That's nice. So it sounds like more of a sense of community in <Williams> than here. 

Jones: Yeah, it's more better, the people are more courteous. 

Maxwell: When you were just the third colored family in <Williams>, did people accept you there? Did the white people give you a hard time? 

Jones: No. No way. Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Good. 

Jones: No way. 

Maxwell: Or the Mexican people? 

Jones: No way. White friends and stuff like that. A bunch of white guys, we would round up on a Saturday night and play guitars and stuff, on Saturday night. They didn't give us no hard time we felt good. 

Maxwell: So without that sheriff, could you go in the different stores and restaurants and things? 

Jones: We'd go in stores and stuff, but just the cafes and stuff. 

Maxwell: You didn't go in the cafes? 

Jones: Unt-uh. Well, you could down there in <Williams>, some of 'em, yeah. 

Maxwell: Some, but not all? 

Jones: Uh-huh, some, but not all. So we didn't have no trouble with that around -it was just up here in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: So it was really 'cause of that one sheriff then? 

Jones: Yeah. Yeah, he did, Peery Francis, yeah. But he had Black people workin' for him. 

Maxwell: Huh. How'd he treat them? 

Jones: I guess all right. They worshipped him. Yeah, they worshipped. Of course I didn't never have no trouble with him, but other people did. But like I say, after we got Cecil, I get 'em mixed up, 'cause Joe Richardson and Cecil Richardson. Cecil Richardson come in there, he hired some deputies and he just commenced to brought the thing onto life. 

Maxwell: And did he let everybody into all the cafes? 

Jones: Yeah. And them people went to cooperate and look like more together. And then Joe, he come in there, and then he's all right, Joe Richardson. 

Maxwell: Is he Cecil's son? Is he related to Cecil? 

Jones: I don't think so. I get's 'em mixed up ‘cause Cecil Richardson and Joe Richardson. He wasn't a bad chief of police, either, Bill Epperson. But I think he's dead now. That was years and years ago when I first come in the state, Bill Epperson was the chief of police. He wasn't too bad. 

Maxwell: How did you get around when you worked in <Williams>? Did you have a truck or a car or something? 

Jones: Yeah, a car. 

Maxwell: Did most of the Black folks have cars or trucks or something? 

Jones: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: So you could go somewhere if you wanted to? 

Jones: Yeah. 

Maxwell: I can't think what else I should ask you. What do you think? 

Jones: Well, that's just about it, I guess. I get to sittin' around, I think about some more stuff happened back in the South. There's so much gone on, I been gone now so long, I done forgot about what's happened back there. 

Maxwell: Okay, how about if we come back and talk to you another time then? 

Jones: Yeah, you can come back. 

Maxwell: Okay. Thank you so much. 

Jones: I'll think about what else happened back there. I done forgot about a lot of stuff that happened back there. 

Maxwell: Sounds like a lot of it's good to forget, too. 

Jones: Well, if you ain't got to live under it, it's all right, if you ain't got to live under it. See, my boy, he ain't got to live under no stuff like that. My kids ain't. 

Maxwell: How do you feel about that? 

Jones: Well, he laughs about it. 

Maxwell: How about you? 

Jones: Well, I don't feel bad about it now -it's gone. 

Maxwell: How do you feel about him not having lived through it? 

Jones: Well, I don't feel that bad about it. 

Maxwell: You don’t feel like he missed out on any lessons or anything. 

Jones: I just tells him, you know -talked to him about how times was. 

Maxwell: Well, thank you very much. 



[The rest of the video footage includes Mr. Jones in his yard showing the instruments he would work on in the sawmill. He explains how they operated and how he would fix them.]

