Paul Wilson (inaudible), Rose Wilson, Martin Tsinnie, Bessie Shorty, Mary Saganito

Interviewed by Frank Jensen and Unidentified Interviewer

Interviews conducted in Navajo and English

1974

<Tuba City Arizona>

Translated and transcribed by Bahe Katenay





ROSE WILSON INTERVIEW



FRANK JENSEN: Thank you very much, Paul Wilson. That is what my efforts are for and that is what I’m searching for. In this way, I wish to commend this man and you have placed more on top of it, beautifully. This is I, the one doing the interview [in English]. You see, this man lives out here and he has it nice. His home is very warm and cozy, and no one is cold. In regards to education [American schools], he emphatically immerses his children into the schools. "All of you need to attend school accordingly," is what has been stated to you. He regards the school system with much appreciation as he has just told you.  

Also, there are our ways of designing, the ways of expressing our thoughts, standing up looms for weaving blankets, and practices of working on stones. These are practices which may be forgotten were his concerns, too. That is very true and how could we allow ourselves to forget those practices. In the same matter as before, we who are Dineh need to continue to keep the re-learning and teachings of those practices, and do that when our children return home. "In this way it must all be carried forth? is what he stated. So it shall be and that is how he had stated, and I shall relay it in that same matter for you. This is I making the interview -- Frank Jensen, from <Tuba City> [in English].  

FRANK JENSEN: This here is the spouse of Mr. Paul Wilson, her name is Rose Wilson, and I believe she will also place more on top of it, I believe, and it will be permitted. So, let us attend and proceed now, Rose.  

ROSE WILSON: It was long ago when my late grandmother use to instruct...  [inaudible for a moment] 

FRANK JENSEN: [In the background] Properly scoot yourself closer to it! 

ROSE WILSON: "Card the wool,? she would say to me with much demand as I would do the carding for her. I would complete that for her. Then she’d say, "Now, grind these.? I would eventually grind all of it up.  

"The grinding of these, you did not do properly!? she would then tell me. So then I would be grinding it again. I would occasionally look at her, and she would return with a brief stare. Once I have reground them I would ask, "What about now?? She would answer, "Yes!?  

"Now, put some water on the fire,? she would say. "Put the water in the washing pan to boil, and put some juniper-ash in as well,? she would demand of me. I would again look upon her and she would only return that glaring stare as she might yell something else, too. Sometimes she would hit my hands with a small stick.  

I get the boiled juniper-ash and pick up the grinding-stone brush and try to use it. I would then be told, "Mix it well, use much strength!? I would try my very best according to what might be permissible. I was still small and I was not even eight years old, yet! I clearly remember all that and those memories make me think about it all, sometime. So, then I would surely do the mix and she would do the straining-mix. She would place the strained mix down and I place my mixing before her, too. Just then my late grandfather would bring home the herds, and he would partake of the meal. (endnote #1)

 "It will be okay for you now to set up those again!" I would be told soon after as I noticed the metate there. I would eventually find myself grinding again. Nowadays, children do not have to do those things and that is how I perceive their environment. "How will they be able to exist,? I wonder about this occasionally and even though, there is all this talk about )l7t?1h?,(endnote #2) I do not see any [existence].  

What will it be when only I and the rest who will soon be gone due to end-of-longevity and thereafter, "Will you all not exist?!" This is what we try to ask repeatedly and I, too, tell them that sometime. Maybe they do not hear me. So, I say this to them and then they [assumed "them and they? refer to her own children] take off again. They go about and do as they please, and that is not too acceptable. In absolute reality, I do not like it at all. They are occasionally absent and it becomes evening time when they have not returned, yet. I wonder "where have they been?" I asked myself that. After my worrying, they would soon all enter. "Shma", [My Mother or Mom] do not say those things," they would tell me and everyone is present and happy, again.  

The following day they leave off as I try to say, "Do not be running off to nowhere but instead attend properly at school. Myself, I do not attend classes so it is like being deaf. And as for you, your ears are being utilized for receiving instructions!" And that is how I think about it. Thus, all of that makes me happy, too. "Even though I dwell in a run-down place, I still appreciate the education that you are provided." I expressed these when I address them as, "my children,? and the children will go off. However, even though I appreciate education for them, it will have to be up to them.  

It shall not always be upon me alone to make the efforts for them. They have independence from here on forth they will have to acquire employment, acquire a home, all its interior furnishings, and an automobile. Then, perhaps when I’m very old, I will be very satisfied and appreciable. So, it is like that... I am not so knowledgeable about how my story should be, ["story? refers to the interview answers] like I do not comprehend it completely. That should be it.  

FRANK JENSEN: Thank you very much, Rose Wilson. That was beautiful as you stated it, and that is the purpose, too. It is I who is making the interview, Frank Jensen. I am at Paul and Rose’s home. She has placed them on the tape recorder perfectly, and I will accurately relay what has been recorded for them. There were other comments made, here also, and they blame the "bujahver" [bus driver] the foremost, (endnote #3) and I have made a note about that. So, when all this is laid out before you, it would be expected that it be viewed with serious considerations. The words they made should direct you accordingly as to how to act upon them. Okay, this is Frank Jensen doing the interview. Thank You. 







MARTIN TSINNIE INTERVIEW



INTERVIEWER: Now, I have arrived at Martin Tsinnie’s place, and they were both home. So, that is where I’m at which is east of <Tuba City> where they reside. From them, you will hear what they wish to say and I will not direct them as to what they should say. Okay, whenever you wish, Martin Tsinnie.  

MARTIN TSINNIE: Thank you very much (endnote #4) that you come for a visit which pleases me. The purpose of your visit has brought you here, again, and as you had made this appointment two days ago. And for the benefit of this interview, you all shall hear some words I wish to share. Despite my difficulty with the Dineh language, I will add a few bits to this information being collected. My individuality is known to many of you who live amongst myself and here, in T?0h]1]5?s?d7z7?z7? [Streams of Water Throughout or <Tuba City>].  

Again, my name is, Martin Tsinnie, of the  [The Intertwined Clan Peoples] Clan, and my paternal clan are [Deer Water Peoples] and who are also of the T0hd77?ch?iinii [Bitter Water Peoples] since they share close kinship. My children are [Salt Peoples]. (endnote #5) I have eight children and with my grandchildren and in-law, there are eleven of us currently living here. That will be the size of my introduction. 

Now, about the question of education, "How shall the opportunity be made in order for our children to attend school properly?? Those of us who have children now need to plan in a good way and discuss thoroughly these matters, and in doing this as bearers of these children, our children may adhere to this. It may be that they will learn much of [English or "white peoples? language], and it will be a success when they have attended the schools. The future will require the usage of that language and education would be beneficial to them. We, who are non-English speakers, are more numerous, too, and have many obstacles that we face. You see, we will ask for assistance unexpectedly like, "Can you translate for me, here?" This type of situation may happen someday, and then we will be dependent on our own children as translators and that school was worthwhile.                       

And to a certain extent, our population is huge and we realize that it is better to think about it clearly. There has to be advance processing of thought made for them and eventually, your children will be able to absorb it. You see? Your patience [h0zd0?sin g0h?] should be profound 

and your communication with them needs to be efficient. (endnote #6) Say to them, "Become trained, my child." But that is not an embarrassment to address them as such. "Go learn English and do not try to pull yourself away from school!" In this matter, it needs to be explained to them, and adequately manage their clothing and footwear. Then perhaps, they will appreciate those things as they succeed in their learning. Again, use well-made plans for them like prepare foods for them and they should have gratitude for that. Thus, they would have nicely learned, and that should be the rightful choice.(endnote #7) 

It is wonderful to have such a fine looking building that holds much English learning and academic training, and it would be an opportunity for our children to enter that. Many opportunities lie within and where they will acquire skills. They will eventually be independent to support themselves. You see, I do have knowledge of certain individuals who have succeeded and acquired much schooling, and they have now become either managers or administrators. The understanding of such knowledge about success and based on that, there will be a time when our children will have the English language and that will be most positive.  

So, you can notice all the various kinds of skills that the white people have and it would be the best strategy for learning. A skill may pertain to automobile repair or a vocational school just for that, and then just out of that the white people can present many more aspects of training. Contrary to that, the lifestyles we have are limited and that is true. The white society’s lifestyle is much broader and of many different aspects. It has been stated to us before that, "We are some distances behind." And that is a true statement. 

[Brief off-microphone discussion.] 

There is this home [how1]?] here that is situated perfectly. (endnote #8) All its surrounding is good and the activities within it maybe unknown as no one probably comes out of it, too. However, the activities are probably happening within... As I think about it, I like to build a good home, a home big enough and a strong built place. One may decide to do that and that should not be difficult if it was thought through. There are the problems of spending monies on windows, lumber and all other materials required to build. Once built, it is for yourself as well as your children and from within that, your straight minded thoughts can bring the good life to your children. You may leave them for a few days and without any guilt, you can return and re-enter. This is how I think about it, and this home will exist into some distance time.  

Another thing is when you decide to bring larger belongings in which is not good for a home it becomes difficult. Like a platform for laying down on or bed] and a platform for eating on [ or table], and any other good things you wish for will not be good for the how1]?. It makes the space difficult. Like when you have relatives come to visit, it becomes crowded and it feels like imposing on each other. These are just thoughts and that is mainly what we have- just thoughts.  

Occasionally, you can notice the children using the air-that-tells [ or radio] and another has visual-motion [ or television images]. From those, there can be some learning and it seems like they look at that each evening.  

[Another brief silence and it is assumed, now, that the narrator is looking at pictures, first of a hogan and now two individuals.] 

Here now are two men standing and one seems to represent an educated person as opposed to the other who has his hair tied signifying the old ways. It looks as if they just met each other, or there is some inquiry going on. This one with the partially shaved hair looks like he was educated and his clothes are nice and well-groomed. The other one is of the old ways, you see, which we all know about. The one with the haircut probably has much knowledge of the English language and perhaps they are either complimenting each other or perhaps not. But in just thinking about it, he probably has a very nice job and maybe he is a teacher, and that is my thought as I look at this. I am referring to the one with the haircut.  

As for the other, it appears as if --it appears as if --if --if... [seemed lost for words] --did not --did not --did not... This individual who has the blanket over his shoulder and as I think about him, he lacks much knowledge and if ever he leaves our lands for the outside, there will be tremendous amount of issues and problems. We will be "unable to hear? [cannot understand English]. We would be "cornered.? It would seem that way if we encountered a white person that spoke English to us. Something will be said to us but we will not hear it and it would be like being in the dark, and he will be limited I feel as I look upon him. For the other, his reply would be of two languages his own and he "hears? English also. He may begin to seek a job and without difficulty he will get a job. He will journey with goodness and that is how I perceive him. We who have never "counted? [schooled] will confront all that is hard. We would be on some journey and there is a white person, here..., and even if we "can hear? it [understand English] may still be difficult.  

So, those of us who have children and when our children become school-age, we should not try to pull them away from that [education]. Appropriately discuss with them about it and be polite in explaining, and ultimately, it would be better that they were educated. It may be for the better in the long run even though we do not know what the future holds or what lies before us. Nowadays, there is no lack of goods and there is plenty out there. Schools have been provided throughout our communities. I attended school in the earlier times,  [the year said in English and followed by "back then? in Dineh], and when it seemed very simple but with hardship. Schools were far away and one had to travel far to get there and occasionally, it required additional foot-travel to complete your arrivals. Right now, schools are available in our midst and grades of different levels are part of these new establishments. There are also the "storage for goods? [ or a market place] where there is clothing that our children can clothe themselves with and these are centrally, located amongst us. That does not require  [go after with refined searches] it seems like. These are what are noticed if you think about it.  

When I went to school, everything that was needed was unavailable. Also, you would start out on a horse from here or a  [the wooden vehicle or wagon] to make the travels to school. This here now, there are many and different types of automobiles that are utilized for travel. For the automobiles, distances are not far for them. A "bus? [in English] is available and up to their homes, they are delivered back to the front yard. It is all nice for us.  

[A brief pause or break.] 

So then by using strong-efforts, our children need to be spoken to in a neat way and they will hear you. Do not use the harsh way of approach but instead it has to have kind and pleasing approaches. In that way, they will listen to you. I am like that. I do not yell at my children or speak to them in a harsh tone in the mornings. Even though, they behave wrongly there has to be the element of politeness and respect throughout and in that way, it is good. Things that are unnecessary should not be built on to your approach but rather use kindness. That really makes children listen while they are still delicate. All of you who have given birth, you mothers and you fathers, you might try to say something to your children but it might not come out clear. Some of us, we drink in front of our children, you see? Those things that are illusions/unreal like the playing cards, things of crazy lifestyles. I understand many things. We may be doing such things before them and they will end up acting-it-out similarly. Those behaviors should not take place before them and our children will be better trained.  

Then all of you should know how to behave and set the rightful thoughts ahead of them and with your strong thinking, your children will hear and receive the English language. The spoken English language is definitely hard and as for myself, I was not adequately educated. That was limited and perhaps, I went up to about nine [either ninth grade or nine years of schooling] and now I am at an older age. About my role, I feel that I have done well and moreover, I have just retraced myself. The truth is that who will completely travel the straight road and that is why I do not accuse or degrade others. I have done things of those crazy lifestyles and that does not provide a life. You may rediscover yourself and say, "this is not good for me.? You can get rid of those and from there forth, you come out without a flaw. A better path is where you will stand and that is the best situation which will help in deciding correctly for your children. Then they follow you as you think of education for them and what else could there be? They will be old enough to acquire skills and employment. Their job title that will help them with economic subsistence and further on, they will have their children. There is distance of time [d1sh88]5?z11 g0h?] within which they make use of themselves [11d77?d11d44s7d88], and you will have expectation for them in that time. (endnote #9) 

That is what has been referred to as, "According to the Lineage of Life? [B44 Iin11 }7t?ii? d0h?], by the women and men folk. They were wiser and were truthful in their statements. With a real attention, one can receive the quality of making decisions. It will be hard but despite that, keep trying to seize with all ten, to scratch at it with all ten and you will grasp it [opportunity or dreams], and it will become loose. Again, use proper planning but do not mix-in things that are fake or unreal. Then decide to go towards the good direction and it will be the fitting-one, and that will keep a good history of the job role. I have done that since I worked for the W1shi]?d-] [the U.S. government] for twenty-three years now, and that is going well and I am still working. At first, it was not easy but it eventually got better and at times, I had to travel a distance to boundaries within where white societies live. I have worked among the white people and that is part of my job history. Okay, Kw1?11h? s7n77?? [My audience] (endnote #10) 

[Short pause.] 

This should be the size of it, Sh?d7n6?4h. [My Peoples] (endnote #11) And again, it was a privilege for this gentleman to pay me a visit. Despite having a little speech impairment, I hope that this was good and "Why should one resist to a request? He/she might learn something,? as the saying goes. One has to make the attempts and thus, words to be stated will form themselves. I will conclude at this moment. Thank you for allowing me to speak to you and thank you, my uncle/nephew.  

FRANK JENSEN: Thank You. !1hxe?eh l2] [Thank you certainly]. This is I making the interview, Frank Jensen. I am at Martin Tsinnie’s home. He did the interview well and has also nicely filled out the questionnaire. I will also tell about it there in the same way. You will be informed later, and you shall be according to the gentleman’s words and that you will act accordingly as well. The reason for that is because the gentleman’s words are to make it all valuable. Also, it was for that purpose that you have assigned me. It shall be that way, okay, and until next time. It is I, Frank Jensen, speaking.  

 

 

BESSIE SHORTY INTERVIEW



FRANK JENSEN: Now here is the interview. This is I speaking, again, and I have arrived at Bessie Shorty’s home. I am sitting here and ready to put some on the tape recorder [in English] for her. With that, she will speak to you now, and we will be witness to how she will present it. That we will do as said. Okay, here she will speak. Proceed, Bessie Shorty.   

BESSIE SHORTY: I will briefly speak about things in as much that I know about. It is about long ago, "a very long ago" as such stated, "at the Place of Emergence the turkey first came up? which a man might say as he tells. Such is also mentioned to us about The Revitalizing of Life [Iin33?N11hiil7?n3?] and these were included in the stories. It is similar to that about this, here, the giving of instructions to children while they are still little. As it is told to them directly, they understand it --how it was then. "About the journeys of long ago, what did the ancestral grandfather and grandmothers say or what were their words?? children might ask you. You may tell them about those stories from past times and thus, the ancestor men folk [H11st?wii] really did share great stories. Back then, there was much rain, crops were bountiful, plenty of corn, and variety of ripened foods and this, I came to realize back then.  

So, now those particular ways seemed to be left behind. Because those ways are being abandoned, the children are a lot more disorderly. They mainly attend to things like dances and 

they do not remain at home. (endnote #12) These are how it is perceived and that is the perception elsewhere as well. It might be announced that a boy who is still very young has been jailed. However, if things are explained to them, they can act accordingly like that certain ways are not acceptable: "These shall not be the way but what your mother tells you, it shall be.? They will be aware of that. What children are is that they can have extreme perceptions. They will set their thoughts to something which they will want to learn. With this education, they must be measured up to it and be guided along the way, and all this should be maintained. They must learn from the time they are little about their maternal clan, paternal clan and which other clans are his/her relations. Today, many children do not know about their clan relations. To have some reassurance, they must know this and it is all for the better.  

A girl will need to, perhaps, see what a weaving loom [d1iis7?gl-,,h] is and be aware about its purpose. Creation of designs needs to be explained along with how to match it so that the yarn can be put through. This is how they should be instructed at home and this way they do not wander off to nowhere. She might spend one night at another’s home and then that is all she will want, or that she will join up with others and this may become her only desire. Contrary to that, they need to return home accordingly on the bus and enter their home where there are meals ready for them. These they will not only appreciate but it will be their expectation. This includes keeping their clothes washed, talk to them with kindness, embracing them, plead with them, and they will become aware of what being disorderly is. In this manner, one’s child will not be wandering about. Having a fixed loom at home and you sit before the loom, and that will attract their interest. They will observe what next step of weaving will be performed. Make a loom for them on weekends and instruct them about it. Then they will be aware of those practices.  

Also, here, we have a nice looking school which has a flag outside, and I look at it as a nice setting. Flags do create a sense of feeling like when you see banners waving in the breezes. The picture of the nice facility tells me that from within that, our children will acquire knowledge and you have hope that they will complete the education. That hope is excitement, too. Sometime you think about what knowledge or what skills they may learn, as you sit at home? At home, you prepare meals and have it ready for them as soon as they return. A good meal makes them appreciative, they help wash the dishes, sweep the floor, and then do a little bit of recreation outside.   

Then, there is a picture of a h0?hw1] [modern hogan with framed-roof], a home which might be viewed by the white people as an awful looking home. Or that they might see it as a nice looking place. The home has a nice outside surrounding and the activities within it are the acquirements of knowledge. There may be a man or a woman who will be instructing their children. Inside that place could be a fixed loom where the children are learning about working on the loom. They 

could be learning about spinning yarn or even learn about preparing meals. That is why this home is situated perfectly and from within, "the flames of their fires glow.? (endnote #13) From inside that home, they take with them the good ways of thinking as they leave for school. Those are the purposes for which these homes serve.  

Also, there are these boys that have large hair and I do not know the reasons for that. Maybe it is thought that "it brings rain? or some other purposes for having long hair. As I would look at that, it seems to be a cheap style because you might mistakenly think he is a girl. Why they should wrap their hair like with a red sash, and that helps with identifying them and as did the old time men folk, or perhaps they are trying to copy that.  

Now here, we see girls that mainly wear styles with their clothes set atop. That is not pleasant to see, too. Please, tell your children to dress decently and not have clothing that sit high. If one wears their skirt that is way above their knees, they will be looked upon with much displeasure. The edges should at least be below the knees. What is the problem or did all the garment stores move away? There are materials still available out there and I realize that the prices are high or that it seems to get higher by the year. Maybe that is the problem.  

There were those ancient stories about "when the mountains became crazy? and they shaved off everything on b77t?s77?k?iizii? [their slopes or flanks]. Perhaps, that is what is being followed now. That is what I wonder sometime when I think about how the boys have their hair large, and the girls with their skirt set high. Maybe it was the foretelling from those stories, and that could be the assumption or the point-of-view.  

Then here are two gentlemen standing and facing each other. One is nicely wearing "whole suit? [said in English], and the other wears a t?sii?y44l7? [traditional-style wrapped hair] and a blanket over his shoulder. That one?s destination is unknown [assumed narrator is referring to gentleman with wrapped hair] or maybe he is going off to live an estranged life, and that is how I view it. The other looks as if he has an intelligent mind, well-educated and completed a high-level of schooling. He probably will never have difficulty with many directions and in getting employment, and that is how I view him.  

As opposed to the other one, he will face much difficulty but despite that, his image is like how our grandfathers in the old days use to wear the t?sii yeeli? and were clothed similarly. They provided great teachings back then. They only spoke proper language to their children and as you see, there were no "drinkers? [alcoholics] then. Also, when they taught in those days, the community never heard of certain individuals being jailed. Back then, perhaps, when there were no "wand? [attempted to say wine]. Now, there is no teaching to the children. Those ways have been abandoned. Now, our children are mentioned as possessing those things [alcohol] while they are still small or that they have drank.  

The children should be taught about the No’s. Allow that to be or they be taught that, and you must teach them yourself. Children are able to utilize their thinking and they can understand --their understanding is their capabilities. They will understand what a "No? is as long as it is taught with respect. These are done without the harsh words of demands and that is not called, teaching. As a parent, one must try to understand their feeling, too. There are just too many of the children now that are in that situation. In addition to their schooling, each morning they must be reminded of certain behaviors, "listen to your mother, listen to your father.? However, they sometime reject the words from their fathers and it is the mother’s word that they prefer to follow. This is how I see it. One thing about children’s thoughts is that when their father suddenly disassociates with them they will take life with y44?11diit?s4k0s7? [meditated future course] "My father has discarded me. I have been completely rejected by my father and because of that I shall begin to think negatively.? In contrast, "I will go to school, get educated to acquire good employment, I will seek a job, the English language I shall comprehend well, I will work in a quality setting, have a good home, and have a reliable automobile.? These are the higher goals which they might also think of.  

As being the mothers, we have our perception, are we not so thankful that our child have intelligence and they may have nice jobs or nice automobile? We think this way in that the schools have assisted us. Thus we are appreciative to see that our children succeeded with their intelligence.   

Another thing about our students is that if their meals are of changing menus, I think that might allow them to not miss school. Also, if there was to be a contribution provided to us like even a dime or even "quince? [narrator used Spanish, 15 for .15¢] to help pay for all that. It would be so much appreciated I feel. This should be it, now, and Thank you.   

FRANK JENSEN: Thank you, Bessie Shorty. You have spoken to us very well. This is the very thing that I am traveling for, those sorts of thoughts you all have and to be recorded onto it directly from each of you. It is not just you or this is not just taking place here. All others like from L0k?117?]t?44l7? [<Ganado> area] will also put some on it [record interviews]. Also, areas like <Fort Defiance> or around <Window Rock>, over there at <Chinle>, there at <Kayenta> and all near there, there in "Many Farms? [said in English], and around <Tuba City>. Basically all regions of the N11b44hw= [another version for Navajo] day schools will record onto it. "How will our schools be good?? This is to be discussed according to how you all think about that. That is the purpose we are asking and so, thank you, you have placed them well on it.  

What you said about their meals is true. I will relay that exactly the way you put it. Others have mentioned the same thing. You are not alone in saying that and others have made comment [in English] like that. I will also make note of that also. Okay, Bessie Shorty, thank you very much [in English]. It is I doing the interview, Frank Jensen from <Tuba City> [in English].  

 



MARY MAE SAGANITO INTERVIEW



FRANK JENSEN: I have arrived at Mary Mae T?s5yiiniit?s0h?s [Saganito] (endnote #14) place. I am the one making this interview, Frank Jensen. From hereof, she will speak to you the way she thinks about it. Then when she has talked about it, you who will hear it should act upon it accordingly. Now, I will allow her to be recorded and perhaps, she might disagree with certain things or not but I will let her tell it. In that matter, it will be done on her behalf.  

 [microphone noises] 

 MARY SAGANITO:  [first words inaudible] What is true is that we must not forget our language. Our children, my children favor and appreciate D7ne?h k?ehj77? [the ways of the Dineh], and for them to learn about the white people’s way, put them in school. [inaudible] I do want them to learn the English language so that they can translate while at the same time, they continue to speak Dineh and not forget it. So, I wish for them to learn both Dineh and English. I do have an appreciation for the schools that they are provided. Eventually my expectation for them is to have employment in the future. All this makes me happy while I do my best to be involved and to have a stable place for them here. I do speak with them about their education like telling them to attend accordingly, do things correctly and not to be mischievous. [a portion of recording is inaudible] When spoken to in that matter, they seemed to appreciate that as well and they also want to share what the papers they bring back are about. I even think about those that instruct them and hoping they feel good about having them. I further hope that they instruct them very well such as to guide them away from doing wrong and that, I will see the instructors as helping me, too.  

I see this school building as being situated neatly and within, students are instructed nicely, as well. The building probably provides much comfort like it is warm inside. Also, here, there are two men that are each quite different as they stand together. One is educated and the other is not. The educated one will have it good and his future holds a better life. He will have good employment one which he will not abuse. Just like for us, we need to provide stability and thus, our children will become well educated. They will have their own expectation about the future learning but I still would talk to them, "continue if you wish because in the future you will have to be independent.? They should be reminded about leading themselves correctly and to avoid the troublesome ways like drinking. If they are allowed to run about as they wish, that only leads to unrealistic ways. There are much unacceptable behaviors like alcohol abuse and now, you see younger ones drinking, and that is very sad. The parents need to be that stable role-model and that is what I do.  

Here is a home situated very neatly. Stability or instability may exist here despite how neatly it may be situated. There might be many problems with alcoholism for example, or there might be good teaching taking place there or perhaps, even ritual ceremonies are being conducted. The home is the place where a parent can provide the base for teaching and this setting also can help a teacher that teaches in the schools.  

Another issue which I do not appreciate is young men who have their hair long. There are those that run about without direction, and sometime you do not know if they are a girl or a boy. Then there are the girls that wear their skirts very short. That makes me embarrassed as well as making me disagree with such styles. So, why do certain mothers not instruct their children accordingly, "when you are a girl you are not to have a very short skirt or if you are a young man, you are not to have long hair.? These I feel are very poor ways. I asked that this be documented --what I am saying. So now, this will be the size of it. 

FRANK JENSEN: Thank you, Mary T?s5yiiniit?s0h. Thank you very much for speaking to us. You have stated the way it actually is. It is true that you women folk should approach your younger ladies about their very short skirts. As it has been stated, here, that short skirts create an embarrassment and that that is disapproved. Then there is a message to all of you young men who attend school that your hair are too large and that it looks awful. It only relates to those called, "hippy,? [in English] who are people out only for d-h11sh?k[77? [rowdy activities]. Also, she wished that it be told and yes, it should be told. Then it is up to you all to think about this among yourselves. I have made this visit to this lady where she resides alone, and I hope that things will be considered according to how she presented it. This is I making the interview [in English], and I have been asked to conduct this and to relay the messages and I shall do so. This is Frank Jensen speaking. 



Endnotes

(endnote #1) Narrator emphasizes lightly throughout like stating, h11g0sh77]? or 11?1hk-,,di]y5?, which may refer to "surely making the effort," "definitely," and/or "with much expectation of acceptability." 

(endnote #2) )l7t?1h? = "method of counting" or education/school/classes, since the Dineh never had a written language to read and they saw reading as a method of counting alphabets.   

(endnote #3) Interviewer stated "bujahver? and would refer to the bus driver if education is the subject, and the bus driver may be the only immediate contact to the school and be assumed 

responsible for not delivering the students.  

(endnote #4) Mr. Tsinnie address the interviewer as Sh?[n11?1sh? which means he is related through his Paternal Clan. 

(endnote #5) He is implying "marriage into this Clan" or that, "his wife is of this Clan." Ultimately stated in a Matriarchal society would be, "that is the Clan whose home I reside at," or "that is my Clan companion."

(endnote #6) Numerous times in this passage Mr. Tsinnie used, ]i?zho]7?g0h,  meaning "with beauty" but here, he refers to "with clarity? or "with profoundness.?  "Patience" is used even though he said, hozd0?si] g0h?, which normally means ,,a state of humbleness? and most often used in reference to ritual matters.   

(endnote #7)Narrator used, 11?1hk6]6?h6? d0l44[?, expressing "the making of right decisions or best choices."   

(endnote #8)How1]? usually refers to a circular framed hogan rather than a traditional- style earth lodge.

(endnote #9)The reference made about "into the distance future or time? is used throughout and thus, "d1sh88]4?z11 g0h" would normally refer to the unforeseen outlook for a journey but with 

expected positive outcomes.   

(endnote #10)The term, Qu1?11?s7]77?, is used some time in formal addresses to a diverse audience and it is almost similar to when a speaker might say, "Ladies and Gentlemen."  

(endnote #11) Similar to Qua’asini’, the formal use of this address, Sh’dine’h, refers to his own relations such as the diverse clans including the young and old who are listening or who will hear his words.  

(endnote #12) "Dances" is assumed to refer to social activities at school where modern country or rock music is danced to. These kinds of socialization based on (foreign) American fun activities are viewed by the narrator as negative towards old tribal custom of social behavior.    

(endnote #13)Narrator stated, B7?yii?d0h b7? k-?hd11d77lclii?, which means "from within their fires are continuous.? This term holds significant meaning to the Dineh: the central place of life, balance and mindset, and the central fireplace for the everlasting connection to home.    

(endnote #14) Narrator’s surname as said by the Interviewer was, T?s5yiiniit?s0h, which translates to Where the Canyon Bottom is Big. It is uncertain if the surname, Saganito, was derived from this location reference.

