SARAH KNIGHT INTERVIEW

[BEGIN SIDE A]

Maxwell: I'm Dr. Carol Maxwell. It's December 7, 1999. We are at 413-B South San Francisco, and this is Mrs. Sarah Knight. Let's start with where were you born?

Knight: Was born in <Mississippi>, in a little town -it was a little town, it was in the country. It's <Sand Hill Mississippi>.

Maxwell: In the Sand Hills, I've heard of that. That's pretty tough country, isn't it?

Knight: A long time ago. I've been away from there so long. It's much better now.

Maxwell: Is it?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What was it like then?

Knight: Well, kinda like slavery time, you know.

Maxwell: Really?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: How's that?

Knight: Well, the Black peoples, they worked -not all of 'em -for the white peoples, and you said "yes sir" and "no sir" and "yes ma'am" and all like that.

Maxwell: So the power relationship was like slavery?

Knight: Like I said from where it was out here, you know.

Maxwell: Wow. So compared to here it was like slavery is what you were sayin'?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What year were you born?

Knight: Nineteen fourteen.

Maxwell: What day?

Knight: November 3.

Maxwell: So you just had a birthday?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What did you turn?

Knight: Eighty-five.

Maxwell: (inaudible) (laughter)

Knight: I never did think I’d live to get this old. But that's been a long time.

Maxwell: Really?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: How come you didn't think you'd live to get this old?

Knight: Well, always somethin', sickly, somethin' the matter with me. I wouldn't be down in the bed, but head hurt, back hurt. My side hurt me out here for a long time. And the doctor operated on it for appendix and it quit. But now.... I was about forty-somethin' then, I think forty-three.

Maxwell: You said when you were little you were sickly too?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Tell me about when you were little.

Knight: Well, I wasn't able to go to the field and work, but I had to -when I was about twelve I think I milked like seven cows, come home, didn’t know what a hot water tank or nothing was. You used a tea kettle. Put the tea kettle on the stove and let the water boil. And when you come home, you wash your hands, and you scald out the churn again. And we had this strainer, a sack, we get flour, you know, a little ol' bag about like this (motions), it was cotton, but it had letters on it. But some way or ‘nother, we washed it and spread it on the grass. All the leaves would come out -all the print, you know. And we put that over the strainer. My mother said to keep maybe some hair would slip through just the regular strainer. But with this towel- it wasn't no towel, just sack over in it. It would catch everything, you know.

Maxwell: You strained the milk into that?

Knight: Uh-huh, into the churn. We didn't have no sink. You washed the dishes out of one pan and put it in the other. And then get hot boilin' water and pour it over that. Sometimes the glasses would break, what few we did have. I don't know, but it was a long time ago.

Maxwell: Did you milk the cows by yourself?

Knight: Yes, I was the last girl. All the rest of 'em had married. Let me see, my oldest sister, she milked hers, but the second sister cooked all the time. She was afraid of cows. And then the third sister, and then when it got down to me, I had to milk 'em by myself. Watered the garden, but you didn't have no hose you know. Take the water in the bucket, have like a dipper, go about pourin' water over the greens.

Maxwell: Vegetable garden?

Knight: Uh-huh, yeah. Long, long time ago.

Maxwell: That's a lot of work!

Knight: (laughs) Oh, yeah! What you had to do is sweep the yard. Oh, I worked for a white lady [when I was] about twelve, I guess. And their house was high up in front, then it go down in back. But you had to go up under there and sweep all out from in the front, you know, far as you could get up under there.

Maxwell: Under the porch?

Knight: Uh-huh. Listen, we didn't know what a rug was. Scrub floors and wash dishes. She said she didn't have no money to pay me, but she did pay me and give me so much of flour, so much of meal. Back in those days, we had a big eight-pound bucket, and sometime the meal would be out at the house, and I'd take this eight-pound bucket home, and Mama would brag on it. And this sister who had cooked all the time, sometimes she'd have a fire made in the stove. She said, "I'm waitin' to see whether you was gonna bring any meal or not." And I thought I was doin' somethin'! Oh! that made me feel big.

Maxwell: I'll bet. How big is an eight-pound bucket? (no audible response) About sixteen, eighteen inches, maybe, high?

Knight: Maybe not quite -about twelve or somethin'.

Maxwell: About like that, about twelve inches?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: How big around would that be? (no audible response) Ten inches or twelve inches around?

Knight: I'd say about ten.

Maxwell: Ten? About like that?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: And she'd give you that for working at her house, huh?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What else did you do at her house?

Knight: Well, I would wash dishes and scrub children, things like that. But I was little, you know, at that time. But one time she gave me a quilt she had pieced. Didn't know what no money was for pay.

Maxwell: Did you have any brothers?

Knight: Yes, three--no--four boys. The baby boy died when he was about two weeks, I think, or somethin', old. And my oldest brother ran off from home. I don't know where he is. I didn't know too much about him, 'cause he was about ten years older than I was. But second in.... Let me see, this is the only brother I have now, livin' in <Mississippi>. Well, he was the baby brother. You know, as he lived, but he said he'll be eighty, I think, his next birthday.

Maxwell: Did you ever hear from your oldest brother again?

Knight: My sister, the one I was next to, she went and got him and brought him back. But it'd been so long. Mama never did recognize him. She said, "What old man is this?!" (laughs) Never did recognize him. But he slipped off [and went] back there. And so somebody said he got killed, I don't know, years later.

Maxwell: What were your parents' names?

Knight: Robert Shampell and Ada Shampell [phonetic spelling].

Maxwell: What did it feel like to work in that lady's house?

Knight: Well, talking about here or back....

Maxwell: Back there.

Knight: Felt all right, felt like you was gettin' old or somethin'.

Maxwell: Like you were grown up?

Knight: No, you had to do. Anyway, you know, any way you could help out at home. My mother could iron, ooo! in those days they used scaldin' things, but she could iron.

Maxwell: Yeah, you said she could iron. Tell me about her ironing.

Knight: In the ironing years, she didn't have no electric iron then. Ironing when you didn’t even make the fireplace. They had another kind of bucket they called.... You put coals in that, and put your iron on top of that and let it get hot. And we had cedar trees in the yard. Break down some of the limbs, and rub the irons real good, would no smut and nothin' come off that. Back in <Mississippi>, be real hot, she could iron these white shirts and have a great big nail hanging up on the porch. And she'd put 'em up there and let 'em dry, finish dryin'. And then she'd take 'em down, fold 'em. Ooo, she could fold 'em nice. Ironed for the white teachers, but they wouldn't have no shirts and socks and underwear. That's all they would have, uh-huh.

Maxwell: No pants?

Knight: Not the kind you ironed.

Maxwell: So she ironed for the white teachers?

Knight: The white teachers, schoolteachers. They be being washed and ironed. And just like (inaudible) time, that's revival was in August. And she'd go and get this white lady to buy my older sisters hats, shoes, dresses. But we little ones had to stay at home. And she washed it out for thirty-five cents a wash.

Maxwell: For a whole load? (no audible response) Wow.

Knight: Long, long time ago. (laughs)

Maxwell: And you said you'd always wanted to go to high school.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: So you could speak well.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Did you go to school at all?

Knight: Yes.

Maxwell: Tell me about school.

Knight: I went to a country school. At first, just one big room. But they built the new school??Oldenboll [phonetic spelling] they called it. And this school had two big rooms with different grades, you know. And then it had some front part where you could look out. Pretty soon ... the schoolteacher boarded with us one time. But back in those days I think about nine dollars a month. She had to look good, too.

Maxwell: The teacher was the woman?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: You were telling me something about your mom sending your sisters to school.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: And what happened with that?

Knight: She came back. She didn't want to. It was kind of tough times and I reckon she had never been away from home. She married. She married, she didn't want to go back. And so I told Mama, she send me, I wouldn't marry. I thought if I ever got there, you could work your way, you know. But Mama, she couldn't strain every cent. Wasn't gonna send nobody else. I was gonna come back there and marry someone -no sense boy. So that was it! (laughs) We were very poor.

Maxwell: Did your sister marry a boy with no sense?

Knight: She had two sets of twins, but they separated. My next oldest sister--we all married– but the next oldest sister, she didn't never separated from her husband. But my oldest sister, she separated. She’s married about three times. But everybody got married. Oh, back in those days, your parents would talk about killing you. You couldn't come up with no baby, nothin' like that. No, no! Unt-uh.

Maxwell: What a difference!

Knight: Uh-huh. And we had to go to the schoolhouse with little picnics or fishin' in the pond. Mama would go with us the biggest portion of the time. Sometimes Papa would go, but we had this brother, he was old enough. He'd walk about three feet behind you...Well, he could run in and out of the schoolhouse and stand out there on the dock, but we couldn't do it. When you went in the schoolhouse, you stayed until you got ready to come home. And they would be about three feet behind you.

Maxwell: How much school did you go to, how many years of school?

Knight: I started the ninth grade some, but I could never do nothin' with that algebra.

Maxwell: How?

Knight: Couldn't do nothin' with it. But readin', sometimes the teacher would have me to read about two hours, just read. At the time, wasn't nobody in the class but myself, and I couldn't work arithmetic, you know, for the grade, but I couldn’t come up with this algebra... This other girl went on to school, but she got sick and she come back home and started goin' back to our school, so that's why I got to sit in the ninth grade some.

Maxwell: How old were you when you came to <Flagstaff>?

Knight: I think I was, must have been about twenty-eight or twenty-nine.

Maxwell: So you spent a lot of time down there in the sand country.

Knight: Well, no, I married when I was seventeen, and went from <Mississippi> to <Louisiana>.

Maxwell: You you moved when you married?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What was your husband's name?

Knight: Eddie Knight.

Maxwell: How did you meet him?

Knight: We was at this one Fourth of July--no--one Thanksgiving, and on Thanksgiving they always have some kinda program, you know. You fixed up a box, and the boy would buy it. And so I was there, and he was a big joy, real’ laughin’ and goin' on. I met him at this Thanksgivin'. Waited about two years, three years after that. We married then.

Maxwell: So he bought your box at Thanksgiving?

Knight: I don't know who bought the box.

Maxwell: Oh, so it wasn't 'cause of your food then? (laughter)

Knight: Mama had bought some kinda cake, they called it but... I got married. Everybody got married, all the girls. Didn't nobody ever run off. She said that was a blessing, having no babies or nothin’. So she said when we get married she didn't want nobody to come back home, not none of the girls, unt-uh. You make your bed hard -that's what the old people used to say -you turned over that much off it. And so my husband, after he got out of the service, he wasn't satisfied back there. He liked to catch freight trains and run up and down the road and all that kinda stuff. So that's how I come runnin' out here.

Maxwell: Tell me about that. Did you move from where your parents were because of the war?

Knight: No, I stayed with my parents, was livin' at that time.

Maxwell: So after you married Mr. Knight, what happened?

Knight: Well, I went to <Louisiana>, stayed a while. Stayed at Deer Island. Have you ever heard of that town? Deer Isle?

Maxwell: That sounds familiar.

Knight: Uh-huh. And then we went back to this big camp, Carthage Camp. That was in <Mississippi>. And some lady or another from the camp had come out here. She talked about they paid so much more out here than they did back there. So my husband come on out here. I moved back to-- my mother and them in town, I moved with my mother-- and I said I didn't want to come out, but Mama told me it's right to go follow your husband. So been out here ever since.

Maxwell: What kind of work was he doing before he moved out here?

Knight: Section, he worked on a section at the camp.

Maxwell: I don't know what that is exactly. What did he do?

Knight: Mens worked on the railroad, keep the track up and all kinds of stuff.

Maxwell: Oh, like replace ties that are broken?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Okay. And so this lady was saying they were paying more for that kind of work here at that time?

Knight: Uh-huh, they did. No, we wasn't makin' nothin' much back there. But she said he could make high as fifty dollars a week. So I didn't want to come 'cause I had never been this far away from home before. But Mama said, "Yeah, you get on up and go on away." Been out here ever since. (laughs)

Maxwell: How'd you get out here?

Knight: On the train -come on the train.

Maxwell: Was it hard to make that trip?

Knight: No. I think he sent the money, and so many soldiers! ooo! at that time.

Maxwell: What year was that?

Knight: Nineteen forty-one.

Maxwell: Oh, the beginning of the war.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What was the trip like on the train?

Knight: I don't know, it was all right. People talking and soldiers and...

Maxwell: How did they treat you?

Knight: All right. They just be.... You know how people walk up and down the aisle on trains. All right. I did all right, and we stayed in the back, back over here (points) on this other street.

Maxwell: What did you think when you first saw <Flagstaff> from the train?

Knight: It was night when I got here and--done alright--beautiful. The weather was like this at winter. I don't know what month it was when I got here. But I had went back home and told 'em I was pleased. And in <Mississippi>, you know, it be hot and humid, the humidity. But out here, ooo, I liked it. So been out here ever since. Been out here fifty-nine years I think.

Maxwell: Where was your husband staying when you got here?

Knight: He was staying in the next block (points), in the back.

Maxwell: Over back on, is it Agassiz?

Knight: On the same street.

Maxwell: Oh, on San Francisco?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: There were houses down that way?

Knight: In the back it was at that time.

Maxwell: Was there the university there at all?

Knight: It wasn't as large as it is now.

Maxwell: And did you go stay with him where he was?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Was he in a house?

Knight: Yeah, he was in a house. He had three rooms I think in the back. And somebody else was in the apartment. Those were elevated. But we didn't have no restrooms inside, you had to go out to the restroom. But that was a long, long time ago.

Maxwell: Was it a boarding house?

Knight: Unt-uh.

Maxwell: It was a house that you two....

Knight: Just like this apartment back here. (points) In the back.

Maxwell: Oh, like apartments. Oh, okay.

Knight: I'd get up and cook. My husband loved a lot of meat. I told him to try to save some money, but he didn't never care nothin' about savin' money. He said, "Let's live while we're livin'!" But such a long time ago.

Maxwell: Did you have any children?

Knight: Unt-uh.

Maxwell: Never?

Knight: Never had ‘em. I had one miscarriage, I think, out here, but it wasn't a month or two, I guess.

Maxwell: Did you want children?

Knight: At first I did. But after, didn't need no children. The Lord knows best. I was sick and married life was so much different from what I thought it was. My dad was a religious man. We were very poor, but he was still a religious man. And I thought all mens got married, they'd be like Papa, but it's not like that. Everybody has their own way. (laughs)

Maxwell: What was your husband like?

Knight: He was a good man, but drank whiskey, tell lies, run with other women. But I had to put up with it.

Maxwell: That old business of "if you make your bed hard?"

Knight: Uh-huh. Yes, that much... But he would treat me good. He never was a fellah that come here and fuss about nothin', 'cause we was raised up, Mama said, still bein' somewheres, just talkin' and goin', "Clean up your own house, wash up your dishes, wash clothes, and cook." I did cook. I thought he liked it, but he wouldn't stay at home. He'd go and take his bath when he get in. I'd fill up the tea kettle with water, set it on the heater, and he'd come take his bath and eat. But he goin’ to get out and go on up the street somehow. And I thought he should have stayed at home, but he didn't want to. (laughs) So he didn't stay. And that was all right.

Maxwell: Was it lonely?

Knight: Not too lonely. I'd be lookin' for him to come back. I went to the movie a lot then. And sometimes he would come in the movie, right up here on the street. He'd come in to see was I really in there, and go on to <Phoenix>.

Maxwell: Oh, we're back to flip the tape. (pause) He'd make sure you were in the theater, and then he'd go down to <Phoenix>?!

Knight: He'd be goin' with some other boys. He knew if I had known he was goin', I would have said, "Don't go." I wouldn't know where he was. The next morning he'd come in about twelve o'clock. Sometimes I wouldn’t say nothin’, and sometimes I would. But he said I fussed too much. "You're too jealous of me, you fuss too much." I let him alone. And drinkin' that whiskey. He says that– Doctor Kiddrick [phonetic spelling] was the doctor then–he told me he was an alcoholic, but I didn't know what alcoholic was at the time. And so my husband said one time, "You don't know how it is.” He wished he could stop. So I didn’t say no more then.

Maxwell: What was he like when he was drunk?

Knight: Nothin'. Come in and lay down on the couch and go to sleep.

Maxwell: So he didn't get mean?

Knight: Unt-uh.

Maxwell: Some do, some don't.

Knight: Uh-huh. No, he didn't get mean. I'd always have.... I worked for a while. But after I found out he wasn't gonna buy no house, be so cold here. We worked at the El Patio, and then I worked for this lady what I was tellin' you about. Worked for the El Patio, sometime get off at night. I had a big scarf tied around my head like this (motions), and then a hat on top of my head. That air would be cold!

Maxwell: Inside?

Knight: Unt-uh, that's when we was comin' home. But when I found out he wasn't gonna get no house, I'd work about four or five weeks and then I'd get, I don't know, cancer-- I don't know what was the matter with me-- and have to lay off, and I just quit.

Maxwell: Did you lose your hope, do you think? Or were you angry?

Knight: No, no, no. Just that weather was so cold. And since wasn't gonna get no house, wasn't no need of me gettin' up and workin' in that cold.

Maxwell: Now, when you first came, did you work right after that, too, when you first came?

Knight: I think. Yeah, I did, I worked then. That was for this lady what I was tellin' you about. I worked for her.

Maxwell: The woman you cleaned for?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Did your mother come out here too?

Knight: No.

Maxwell: I remembered you talking about your mother's ironing when you were talking about ironing for that lady, so I thought maybe your mother had come too.

Knight: No, she didn't come -never come out here. She wanted to one time, and she loved to wash dishes, and she said, "I'd come out there and get me a job." But washin' dishes at a café is different from washin' 'em at home. No, she never did come out here.

Maxwell: When you first came, how many Black families were there here, would you say?

Knight: Wasn't many. Maybe I'd say six.

Maxwell: Six families?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Wow! That's not many at all.

Knight: Uh-huh, about six.

Maxwell: Six Black families in <Flagstaff>.

Knight: Uh-huh. That's right. But the people started pourin' in here -lots of people, after that, you know, after I moved here.

Maxwell: What was it like for you to be here? Were people prejudiced?

Knight: No, the white people was much better here than it was back home. Course, there were some good ones back there. But all this callin' you "nigger" and this and that -they didn't do that back here.

Maxwell: So they did that back....

Knight: Uh-huh, some did.

Maxwell: In a mean way?

Knight: Well, if they get mad. Sometimes they wouldn't be mad at you, just talkin'. And the older people, they called the women "auntie" and men "uncle," uh-huh -older people. Everybody that lives has, I guess, some kinda rounds. It's to be that way, I reckon. So that be a long time. I like it here. I never did want to go to <Phoenix>, to <Winslow>. I don't like <Winslow>. <McNary>, ooo! <McNary> was way back in the woods. But I've lived here a long time.

Maxwell: Tell me, when you first came, could you go into restaurants and stores?

Knight: Yeah, you could go anywhere. They said this café right here, didn’t allow no Negroes in there because they say a soldier showed out one time. He come in here, walked to a table -I don't know what the man done -but he showed out. And the man, then it was his uncle, he left and they said they didn't allow colored folks in there.

Maxwell: After that?

Knight: Unt-uh.

Maxwell: So they let him in first, and then this guy showed out, and so then they wouldn’t allow it.

Knight: And see, wasn't many here, this soldier, he come in here with his regiment- I don’t know how the company of soldiers go to town. He showed out up there. And this man and his wife, they were separated. And they say he went to Old <Mexico>. And this is his nephew, but I think anybody can go there what want to. I used to go all the time, about once a week and get my plate before they started to bring it, you know.

Maxwell: When was that, that you could go in there?

Knight: Anytime, all the time.

Maxwell: So even though they had a rule that no colored folks could come in, you could go get a plate?

Knight: No, that's been since the older boss man was gone. They had this young man.

Maxwell: Oh, okay. Joe? Joe's the boss over there, isn't he?

Knight: He's the cook, a big fat man.

Maxwell: Yeah.

Knight: But his uncle was the boss.

Maxwell: Oh, okay.

Knight: He's a real quiet fellah.

Maxwell: Well, when there were just six families here, could you go into the other restaurants?

Knight: Yeah, uptown. I didn't know too much about this one at the time.

Maxwell: Could you go into stores?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Did people treat you well?

Knight: Yeah.

Maxwell: Did they?

Knight: Yeah. Treat you well. They didn't have no segregation and all.

Maxwell: So it was better?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: That's nice.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: I'd heard that in the late forties, early fifties, there was a policeman who wouldn't let colored folks go into the restaurants. It wasn't against the law, but he wouldn't allow it. Do you remember that at all?

Knight: I don't remember it. I don't remember that. Police used to ride this street, oh! about every forty minutes, at night. But they don't do like that now. But they used to ride.

Maxwell: What did you think of that?

Knight: I was glad ‘cause that way I went to the show a lot, wouldn't nobody try to bother me or nothin'. Nobody never bothered me. I used to walk the streets at night. But then nobody never bothered me.

Maxwell: So it made you feel safe to have the police around?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: When did the Black church start up here -Riverside? Wasn't that the first one?

Knight: No, I belong to the Baptist Church. They had a church over here on the highway, but they sold it and bought over here on Birch Street. I think it's Birch Street.

Maxwell: I'm thinkin' of Riverside, just across the way here.

Knight: Uh-huh. No, I didn't belong to that. That's Sanctified.

Maxwell: I thought it was the first one. Do you know if that's true?

Knight: I don't know.

Maxwell: I'll have to find out. But you belonged to the Baptist Church?

Knight: That's right.

Maxwell: Is it the one that's just a block or so over to the east?

Knight: Uh-huh, where you go to the mill -used to.

Maxwell: Yeah, just a little bit up on the hill?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Just off there, near the Whitackers' house?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Can't remember the name of the road, but I know where it is.

Knight: Yeah, I done forgot.

Maxwell: When did that church start up, the Baptist Church?

Knight: Oh, it was, like I said, over on the highway at first, and they sold it and sold the land or church or whatever, and built this one. But it’s been a church, Baptist Church, Sanctified Church. (points) This is a Methodist Church right there.

Maxwell: But what year was it started, do you remember?

Knight: No, I don't. Well, it was a church when I came, 1941.

Maxwell: Oh, it was already there..

Knight: Uh-huh, it already was over on the highway. The preacher sold it, or somebody sold it, and bought over here on, I don't know, Birch Street, I reckon. I don't know what street it is, but it's been a long....

Maxwell: It's not Fountaine?

Knight: No.

Maxwell: Can't think of the name of it. But did you join that right off?

Knight: Uh-huh. The Baptist Church I did.

Maxwell: What was it like, being a part of that church?

Knight: Oh, just like any other church, I reckon. I used to go sometimes to right out here (points) when I didn't feel like walkin' over there. I'd go there, but it's been a long time. I haven't been to my church this year. But we have a new preacher -he's not so new  -but he's a young man. He and his wife both have been here to see me, but I think he's working up at the hospital or somewhere. So I haven't been to church this year, and he hasn't been over here -with the job and everything.

Maxwell: I guess I'm just wondering what it was like in the old days when you were part of the church, what you all did.

Knight: First you have prayer meetin', but they would hold so long, I wait 'til about twelve before I go. And then we have the preaching, take up collection, turn out shakin' hands, and come on home.

Maxwell: Did you do anything like picnics and any kind of fun stuff like that?

Knight: Seemed like one of the pastors -but I didn't ever go. My landlord is one of the deacons of our church.

Maxwell: Who is that?

Knight: Combs, Wilton Combs [phonetic spelling]. He used to work with the police department. He used to be police.

Maxwell: Where did they have him working?

Knight: Well, a deacon is supposed to see about the members, to see about the church, you know. He still is a deacon.

Maxwell: I was thinking of when he was a policeman.

Knight: Oh.

Maxwell: Was that here in <Flagstaff>?

Knight: Uh-huh, been a policeman right here.

Maxwell: What did you do for fun when you first came back in the forties?

Knight: Well, I wasn't used to goin' nowhere and havin' no fun. My husband would tell me lot of times, "I don't try to keep you; come and go with me." But all these honky-tonk places and where he liked to go, I didn't want to go. Wasn't no need of me startin' that. I didn't want to do it. (laughs) I didn't go.

Maxwell: Where would he go, do you know?

Knight: He'd go up to the saloon.

Maxwell: Which one?

Knight: This one right up here. (points)

Maxwell: The Grande?

Knight: Uh-huh. I didn't go where they was to be drinkin' that–Lord! (rubs eyes) But I didn't want to. I have been to the Elks Club up here, they have some dinners, you know. Sometime I go there.

Maxwell: That seems like a nice place.

Knight: Uh-huh. They have good food. Somebody sent me a plate from there. They have dinners up there every now and then, and so somebody from the club sent me this plate.

Maxwell: You were telling me about working for that white lady that you worked for here.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What was her name?

[END TAPE SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

Maxwell: What was her name?

Knight: Miss Wolhouse [phonetic spelling]. She's dead now.

Maxwell: Was she a young woman at that time? Middle aged?

Knight: She was middle aged at that time, I think. She might have been. No, she was about fifty-somethin'.

Maxwell: And how old were you when you started?

Knight: Oh, I was in my twenties -twenty-eight or nine, or somewhere along there.

Maxwell: But right off when you first came?

Knight: Uh-huh. And I worked for Dr. and Mrs. Fronske, but just workin' out at the house. And I worked for Mrs. Olbin [phonetic spelling] at that time.

Maxwell: Dr. and Mrs. Fronske? The ones that the things are named after?

Knight: Is it?

Maxwell: Yeah, they got some things named Fronske around.

Knight: Oh! Well! (seems pleased) I saw in the paper, you know, his son is the one that is in photography downtown. And so I never did meet the brothers. It was two boys. But I saw where Mr. Bob Fronske died last year. I think it was last year. It said he was eighty-two. And his wife, she was so friendly. When I'd go out there, the boys were little then, and she had four boys. And she’d say, "Bob, we need a girl. If I have another baby, how you know it be a girl?" But he'd come home for lunch, at dinnertime, she'd take the baby and go pace away with him when he'd go back. I thought that was so cute. (laughs) And one time, Dr. Fronske -I was livin' over here (points) -and he'd always come and pick me up. And I told Miss Fronske, "He don't need to.” We had these high windows, you know. And I would be ready, I says, "I'll just walk out there." But he was so intelligent, he wouldn't blow no horn or nothin' -he'd get out and come on and knock on the door.

Maxwell: Oh, well, that's nice.

Knight: Uh-huh. And one time.... Well, at first, we'd go in the back, you know, on the porch, but they had it screened-in half-way, and I wasn't used to it. Doctor would take off my coat and hang it up. And just like if he wanted to use somethin' in the kitchen, he'd ask Mrs. Fronske, "May I?" That's what he said, "May I use such and such?" And one time I was comin' home, and Miss Fronske was comin' downtown. She says, "Since I'm gonna be the first one to get out, you ride between, sit up here." I could have stayed in the back. I had this great big black fur coat on, and sittin' up there, I says, like a fly in buttermilk. And Lord! Miss Fronske laughed so! And after that, I'd take off my own coat, and Miss Fronske take off hers, but she would treat me so nice. Ooo! Just like I was one of them. And just like Thanksgiving time, Mr. Bob and his wife would come over. She could cook! Ooo! She could cook! Uh-huh. Played the piano.

Maxwell: What did you do for them?

Knight: I cleaned.

Maxwell: Were they picky like that other lady?

Knight: No. No, no, no. Sometimes she'd leave me there and go on downtown. But she'd always make it back in time enough to have dinner. No, just a little lady. None of 'em was particular like she was. I told her I could go, at that time, I could have went in <California> anywhere, I wouldn't have been afraid, because she was so particular. One time I told her, I said, "I always was slow, but I can't do this work like you want it done and do it fast." And at that time, was payin' by the hour, seventy-five cents an hour. I think that's what I was gettin’. And I said, "You get somebody else." She didn't want nobody else.

Maxwell: So tell me again. You said that you'd be doing something and you'd just take your time and really do it well (

Knight: Yeah!) and she'd come back in.

Knight: And she'd ask me would I be through in this room, when I wouldn't be no more than half through in this room.

Maxwell: And she said she'd have you re-do everything?

Knight: Uh-huh. Re-do, but she had this great big house out on Birch Street, I think. Upstairs -all the bedrooms was upstairs. And this hall, oh! It was hard wood, and she had these huge Indian rugs. I think she said she paid about $240 a piece for 'em. But you vacuum the rug, fold 'em up, and then you take the dust mop and go over this hardwood floor. Oh, it was beautiful. Uh-huh! And her bathroom looked to me like it was about like this room. Might not have been quite as big. But she had this kind of glass, you could look in the glass and see behind your head.

Maxwell: Oh, like several mirrors?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Yeah.

Knight: And she had these deep guest towels, heavy, about three inches crochetted on. And Mr. Wolhouse, he had a shower at the end of the tub. Her tub was blue, and the commode was blue. But it was nice.

Maxwell: But she wasn't so much fun to work for?

Knight: Well, I think I got used to it, and she was gonna keep me. And one time, she let me clean up -she went somewhere downtown. But she knowed it would be there, you know, first time without her. She found out, and she said she didn't want nobody else. And I had a friend lady at that time. Well, she was swifter than I was and, like I said, one time she went and worked, but she thought--I guess she thought -the lady was gonna take her, but she was so plain and straight with her, to the woman. I don't think she wanted to work for her no more. Unt-uh-- too particular.

Maxwell: How long did you work for her?

Knight: Off and on about two years, maybe three.

Maxwell: That was a long time.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: So then you felt like you could go clean anywhere.

Knight: Anywhere! (laughs) Take a dust mop and all around the edges (acts out motions) and turn the dust mop up and go around the edges of the baseboard. Upstairs you shake this, pull this one back and shake it outside. But I learned so much from her.

Maxwell: How did you come to stop working for her?

Knight: Well, I was too sick. Some days I would have to.... We didn't have a telephone at that time. Some days I'd have to get my husband to go down to the store and call her and tell her to don't come, I wouldn't feel like it, workin' for her. So I just finally quit. (tape turned off and on)

Maxwell: Like not very generous or something. She wasn't like the Fronskes.

Knight: Well, you know, no two peoples is alike. This lady wasn't like Mrs. Fronske to work with, you know, but she was good to me.

Maxwell: Was she?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: So then when you stopped working for her, what did you do?

Knight: I didn't.... Stopped workin' for.... I didn't go nowhere. I had worked at the café up here. I don't even know what year it was, at the El Charro's uptown.

Maxwell: El Patio?

Knight: El Patio, that's what it was, uh-huh. And I worked at another café that was called The Black Cat. But I never could work too long before I'd get sick. Then I worked for a schoolteacher. I wouldn’t know her now if I see her. I'd just work out at the house.

Maxwell: Cleaning for her?

Knight: Uh-huh. She was real young.

Maxwell: What did you do at the cafés?

Knight: Washing dishes at the cafés. And the schoolteacher, I washed dishes, make up the beds, change the beds, vacuum the floors, and stuff like that.

Maxwell: So you were here a long time. What kind of changes did you see go on?

Knight: Well, do you mean among the people?

Maxwell: Uh-huh.

Knight: I don't know. I don't think it was.... I was here when this street out here (points) was gravel, and it was a white man, and a Black man, when they put the sewage down side here. This Black man was kinda low, and when he got down in the trench to lay the pipes, you couldn't see the top of his head. (laughs) But it's been a long time ago.

Maxwell: You said the people came flooding in. When did that happen?

Knight: I don't know what year it was. I tell ya', I can't think too good since I've gotten kind of older, you know, seems like.

Maxwell: Was it during the wartime, or after the war?

Knight: Must have been after the war.

Maxwell: What was it like here during the war years?

Knight: It was all right. We had a policeman, Mr. -his name was--Epperson. He passed by you, he'd throw up his hand and speak. That was all right.

Maxwell: Did you see a lot of soldiers come through?

Knight: Well, at this café, it was few from here, you know, but not too many. My mother always said “I stayed at home, I took care of my house.” I didn't worry too much about what that other fellah did or said. Since he wasn't botherin' me, it was all right.

Maxwell: I remember you saying something about your mom taught you if your husband could go out and....

Knight: "... make the living, you sure can cook." I stayed at home and always cooked. He loved it... He didn't eat so much, but that meat and oysters. I never have tasted oysters, but I used to buy 'em and cook 'em for him. And I had a pan about like this (motions), boil the spareribs and put that ketchup. Some of 'em, but called myself barbecuein' 'em and put 'em in the stove. And he brag on me, he said I had a good dinner that day. But he wouldn't have never brag on me about nothin' much, unt-uh.

Maxwell: Just the cooking?

Knight: He didn't brag on that all the time -just sometimes.

Maxwell: How come you didn't taste the oysters?

Knight: I didn't like the looks of 'em before I cooked 'em. (phone rings, aside not transcribed)

Maxwell: How long have you lived here?

Knight: I've been here about twenty-eight or nine years. I don't know exactly which one, but I been here a long time.

Maxwell: What was it like finding a place to live when you first came, back there in the forties and fifties?

Knight: You could easily find a place. I never did want to live way back over the hill. Never did.

Maxwell: Did your husband have any trouble finding work here?

Knight: No.

Maxwell: What did he do?

Knight: Section. He was smart as he could be.

Maxwell: What company did he work for?

Knight: It used to be a mill here, they called it Saginaw. And then from that to Southwest. And then from there, APS, the last company. APS was a good company.

Maxwell: Now, he worked on the track for the lumber companies?

Knight: When he was workin' at the mill, uh-huh. But I don't know, he worked all the time. What did he do at APS? I done forgot that. But he worked there for a long time. I didn't work enough to draw my Social Security, so I draw off of him. He fixed it that. I didn't know you could do it!

Maxwell: Yeah.

Knight: Uh-huh. And my husband fixed all of that before he passed. I sure was glad of it, 'cause that's where my support comin’ from.

Maxwell: You said he passed seventeen years ago?

Knight: Will be seventeen.

Maxwell: That's a long time.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Did you stay together until he passed?

Knight: No. No,no. He was in <Louisiana> and I was out here. I have a step-daughter. She lives in <New Orleans>, and he was down there with them.

Maxwell: How old is she?

Knight: She's about seventy, I guess.

Maxwell: So he had her before he met you?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Did you raise her at all?

Knight: Unt-uh, but she treats me so nice. A lot of people say that step-folks don't get along, but I wouldn't want nobody to treat me no better.

Maxwell: That's nice.

Knight: She's been out here to see me. I don't know whether she'll come this year or not. But she comes to see me. She loves to cook, and oh, she'll cook, and we'll talk, and I enjoy her so much.

Maxwell: When you said there were six colored families here when you first came....

Knight: About that, yeah.

Maxwell: About how many people would that be?

Knight: I really don't know.

Maxwell: Were they big families?

Knight: One of 'em. One of 'em, Mrs. Polk.... Let's see, Mrs. Polk was here. I'm tryin' to think....

Maxwell: Do you remember any of the other family names?

Knight: Grunmother, Birkfear, Misty Nick [phonetic spelling]. And this other woman lived up close to -I can't think of her name. They lived up on the hill.

Maxwell: The Flemmings [phonetic spelling]?

Knight: No. I think the Flemmings–they wasn't here when I first came.

Maxwell: Was it Miss Alice? I don't know her last name. Miss Alice. I can't remember her last name.

Knight: Miss Allen?

Maxwell: Alice. She cooks down at Martans. Someone said she'd been here a long, long time.

Knight: Uh-huh. But she wasn’t. I didn't know her, if she was.

Maxwell: Probably not her.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: I wonder who it was. I heard there was one family who's been here a long, long time, and the first one of that family came, he was a Buffalo Soldier. Do you know anything about that?

Knight: I done forgot that one. (laughs) Yeah, done forgot that one.

Maxwell: What was life like for you when you lived here back in the forties?

Knight: Oh, it was good.

Maxwell: What did you like about it?

Knight: The white people wasn't segregated like they was back south. I don't know, we just talked. Mama said when you get to one place, you just stay there and move in here. I didn't like to go here and yonder. And after I got here, at first, I didn't want to go nowheres else. <Phoenix>, <Winslow>–going all those places-- not to move, you know.

Maxwell: So you were tired of moving?

Knight: Well, I didn't like to. I didn't see if you was doin' pretty good at a place, it could be worse when you move. I didn't see no sense in it. I reckon, it was just because I was raised like that.

Maxwell: But you didn't have any cows here.

Knight: No.

Maxwell: Did you miss 'em? (no audible response) Not at all? (laughs)

Knight: We had a Jersey cow, my second year, and sold cream for a while. Oh, that was back in the thirties, a long time ago.

Maxwell: Before you came to <Flagstaff>?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: Those Jersey cows give some nice milk.

Knight: Uh-huh. This place where we stayed, the boss man's brother stayed with her husband. And he lived in, let me see, Monroe? Out from Monroe? I’m talkin’ the boss man did. But this brother stayed on the place where we did, and she told me about this Jersey, sellin' some cream. So, once or twice, 'cause it was too much for just us two, uh-huh. I'd strain the milk sometime and I had a little jar [for my] husband. He liked it, rich, creamy. But I eat so much milk and bread. I guess I don't hardly ever drink no milk now. I eat too much of it when I was young, uh-huh.

Maxwell: Did you bake all your bread and stuff when you moved here?

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: What kind of stuff did you make?

Knight: Wood stove.

Maxwell: What was it like cooking the bread in there?

Knight: Well, you see that was all I was used to. Old as I am, I never had a new stove in my life. Always be four months or six months a year I would buy those kind of things. I said if I lived and have 'em next year, I'll have to try to get me a new stove because I don't like the one I got. I don't like no dark stove.

Maxwell: What kind do you want?

Knight: White. I want a white one. My husband had a Magic Chef. That's the kind I want. Good cookin' stove. But his on’ was blue, light blue. He had a light blue great big ice bucket, or so he told me one time. That was when he was in <New Mexico>. "You can take another one back with you." I said, "I don't want it. Have to buy me one." (laughs) I didn't want that, unt-uh.

Maxwell: That was when you guys were separated?

Knight: Uh-huh, yes.

Maxwell: When did you separate?

Knight: I don't know what year it was, but I was thirty-nine.

Maxwell: So it was the end of the forties?

Knight: Uh-huh, I was thirty-nine years old.

Maxwell: It must have been about 1950, something like that. Let's see, you were born in 1913?

Knight: Fourteen.

Maxwell: And you were thirty-nine, so it had to be 1953, right?

Knight: I can't think.

Maxwell: My terrible math. I really can't do math. I need a paper and pencil. I'm trying to think of what else I should ask you. What else do you think I should ask you?

Knight: I don't know.

Maxwell: Do you have any stories to tell about those early years?

Knight: I don't think so.

Maxwell: About people or anything?

Knight: Not nothin' of interest. I don't know. Nothin'.

Maxwell: You stayed here and went through the war years, and then after the war years a lot more of the African American community started to show up.

Knight: Uh-huh, and now it's full, this town, on this side. (laughs) It's not too many ...

Maxwell: Was it hard for your husband to get his job when he first came?

Knight: No.

Maxwell: How would he do that? How'd he get a job?

Knight: See, he got here before I did, and some friends we used to know back on that other camp, but he had a job, he always would work, you know.

Maxwell: Did you feel like he got fair pay?

Knight: Uh-huh, much more pay than what he was gettin' back in <Mississippi>.

Maxwell: So how did he feel about his job, do you know?

Knight: Felt all right, I tell you he worked for this Saginaw. Then he went to Southwest, and from Southwest to APS.

Maxwell: Sounds like you liked the APS job best.

Knight: Oh, APS was a good job, uh-huh.

Maxwell: What made it good?

Knight: Well, I think it paid about seven or eight, holidays got paid for. It was a good steady job. But he kept a job, uh-huh.

Maxwell: So it wasn't a problem then for him to get work?

Knight: No.

Maxwell: You hear a lot of people nowadays talking about that being a problem.

Knight: I see a lot of jobs in the paper. Some people just -they ain't gonna do nothin', uh-huh. There’s some workin' someone but I don't worry about that. Eddie, my husband, kept a job.

Maxwell: Did you have trouble finding a job when you wanted one?

Knight: I didn't. After I saw we wasn't gonna get no house, I didn't. I wasn't gonna try to work out here in this cold and not have nothin'. I didn't think nothin' about it.

Maxwell: How'd you figure out he was never gonna get a house?

Knight: He wanted to go to <California> to move one time because we was separated. I told him to go ahead. I didn't want to go to no <California>, somebody else's house. We lived here a long time, he never did.... He told me one time he didn't have nobody to help him. And I didn't never see nobody ... You know, you can't tell how the other fellah feels when you want to buy a house or somethin', and I wasn't able to work. But I would have straightened up and did more than what I did do, but after he said that, I didn't care no more about no house, unt-uh.

Maxwell: Did you have friends here?

Knight: Uh-huh. Oh, good friends. I have lots of friends here.

Maxwell: How'd you meet your friends?

Knight: Oh, when I first -different ones, you know -at church, some of 'em I met at church, and some just in the community.

Maxwell: It was enough of a sense of community for you to meet people?

Knight: Yeah.

Maxwell: Would you say there was a sense of community when you first came and there were just six families?

Knight: You know, I can't think too good. I'd better not say because.... (hears something) Is that my.... (Talking to a third person in the room) Go in there and get that plate for me please, ma’am. You know, I'm talkin' to you, he’s early today.

Maxwell: Is he gonna eat with you?

Knight: Unt-uh, that's the man that brings my lunch.

Maxwell: I guess what I'm wondering is how that sense of community grew, where did it come from?

Knight: I guess from the state.

Maxwell: How do you mean?

Knight: I guess the food comes....

Maxwell: No, I mean the sense of community. You said there was a sense of there being a community here, that you could make friends and so on.

Knight: Oh!

Maxwell: And I'm wondering how did that community grow?

Knight: Oh, as more people came. I reason it just growed from that.

Maxwell: Just from being here.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: And the numbers being enough.

Knight: Uh-huh.

Maxwell: So maybe it grew more after the war?

Knight: Yes.

Maxwell: Would you say so?

Knight: I'd say after the war, sure.

Maxwell: One of the things I want is to have these stories recorded so that when children who grow up here want to find out where did their community come from (narrator laughs), they can go find out.

Knight: Yes!

Maxwell: So are there any other stories you'd like to put on, to say now?

Knight: No, that's enough.

Maxwell: Okay. I think we kinda wore you out, to tell you the truth. I feel like we've been making you talk a long time here. Want to end it here?

Knight: We can, if you want to.

Maxwell: Okay. Have you got anything else you'd like to say?

Knight: I don't think so.

Maxwell: Okay. We'll just turn it off then.



