Tim Whitney

July 11, 2008

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, <Tucson Arizona>



STEIGER:  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is a second session with Tim Whitney.  This is Lew Steiger, and I’m here in Flagstaff at Tim and Pam’s house.  It’s July 11, 2008, and we’re goin’ back for a pick-up session here on all this, and we were sittin’ around discussing things that we forgot to do in the first one.  So that’s what we’re lookin’ for here.  You were startin’ to talk about South Canyon and stuff you saw there--I guess the skeleton.

WHITNEY:  Right.

STEIGER:  We talked about that earlier.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, and it’s in some of the early <Page>s.  I said that the whole skeleton was there, including the skull, and I have to just check that.  I’m not positive that the skull was there.  I remember the skeleton up against the cliff, but that would have been in the mid seventies, and it may or may not have been there.  I seem to remember it, but I can’t be positive about it.  But also, I was just remembering, as much as this river story’s from recently, that some of those earlier trips were really impressionable, because a lot of places that we went were places that they hadn’t been very often, and so it was a really big deal to go up South Canyon or up Saddle, climbin’ up into Vasey’s--which I didn’t do, but other guides were doin’ that.  I mean, some of the first times that anybody had been above the falls at <Shinumo Creek>, and walked back up the creek, and goin’ back up to the orchard back there findin’ some of that stuff, from the river.  That was really fun to be with a bunch of guys that it was the first, second, third time that they’d done that stuff.  I remember--just was reminded today--about goin’ over the chain link fence in Stanton’s Cave, and bein’ really careful, but we went back in there.  We had flashlights.  It was so tempting, how could you not do that?  It’s like, "We can get over that fence!"  And so we went back in there.  I can remember exactly, it must have been hundreds of yards back in there.  I remember going through into maybe six or seven rooms, and these were really giant solution caves, and the rooms were giant, and there were small passages.  You go back into the first part of Stanton’s Cave, and then you could see where there’s a passageway, and it wasn’t a big arch or anything.  It was a relative small hole, and maybe you could walk through it, or you have to bend over, or even get down on your hands and knees, and then that would open up into another big room.  And we went back about six rooms with flashlights.  It was the only time I’d ever done it, but it was incredible, just incredible.  And you realized that so many of those solution caves are like that, where some spelunkers--I think in the early eighties some guys went back in Vasey’s Paradise quite a long way, like over half a mile, or farther than that.  And as I remember, it wasn’t that interesting, and so they came back out.  It wasn’t as interesting as some other places that they’d been.

Either the same trip, or one of the other first trips was we camped at <Nankoweap>, and we were going to go back up to the Kolb Arch.  We’d found that on a map and thought that that maybe we could get up there and back in the same day.  And it was just nobody around, hikin’ way back up there, and it was just really great.  For me, everything was--I was just so impressionable, we’re just hangin’ out in the creek, and hiking.  We went back quite a long ways.  We didn’t get to where we could actually even see the arch.  We knew about where it was, but anyway, it was just a great day hike.  That was the fun thing about those early trips:  everything was still pretty new to the guys that I was runnin’ with.

STEIGER:  Now, were these all just regular one-boaters?  These were eight-day motor trips that you did all this stuff on?

WHITNEY:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Because I remember you had talked about training trips--you got to do a couple of those?

WHITNEY:  No, I didn’t do any training trips.  A couple of these were dead-head trips, I think.  One was a dead-head to the Little Colorado, and we picked people up there.  It was still kind of a remnant of one of Tony and Fort Lee Company’s old trips, where he would run people to the Little Colorado, and that would be the trip.  Then they’d fly out and run on down to <Diamond Creek>, and that would be the end of the trip, before they went down to <South Cove>.  You have to check that with him, but I know one of these trips was a dead-head to the Little Colorado and we picked people up there.

	There was another trip--it could have been the same one--where we took them, and they flew out from one of the helicopter pads just down below lava, before you get to Whitmore.  And then we ran on down to Pearce Ferry.  There was one trip--again, I don’t know what the schedule was--but we wound up without any people on the boat, and we camped out at Lava Falls for two nights, waiting, I think, for Dick Clark to show up, and maybe there was another boat.  I can’t remember if it was Dave Henshaw.  But we were there for a couple of nights, just all by ourselves, just the two of us.  I had thought that this had happened at North Canyon, but Bob reminded me that Dories were camped down at--well, we went by there--they were camped at what we called the party beach.

STEIGER:  Lower <Lava>, Fat City.

WHITNEY:  Uh-huh, Fat City Camp.  A big wind came up, and someone had one of the early domed tents, and it wasn’t staked down, and it came off the beach and just went like Dorothy’s house in "The Wizard of Oz."  It just flew around and around, went across the river, and just got blown way up into the rocks.  And somebody rowed over to try and go after it.  I don’t know if they ever did retrieve it.  That was quite a sight.

	Should I go back and correct some of that stuff about when we first got to the canyon, and meeting Kolb and that stuff.

STEIGER:  Yeah, let’s correct the things that need to be talked about.  But these things, if you’ve got 'em corrected here, I can just do that--I can just put those into the transcript, and I can note.

WHITNEY:  I can write it so that it’s not just cryptic notes like that.

STEIGER:  Well, if you want to go back and touch on those, then we should.  And we might as well start with Emery Kolb.  What I wrote down here was that we had to get Emery Kolb in.  And then what you said earlier was that [unclear] Bob [unclear] North Rim, and he almost drove off into Zion.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, right.  In fact, I mean, I had come, when I drove my old Volkswagen van out from <Wisconsin> to come and do a trip, I’d come through the Four Corners.  But to backtrack to <Page> 5 or 6, early on in that description, I’m sure that I--talk to Bob today about it, and I’m sure he was right--we had come through <Texas> when we were comin’ out, because we almost got in a bad car wreck on the highway.  I’m not sure if came through <Albuquerque>--we came through Flagstaff, because he remembered that we went past Red Butte, that he’d flown over several times when he was out here.  So we came in, and everybody was so tired that I actually wound up driving into the park.

STEIGER:  Fourteen-year-old  Tim.

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  And there was nobody around, it was late at night, and both Larry and Bob were exhausted.  And so they just said, "We’ll just drive in and we’ll go to the campgrounds."  So we drove in and went to the campground.  I think we probably spent a couple of nights there, but one of the most memorable things was that--we were just touring around, and we’d drive around, and I thought it could have been the South Rim or the North Rim where Bob drove in his sleep, but that was farther along on the trip.  But we did go to the Kolb Studio, and Emery Kolb was still narrating the movie, which was "Down the Mighty Colorado."  Was that the title?  I think it was, "Down the Mighty Colorado."  And he would stand in the studio and narrate it.  That was pretty memorable, just by itself, but then later on, as years went by, it was a great memory to have, that we actually had seen Emery narrating the movie.  I think we went up and shook hands with him at the end of the show, because he’d hang out there and talk to people if they wanted to, and talk about the movie and stuff.  So that was pretty cool.  We were pretty excited to remember that later on.

STEIGER:  Do you remember what your impression of him was at the time?--your first impression, and of that whole movie?

WHITNEY:  Even then, I thought he was just an older gentleman who was kind of thin.  He had a pretty forceful voice, as I remember.  You could easily hear him.  He would project pretty well.  I think we were just sitting on folding chairs in the studio, and the projector was playing the movie over the top of everybody’s head, just like they did then.  He would just stand there, and he introduced it, then he narrated the movie, like he’d done it a million times.  It was a very quick hello or meeting before we left, and whisked off to do something else around the South Rim.

STEIGER:  Do you remember what you paid to get in there?

WHITNEY:  No.  I looked back, and we were paying about 30¢ a gallon for gas--or less.

STEIGER:  Those were the days.

WHITNEY:  So everything was....  Then from there, we went on, up to <Marble Canyon>, and over to Zion.  And that’s where we came through that storm, driving down 89, going on the way downhill into <Marble>, where we drove through that storm.  And then it was in the early eighties when I came back again.  We talked about that, coming through, just a summer monsoon that crossed the road like they do.  At V.C. we would watch 'em come out of <House Rock Valley>, and they either come down the road and go over the top towards the Ferry, and you could drive around and if you saw one go that way, you could get in the car and drive down and just sit and watch a little flash flood come down Cathedral Wash.  And then sometimes they’d go across the river, or maybe they’d go down the river, but later on we realized [unclear].  They were spawned in <House Rock Valley>, it seemed like, and they’d come out there.  And we drove through one, so here we are in this ’64 Ford Country Squire, and come into hail and rain, and then two minutes later you’re back out in the sun.  And then that made such an impression on the three of us.  And then the same thing happened in the early eighties, comin’ down from <Page> and I deja vued on that.  I hadn’t thought about it since then.

But then we stopped in <Marble> and went on to Zion.  That’s where we pulled in there.  I think we were at a campground down near the river, and that’s when....  I was sleeping in the front seat that night; I think Bob was in the back; Larry was in the back too.  And then he just slipped over the front seat, and he was down onto my legs and started the car, started driving, and I said, "Where are we going?"  And then I just kind of fell back asleep.  Then we woke up in the morning and we were about 100 yards from our gear pile, and realized that he had driven in his sleep.  That’s where that happened.  I thought it was at the North Rim.  I thought we were closer to the rim, but....

STEIGER:  So you guys came down through Tuba--I missed that--and you went to the South Rim before you went to the North Rim?

WHITNEY:  Yeah, we never actually went to the North Rim.  We drove to Zion.  We came ...

STEIGER:  ... around.  So that was why you were goin’ around.

WHITNEY:  Right.  But then we backtracked.  We didn’t go through Vegas to get to <Phoenix>, which was the destination.  So we came through--I’m not sure, but we were in <Texas>, and so we didn’t come through the Four Corners.  We came up the eastern route, probably from <Albuquerque> maybe.  I don’t really remember Flagstaff, but we must have come in the south entrance to the park.

STEIGER:  Just must have went through Flag and then straight across to the park.

WHITNEY:  Into the park, southern entrance.

STEIGER:  Did you go around to Desert View, you think, on the way?

WHITNEY:  We probably did.  And then out to Cameron, then up to <Marble>, and then Jacob Lake and over to Zion.  I don’t really remember Bryce.  We spent two, three days in Zion, and we hiked around and we drove around, and we rode horses, did a little horse trip, Refrigerator Canyon up to Angel’s Landing.  And then I’m sure that we must have just backtracked to <Phoenix> from there, because we didn’t go through Vegas, I know.  So that’s that correction.  I know that I’d come through the Four Corners before, but it must have been the southern route from <Texas> that brought us to the canyon, through Flag.

STEIGER:  Love that story.  Your parents, you really do gotta hand it to 'em, boy.  That was really somethin’.

WHITNEY:  And it was a brand new car, on top of just....

STEIGER:  Wasn’t a beater.

WHITNEY:  No, wasn’t a beater.

STEIGER:  This was 1964, so there weren’t gonna be any breakdowns or any problems.

WHITNEY:  That’s right, there weren’t gonna be any breakdowns.  I mean, they really had thought about it, and there wasn’t gonna be any c<Hance> for any major problems along the way.  It was a new car, and send the boys out there.  A lot of people thought they were crazy to let us do it.  But when we got to <Phoenix>, my father had to put an air conditioner in the car for my mother, because it was just....

STEIGER:  Too hot in <Phoenix>, especially after <Canada>, I imagine.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, too hot.  And that was whatever month that was, June or July.

STEIGER:  So they had 'em where you could just add that on later--the air conditioner?

WHITNEY:  Oh yeah, it was just a retrofit thing.

STEIGER:  Not standard equipment.

WHITNEY:  No, just went under the dash, over the hump, in the front seat.

STEIGER:  I remember those kind of round dealy-bobbers.

WHITNEY:  I’d forgotten that it was a new car.  It worked out really well.  We had a cartop carrier that was a plywood thing that was covered, and threw most of our stuff in there.  Inside the station wagon was a cooler and food and....

	I can’t even remember how many days we spent.  We stopped quite a few places.  It’d be fun to have the AAA Triptik, just to see what the route was exactly.

STEIGER:  I wonder where that got off to.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, just lost in the shuffle.  But we covered a lot of country, the north, the Midwest, and then down south in <Texas> and back up.  That’s really the only correction, the only thing that I can’t just write in.

STEIGER:  Well, what I had in my mind, was I thought it’d be good....  It didn’t seem like we quite--we kind of covered Rivers and Oceans.  I told Pammy that we covered you guys getting married, but I lied--we didn’t really get into that too much.  I don’t know if we want to touch on that, but I thought we could maybe touch on maybe a little bit more on just the evolution of Rivers and Oceans.  How are things goin’ right now?  How’s business?  Are you guys holdin’ up here?

WHITNEY:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  I mean, I say that, here we are in 2008, watchin’ the stock market go through the floor, and we’re watchin’ the dollar totally tank, and all this stuff goin’ on.  It’s interesting to sit here and think about how we’re gonna do in the river business for the next little while, and what-all’s gonna happen there.  But also interesting to think about you guys startin’ this business twenty years ago, that you’ve hung in, that it’s gone good.  It struck me that maybe I should have asked what were some of the highlights of doin’ that service.

WHITNEY:  Well, it was a lot different in the beginning than it is now, just like with any small business that you just grow on your own.  It really was fairly predictable until 9-11, and all that kind of changed.  There were so many aspects, really.  I mean, it took a long time, I think, for people to kind of heal emotionally from all that.  It took longer for--it was later in the spring before trips were booking up in <Grand Canyon>--and everywhere, really, at first.  There was a big lag that took place, and it was a while before people....  Some people had their trips already booked, and other people were just kind of wondering what they were gonna do.  And then the next year it started to get a little bit more back to normal.  And the next year was a little bit more back to normal, but then people were booking--I mean, adventure travel was changing, and people were booking things closer to when they wanted to go--small things that were noticeable.  We’ve diversified a lot of the offerings that we have, other destinations.  We just ran a trip in <Costa Rica> doing more natural history, whale-watching, sea kayaking trips, and Southern Baja, and sending more people to <Alaska> and British Columbia.  So there are other things that people found us for, other than river running in the West and <Grand Canyon> specifically.  It just kind of goes along, where some days are busy and some days aren’t.  It used to be if there was an airfare war, which was a real thing where all of a sudden there were fare wars, and all of a sudden you’d be busy for a few days of people--I mean, that’s all it would take, and people would be ready to book a trip in the canyon if they could find some space.

So it’s been fun for a long time.  You get calls from people who were in the canyon twenty years ago, and they did a trip where they helicoptered out at Deer Creek, or some really oddball thing like that.  It’s fun to talk to people who had been in the canyon years ago, and people who had been with Georgie or had been on some other trip, and maybe they remembered the schedule or the color of the boats, or some of the guides.  And so it was always fun to sort of reminisce with people on experiences they had.  In fact, next year I’m gonna do a charter trip with a couple of guys that worked for Georgie in the early seventies, and they’re putting a group of people together.  So like anytime you’re dealing with the public, we’re getting calls from all over the place.  But every once in a while somebody will call in, and they’ll have a lot to talk about from previous trips.

One example, which didn’t work out, and I was sorry not to talk to the guy again, but I got a call and he was in a really busy office--sounded like maybe a stockbroker or something like that--and his grandfather had been on....

STEIGER:  Crashed in the plane.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, I think he’d been on the United flight.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I think we got that.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, that crashed on <Chuar Butte>.

STEIGER:  And now his dad had died.  His dad brought him down.

WHITNEY:  Right, exactly.  And his father wanted to do kind of a memorial trip, so he chartered a trip with Cross Tours, and came down.  They did a trip in the canyon and they had a little memorial service, went around the corner at the Little Colorado.  Then his father had just died, and he wanted to do the same thing, and Cross Tours at that time, I think it had become--I think Tony Heaton bought it and it became Adventures West, but whether or not it was Adventures West or Arizona River Runners had absorbed Adventures West at that time, I can’t remember exactly what the company  name was.  But he wanted to do the same thing, and I thought, "Well, this’ll be great.  You called the right place, and I can help you put this together."  And then something came up and he had to go.  I said, "Call me back, make sure you call me back," and he never did, so I never know what happened with that.  That never came to fruition.  That’s been a fun aspect of the business.

	Do you want to talk about the beginning of it, starting in <Marble>?

STEIGER:  I think we kinda got that.

WHITNEY:  I can’t remember.

STEIGER:  Basically what we said in the transcript before was that Fred had had this slow year, and he offered you guys a commission, and from that, you were lookin’ for somethin’ to do, and so from that you ended up saying, "Hey, we could make a business out of this!"  And you also had talked about....

WHITNEY:  Nothing happened for a long time.

STEIGER:  Well, also, that there wasn’t the Internet, so it was a whole different deal.  In some ways, you were really needed then, just for people to make sense of the whole thing.  I think that holds true today, Internet not withstanding.  Do you get a bunch of your business from the Internet, you think?

WHITNEY:  Yeah, a lot of it now.  In fact, we were talking about this a little while ago.  We just renovated our site about a year ago, and we’re neighbors with the guy who started InfoMagic in town, and he was working with a group of young guys, and we got talking to them, and the guy put a small website together for us, probably in about ’89 maybe, or ’88.  I’m sorry, no, about ’94, maybe ’93 or ’94.  We realized that we were the first people around here, in <Grand Canyon> anyway, to have a website.  And it was so early on that it didn’t really make a big difference.  It was more of an electronic calling card that you had, really, as much as anything.  But where it’s come now, really, commercial competition--not just in <Grand Canyon>, but for so many things, it’s really taking place on line as much as it is in print advertising, for instance.  Website presence is a really big deal.  It doesn’t work quite as well in the river business, I think, to have online bookings.  You can do that, but availability just changes, it’s so dynamic, availability’s changing so quickly, that it’s not like you’re buying a book on Amazon.  Availability can change every minute, or several times an hour.  But still, a website presence, and bein’ on the first couple of <Page>s of Google or Dog Pile is a really important thing.  It’s where people want to be, because so many people are shopping that way, as we know.  And so that’s a little business in itself, maintaining your website.  It’s really important these days.

STEIGER:  Doin’ whatever you gotta do to make sure you come up on <Page> One at least.

WHITNEY:  That’s where people are lookin’, for the most part.  Still, there’s a lot of print advertising that works, and having a regular position in some magazines is important still.  I mean, it works, and there are a lot of people who aren’t as wired as others, and still prefer to have a color brochure, and deal with communication through the mail.  Most people are ready to e-mail now, but some people still just like to talk on the phone and figure it out that way.

STEIGER:  I remember one of the things we said was that we’d have to do another session and just talk about people, characters--and that kind of comes to mind, is that that might be worthwhile, just based on....  We’re certainly not gonna get 'em all in, but lookin’ back over the transcript from the earlier session, it was really neat to--you did a really nice kind of just description of Jim Norton, which is pretty classic, when you think of all these characters--especially from those early days.  I mean, I think about Fort Lee Company, I think about just what <Lee's Ferry> was like in the early seventies, just that whole scene there, some of those guys.

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  It’s all about the people.  That’s been the most fun aspect of my whole time down there, really.  I kind of came in--I mean, I was sort of dabbling in that era when I came to visit and do a couple of river trips in the seventies there--I mean, not that there aren’t any characters all along the way, but it did seem to be a little bit more Wild West down there when we talked about the Ferry and you could live down there for months at a time and nobody’d come down there.  Fishermen only came at certain times of the year, maybe.  And you could be there--if you were there over the winter, you could be there for days and days at a time, and unless somebody came down from <Marble> or V.C. or Cliff Dwellers....

But it was great to run with Jim Norton, for sure, for a couple of summers.  He was probably one of the great characters.  He was really the great characters of my early days as a minnow down there, when what was goin’ on.  Here was a guy who just seemed to have it all under control, even though....  Crash and burn or whatever kind of stuff that he got into, it never really seemed to faze him, and it always made a real impression on me.

But you should talk to Tony Sparks.  There’s a guy who just....  He remember all the people that kind of came and went through those early days when he was developing--he was gonna build a motel above the <Paria Beach>.  There’s a place there.  I think the sewer system and all that is still in there.  And the park wouldn’t go for it, and so he moved the trailers over to behind the restricted lot, what now is the bus lot between the Ferry and the fort.  That’s where he built the gas station, had his office and a restaurant and some downriver supplies.  The characters that’d come through there--I mean, he’d sit and talk to Georgie and Whitey.  They’d just come and sit and talk.  I was just there for a few days when some of that stuff was happening, but Pat and Susan Conley were there.  I think Pat hired Dick the first time when he came from <Phantom>.  When Bob and Myron and Dick Coffee were down at <Phantom>, spent the winter down there, I think Myron came out.  But then they sort of disbanded and Dick went up to <Lee's Ferry>, and Pat hired him.  Tony would talk about those days.  There were so many people who came through who were really early river runners and kind of cowboys and transients, people who were just moving through and would work for a few days.  But when I really started workin’ in 1980 and after that, it was a lot of the people who are still around, who I was working with. 

STEIGER:  Can you think of any classic stories you wanted to put in here?  You know, things that are actually specific?  I can’t believe how many....  I told you that story about Ed, where he’s like [unclear], and I’m like, "No."  (laughs)  There’s all this shit that would happen all the time, and I used to think I’d remember all these things, but it’s funny how you don’t.  They just kind of slip away.

WHITNEY:  I don’t know....  I mean, river stories, you tell me one, and it’ll remind me of two more.  I do remember--it’s not a really especially funny story, but it was my first real introduction to how--it probably changed my sleep pattern to this day.  I was down in <Marble>, camped on a little beach just down below North Canyon.  Went through that next little rapid, you know, and we were camped on the left down there.  And I’d seen it for a couple of trips, and of course, you know, you’re down there, and it’s higher water, it’s afternoon water.  Then it looked like a great little beach, just perfect for ten to twelve people.  That was all we had on the trip, one boat.  So I pulled in there and we camped and everything was just goin’ great, and then my sister Ann was with me, swamping for me, and about four or five o’clock in the morning I must have just fallen dead asleep, and I had a great sleep, and I woke up and I was sleeping so soundly that I slept past daybreak.  I’d been sleeping so soundly because the boat had been aground, on a perfectly flat beach.  Where we pulled in for camp was great, a nice little sandy dune, plenty of room for the kitchen and for a few people to throw their gear down.  But right about where the river met the beach was pretty much flat from there on out.  So I just woke up and saw that, and I was slightly alarmed, being one of my first trips down there.  I thought, "Okay, what are we gonna do now?"  And so I knew that the water was coming up, and I wasn’t sure exactly time it was gonna be--could be noon by the time we were really getting any good water.  So there really wasn’t anywhere to hike there either.  I mean, you could kind of climb up in the Redwall, but that was about it.  And it wasn’t even the Redwall, quite, at that point.  So it was sort of a slow morning in camp.

STEIGER:  So you decided not even to try to push it in?

WHITNEY:  No.  I mean, there were twelve people, and a big ol’ Fort [Rilly?] rig.

STEIGER:  Big rear unit.

WHITNEY:  Fully loaded.  First day out, we weren’t gonna pivot that thing around.  So here was a really definitive moment.  Around the corner comes Alzedo [phonetic] on a Diamond trip, and it was a double take.  You know, I’m looking at him, and he’s looking at me.  Then he looks at me again and the next thing you know, he just pulls in.  And so it’s a two-boat Diamond trip, and they pull over and just come right in.  "Hey, how are you?" like nothin’s wrong, this sort of thing happens all the time.  Stopped, nothin’ to worry about, just blow it off, don’t take it personally.  And they just all came and just lifted that boat up and spun it around about two times, and we were back in the water, and off they went.

STEIGER:  Now you got forty-five people.

WHITNEY:  Exactly.  And so, see, he came to my rescue that day.  I’ll never forget that.  And how everybody just pitched in, and it was all fun and laughs, there was nothing serious or personal about it, nobody got hurt.  So what, so the water went out and you got stuck?  No big deal.  And that was a great lesson, really, just in terms of, number one, paying attention to....  That’s when the river was still fluctuating 10-12 feet every night.  But no worry, we’re all in it together, your pards will come to your rescue down there.  They just made such short work of this great big boat that was stuck on the beach, and off they went.  So we just threw our gear on, and off we went.

STEIGER:  I wonder where Alzedo is.

WHITNEY:  He’s actually in Parawan [phonetic] or someplace not far from <Brian Head>.  In fact, I was lookin’ for somebody to run that private trip, because I couldn’t go.  I talked to Tim Deutschlander [phonetic] up there, and then to Doug Deutschlander.  I have a long list now of ...

STEIGER:  ... possible motorboatmen.

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  Mostly fairly ancient guys.  And they said that he was up there.  I’m not sure what he was doin’.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that was quite a crew all those guys had--both Diamond and Sanderson.  I don’t even separate 'em.  I think back to those days when they were all in it together, those guys.

WHITNEY:  There’s a story that Richard was tellin’ the other night.  He’s really tickled by this story.  We were having fun with it, but I guess the image of what’s going on in tellin’ the story speaks louder than what we were doin’ at the time.  It was a trip with Fox, probably one of my last training trips.  We were camped at Poncho’s.  It got right about dark, and we hadn’t quite cleaned up, and everybody’s havin’ a big party.  We weren’t feeling any pain, there weren’t any real antics, no acrobatics going on or anything.  We’re standing down in the kitchen, and here comes this little spotted skunk that comes running down from up at the edge of the overhang, just "doot doot doot doot doot."  Came right down, we just all stood still, he looked around in the kitchen, and we used to have a big roast beef that we’d cook in <Page>--get it from Basha’s and then take it down there and then just heat it up, warm it up and slice it.  Everybody thought that was great stuff.  So there was roast beef that was floatin’ around in the chickie pails and the wash buckets.  And so this little skunk must have had some success at this, because he kind of looked around, but then he went right to the buckets.  He pulled a piece of floating roast beef out of the bucket, and "doot doot doot doot doot doot doot," up into the cliff.  About five minutes later, here he comes again.  I didn’t really know, it wasn’t a striped skunk, but it’s a skunk and somebody said it was a spotted skunk.  Oh okay, that’s a new kind of skunk for me.  But he came back down, and he did it again.  He just went right to the buckets and pulled out some roast beef, and rather than munch it right down there, he just took it right back up, all the way back up the dune, and kind of under the overhang, or up on the slope there.  And so he did this two, three times.  We thought we’d have a little fun with him.  So he came back down the next time, and I grabbed a piece of roast beef off of the table, and I held it down there.  So we weren’t feelin’ any pain, but it wasn’t bein’ really crazy.  It was just see if he takes ahold of this thing.  Sure enough, he just came over and he latched onto it, and we were standing there quietly, and people were laughing.  So I just kind of hung onto it, and he hangs onto the other end, and we had this little tug of war goin’ with this piece of roast beef.  So this went on for about a minute, "gnar, gnar, gnar," he’s pullin’ on it, and I’m kinda pullin’ back on it.  And then I just thought he seems so intent, I reached down and I lifted him up by his tail.  I pulled on his tail, and he didn’t let go of the roast beef, and so he’s hangin’ there with his mouth wrapped around this piece of roast beef, and his feet are off the ground, and then I put him back down, lifted him up again, put him back down, and then just let him have the piece of roast beef, and he took off.  Fox still tells that story.  And somebody said something about the spotted skunk, and I said, "Well, I don’t think spotted skunks can spray if you’re holdin’ their tail up."  And somebody said "Oh ... yes ... they ... can!"

STEIGER:  So you just lucked out of getting squirted.

WHITNEY:  Yeah!  He was just so intent.  Helen Fairly [phonetic] was sayin’ that she’d had some kind of an experience with a spotted skunk--oh! that had been running over her camp, using her tarp as a highway between Point A and Point B in some little camp that she was in.  She looked up about spotted skunks that they’re more reticent about spraying, but that their odor is worse than a striped skunk.

STEIGER:  So you dodged a bullet there, boy.

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  That’s one of those stories that you start out by saying, "We were younger then...."  Richard likes that story.  (pause)  I’ll have to think some more on this next trip.  I’ll be down there with....

STEIGER:  With Bob, yeah.

WHITNEY:  Maybe I can add a couple of river stories.  Sitting here, it doesn’t....

STEIGER:  Yeah, he had that little recorder didn’t he?  On the Sobek deal.

WHITNEY:  Yeah!

STEIGER:  Make him bring that.

WHITNEY:  I will!

STEIGER:  I think it was pretty good, too, whatever it was.

WHITNEY:  Did he give you those tapes?

STEIGER:  Did he give 'em to me?  I’m not sure if he did, or if he kept 'em.

WHITNEY:  I know he’s interested in having whatever he recorded as part of the whole archive.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I’ve still got--what a can of worms--I’ve still gotta put that stuff out.  I got started, I got the menu, and I got it kind of laid out, but it’s still on my list to do.  They have these big dual-air [phonetic] DVDs that I think I could put a whole bunch of stuff on.  But anyway, I shouldn’t be recording that.

WHITNEY:  Well, I mean, just sitting here, I hadn’t thought about anything particularly to thoroughly dredge up.  I mean, there’s the famous wall-to-wall story when we were down....  I guess I should tell that story.  That should be on tape anyway.  Honestly, it’s one of those stories where I need to get Fox and Walt Gregg [phonetic] and Paul Henshaw in the room to really get the flavor from a few different angles.

	It starts out that we got to Pearce Ferry, the trip, with....  Why was Pablo there?  It might have been one of the rare four-boat trips that we all launched together and took out together.  Fox was runnin’ a boat, and it was one of those last two training trips that I did with Fox.  And Jim Northon, and Walt Gregg, and a guy named Max Byrd [phonetic] was with him.  I can’t remember who was crew with Jim Norton.  And then Paul Henshaw.  Anyway, we got down to Pearce Ferry and the truck couldn’t show up, so we got word that we were gonna be there overnight.  And we were all pretty de-rigged on the beach, ready to go.  In those days, with that Fort Lee rig, there was a couple of cross straps underneath the doughnut that would hold the frame, other than the frame straps that would go around.  I remember that there were these straps underneath.  So we were completely de-rigged, the frame straps were off, and so the frames were really just sitting on the rubber.  There were these straps underneath, but mostly they were just there to help seat the frame in the boat.  So anyway, it gets to be later in the day, and we’re just runnin’ out of things to do, and Jim Norton starts to blend up some margaritas on the beach.

So one things leads to another, and everybody’s havin’ a few margaritas, and we’re havin’ a good time.  It’s dark, and we thought, "Well, let’s take the boats for a swim, maybe go out and have a swim and take the boats for a spin."  So we got two of the boats, and we’re just out there, kinda hangin’ out.  I don’t remember exactly how it started, but we bounced the boats into each other.  And then it became kind of a contest, like a sparring contest, or what did the knights used to do?

STEIGER:  Jousting?

WHITNEY:  Jousting contests!  So we’d back up a little bit and then we’d drive towards each other.  And with those rigs, there was a frame in the back, and then there was a center tube that filled in the doughnut.

STEIGER:  Pretty soft up front.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, but there was nothin’ up front.

STEIGER:  So were the side tubes off of 'em?

WHITNEY:  Yeah, side tubes are off.

STEIGER:  And these frames are sittin’ on there, just sittin’.

WHITNEY:  Sittin’ on there with basically nothing to hold them on.  "Oh, wasn’t that funny?!"  We’d run 'em in bow-to-bow, and the rubber would go up in the air a little bit.  Well, here we are, all these bright boatmen, trying to make the game a little bit more interesting.  So we back up a little farther, and then we go full cob and run the boats into each other, and the rubber meets and goes up a little higher in the air.  Well, that’s even more fun.  So then somebody yelled out, "Wall-to-wall!"  So we turned the boats around, and we drive off in opposite directions, and then turn around and then in order to make this work right, we had to know that we were gonna meet head on, just right, so we were flashing lights.  We’d flash a light and start driving towards each other, full bore.  Then shine the lights right at the end so we make sure that were....  And it hit straight on, because you wouldn’t want to have a glancing blow, somebody might get hurt.  And basically about the first fifteen of the boats, the two, would just go straight up in the air.  Just the sound of the rubber meeting and the "D" rings clanking, and straps stretching and that sort of thing, we thought it was just hilarious.  So we did that for about another half an hour or so.

At one point I remember somebody else was drivin’ our boat, and Fox straddled the doughnut, one tube, like he was gonna be bull riding.  So he was gonna ride that thing into the next....

STEIGER:  Now, the middle tube’s still in there?

WHITNEY:  No, it’s out.  It’s just the doughnut, you can see down to the lake.

STEIGER:  I can’t believe those frames didn’t just fall in.

WHITNEY:  Well, exactly!  That was the thing later on, that we were thinkin’ about.  All we had to do was separate the rubber enough, and we’d have dropped those frames to the bottom of the lake.  That would have been another story.

STEIGER:  That would have really hurt Tony’s feelings, yeah.

WHITNEY:  That would have hurt Tony’s feelings, right.  We wouldn’t have been able to explain it to him for years to come, not being employed in the company probably.  So I just remember that last time when we ran into each other, and Fox rode up on this thing like bull riding.  But it was just enough of a collision that he couldn’t hold on, so he fell into the lake.  I looked down there and for a second--what I remember seeing was like water goin’ down the bowl.  I mean, his mouth was open and the lake was just kind of circling down his throat.  So I ran up to pull him out of the water, and he comes sputtering out of the water and he sits on the tube and he looked at me and said, "You were scared, weren’t ya’?!  You were scared, weren’t ya’?!"  So he was giving me a lot of malarkey about coming to his rescue.  But the thing was, we went back in and we survived the whole thing.  It was hilarious, really.  Norton’s still in there blending margaritas.  So we wake up the next morning, and we still don’t know when the truck’s gonna show up, but there’s a guy who’s camped down at Pearce Ferry, so he sort of ambles over into camp, and I think we’re firin’ up some coffee.  He said, "Are you the guys that took the boats out last night?"  Looking through these ticky little hangovers sayin’, "Yeah, that was us."  He said, "Hey, if you go out tonight, could I come with you?"  (laughter)  So we didn’t upset the neighborhood too badly, I guess, that night.  You should hear Walt Gregg’s version, and I need to hear it too.  [unclear] from Walt and from Pablo and from Fox, because I’m sure there would be some other colorful angles that those guys remember.

STEIGER:  Boy!

WHITNEY:  That was a funny night, though.  That was just hilarious:  what we thought was really funny, what we got away with, and how little it took to entertain us.

STEIGER:  I was talkin’ with Gale [phonetic].  Remember that time we all got together, we were runnin’ out some how, and we ended up with five motor rigs tied side-by-side.  I was tryin’ to figure out....  Remember that?  We were all runnin’ out.  You were on an ARR trip, and I can’t remember if we were on an Adventures West deal or somethin’.

WHITNEY:  I remember two trips.  I don’t remember you and Gale on that, but I remember Myron, I think, was on that. We did have five motorboats across.

STEIGER:  Well, what I remember was it was....

WHITNEY:  We ran out where we got stuck at <Salt Creek>.  Remember that?  Where we went around and around in the eddy.  We couldn’t tell, because <Salt Creek> was so big at the time that you couldn’t tell <Salt Creek> upriver from downriver.  And there was no moon, and we thought, well, we could figure this out from the stars.  And that didn’t help.  And we’d motor a little bit and then drift.

STEIGER:  Oh, early in the mornin’.

WHITNEY:  That was when you could float all the way out to Pearce Ferry.

STEIGER:   I don’t remember that.  I remember doin’ this thing where me and Gale were on this one boat, and we helicoptered everybody out at Whitmore, and we’re down there, not all that far down, somewhere ten miles down, down there around 200 or somethin’--not even 200--195 or somethin’ like that.  And here comes Ed Smith and somebody, and we wave 'em on in, and they come and tie up to us.  Then we got three big motorboats tied up, and we start partyin’, "Hey, let’s have a party!"  And I remember thinkin,’ "Oh shit, this wasn’t such a good strategy, I’m on the outside."  (laughs)  "I wanna be in the middle!"  And then along comes you and somebody else.  You guys are on a two-boater, and we already got three boats tied up, but you come and you’re on a two-boater with somebody else, and we wave you in.  And I remember I’m laughin’ to myself, I wave you over next to me, "C’mon over, Whitney!  Here, I’ll tie you up, buddy."  And we tied you up.  Do you even remember this?

WHITNEY:  Yeah!

STEIGER:  And we tied you up.  I did it just ’cause I was like, "Good, now Whitney’s on the outside."

WHITNEY:  "Now I’m covered."

STEIGER:  Yeah, I’m on the inside, so I’m good.  We tied all those boats up, and I remember somebody had a boom box and we’re dancin’ and doin’ all this, and completely forgot about Parashant Wash, that little riffle down below, and we went into that, all five of us.  Oh my God, I remember that.  But we shouldn’t be puttin’ that on....  We’ll just clear it.

WHITNEY:  How could I forget that?

STEIGER:  And your boat, we put your boat just right up on shore there, on the right side.  I remember thinkin’, "Oh my God, none of us are ever gonna see whitewater again," because we just forgot that riffle was comin’.  We’re all partyin’, and it was so gentle before, five boats, we weren’t even gonna catch an eddy.  We were just goin’ round and round, nobody was payin’ any attention to where we were.

WHITNEY:  There’s a little bell goin’ off on that.  Bein’ up on shore, I kind of remember that.

STEIGER:  I remember your boat went way up on shore, and luckily we had four more boats in the water, and so we drug you back off, into the river.  I couldn’t believe it.  And nothing was broke, nothing got hurt.  That’s what was so incredible.  That was, I think, the biggest....  Thank God it was a Demory [phonetic] boat.

WHITNEY:  That wasn’t what I was thinkin’ about.  I was thinkin’ that there was a big run-out, five across, but we were down on the lake for that.  Were we towin’ anybody?  Pullin’ and row rigs or....

STEIGER:  This one that I’m thinkin’ of, there were five motorboats just tied side-by-side.

WHITNEY:  Way up there.

STEIGER:  Yeah, and we were just floatin’, and we had the boom box out and we were partyin’ down, and everybody was dancin’, and we weren’t paying any attention at all, because we were invincible in our big five-boat rig.  And then we looked up and here comes that little riffle, and we’re like, "Uh-oh!"  And we all just kind of ran to our boats.  We probably had our motors up anyway, but I remember goin’ to the motor, but there wasn’t really time to.  We had those little ropes, we’d have had to cut 'em all off.

WHITNEY:  There’s some great run-out stories.  Did you ever hike up to the bat caves?

STEIGER:  Yeah, where the tower is.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, somebody asked me about that the other day.  I think it was up there when you could still pull in and just go up.  There was a trail.

STEIGER:  I did that with Dick on a winter trip.

WHITNEY:  I can’t remember who I did it with the first time, but then I remember it was a pretty fun hike, number one, just to be up under the tower.  I think it might have been with Owen.  As I remember, Fred had said, "If you ever go up there, make sure you bring me some guano for the garden."  And so that became kind of a mission one trip, to go up there.  But walking back in there on that board walk--you know, there was a board walk that went way, way back in there.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I remember.

WHITNEY:  I remember it was some time after that, that Owen showed up.  He had a canister of guano from the U.S. Guano Corporation that he found at some yard sale or something like that or something.  I don’t know where he found it exactly, but it was the way they had packaged that stuff.

STEIGER:  Historic artifact.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, really great artifact.  You could climb around on the tower a little bit, but to me it wasn’t all that inviting anyway, because it looked kind of creaky.  I was kind of blown away by how big and deep that cave is.  It’s a great big place.  And that stuff is like moon dust.  I didn’t really know what to expect there either, but you had to be really careful, or you’d get that stuff up in the air, and it would take forever to settle out, it was such fine stuff.

STEIGER:  Yeah, a lot of bats in there, from what I remember--even then.  I mean, even now I guess.

WHITNEY:  And they’d vacuum it out, which I didn’t realize either.  It wasn’t something that you dug and used a shovel for, but they’d just suck it up and ship it out that way.

STEIGER:  Well, I’m at a loss for an intelligent question to ask here.

WHITNEY:  I do remember one night, it was a May trip, a night at Redwall.  Grand Canyon Youth was there, and Brian and Dugald were on the trip.

STEIGER:  A night at Redwall Cavern?

WHITNEY:  Yes.  Were you there?

STEIGER:  I don’t know.  I don’t think so.

WHITNEY:  (chuckles)  Good answer!  It was a freezing cold day.  I remember we were camped at like 19 Mile or Indian Dick or somewhere like that.  Fort Lee trip, me and Fox, one of those two trips, and it started raining about 3:30 or 4:00 in the morning, and it was a cold rain, probably snowin’ up on the rim.

STEIGER:  Like early May or somethin’--late April, early May.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, May seventh or somethin’.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Boy, it used to do that all the time.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, I know, it’s funny.

STEIGER:  Just colder than hell--snow, rain.

WHITNEY:  It could be a really cold time, change of seasons.  That Memorial Day storm, the last one to come through, kind of thing.

STEIGER:  Where you get faked out, because it’d already turned hot.

WHITNEY:  Right, exactly.  You started out in shorts an tee shirts at the ferry, and then that night it turns to freezing rain.  And it was cold.  We were in our trusty tube tents, and so everybody was completely soaked in the morning--cots and everything was drenched and sandy.

STEIGER:  These were canvas cots, that wouldn’t even dry.

WHITNEY:  Canvas cots, army surplus cots.  And it didn’t stop raining.  It rained right on through breakfast.

STEIGER:  I guess those cots, once they got wet, they were wet.  They would never dry out, would they?

WHITNEY:  Yeah, well, they were wet.  They were heavy-duty canvas, so they went away wet.  It didn’t take too long for 'em to dry out, just as long as you had dry weather.  But they weighed about ten pounds more, once they were wet, than when they were dry.  It was rainin’ in the eggs in the morning, and we just packed up everything the way we had it, and everything just....  Then people just got two black river bags--one for a sleeping bag and a three-quarter length pad.

STEIGER:  A foam pad--not a Paco pad or a ThermaRest. [phonetic]

WHITNEY:  Yeah, foam pad, just like a one-inch foam pad.

STEIGER:  That would take in water.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, right.  A one-inch foam sponge.  And then another bag for their clothes.  Anyway, we got on the water and went down.  It was cold and still raining, and everybody was really freezing.  I remember I was drivin’ some of the rapids.  Anyway, I drove right through the guts of Indian Dick and just got everybody soaked with 50-degree water and still raining.  We’re like waiting for it to turn to ice on the frame any minute.  I’m doin’ pushups to try and stay warm.  People are doin’ whatever they can, huddled together.  We got down to Redwall and just got out of the rain, number one.  Everybody’s standin’ around.  It was still raining and cold.  We got out the [blasters?] and we fired up some soup, and just basically spent the whole day there.  Moki came by, they went on down.  I think they camped early at the Little Redwall downstream.  Another trip came by.  And then it stopped raining.

STEIGER:  But it basically rained all day.

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  And later, after lunchtime, it stopped raining, and we just thought....  It was fine with everybody just to sit in a nice dry place and get some other clothes out, get some hot soup, and just basically....  It was sort of a hypothermic emergency.

STEIGER:  Survival issue, yeah.

WHITNEY:  So it got to be later in the afternoon, and it stopped raining.  Everybody was just so happy to have that big cavern for shelter, we just sort of looked around and thought, "You know what, this is still kind of an emergency, and we’re gonna camp here.  Everybody:  you gotta keep everything really clean, and don’t tell anybody, keep the place open so everybody can come in here.  So if anybody comes in, in the morning, we just make room for 'em.  We’ll just make a quick breakfast and make sure we get everything all cleaned up and we’ll get out of here and keep on goin’."  So that was the plan.  And then later in the afternoon, a Grand Canyon Youth trip pulled in.  Well actually, they pulled in upstream in the little mini-overhang that’s up in the eddy.  So we have the kitchen set up and we’re making dinner.  I think Brian came down and said hello, and "we’re gonna camp upstream."  We said, "If anybody wants to come down and sleep inside the cavern here, we’re here too, just tryin’ to stay out of the weather."  So we had some how-do-you-do’s, and they went back and they’re makin’ dinner.  And then it cleared up, and the moon came out, and the stars came out, and the moon came around downstream, and started to shine back into Redwall, and it was just this beautiful....  Everything turned silvery in this big, bright, white moon.  And everybody was still awake for quite some time later in the evening.  And then we just kind of got together, and we started to float around the eddy in the rowboats.

STEIGER:  The rowboats came on down.

WHITNEY:  Came on down, yeah.  Totally harmless, and we just kind of floating around.  And you go back up and catch a little bit of current and then come down, row out of the current.  And we must have circled the eddy about ten times, really being quiet and letting everybody sleep.  I think Pablo was there, so he decided to get one of the Fort Lee boats, and so we’d all go around the eddy.  Pretty soon, I think every boat was goin’ around in the eddy, and we were just doin’ this little eddy dance until late at night.

STEIGER:  So were you just idling?

WHITNEY:  No.

STEIGER:  The Fort Lee boat was just floatin’?

WHITNEY:  It was just floatin’ around.  And at one point....

STEIGER:  Did you have to start the motor?

WHITNEY:  Eventually.  We went around, I think, a couple times, and the row boats would pull us back in so that we didn’t have to make any noise--we were being so considerate.  And then we just sort of got out of sequence at one point, and (laughs) I remember I think we got down to where you need to pull in, and the boat wasn’t making it into the eddy.  And so Brian latched on, and he was gonna get us into the eddy.  And with Brian doing these Herculean pulls, one after another, standing up and pulling, and just rowing as hard as he could, at just about midnight.  Couldn’t quite get us back in the eddy.  I mean, it was just a hair’s breadth away from comin’ home--but he couldn’t.  Then Pablo fired up the engine to drive in, and we thought, "That’s probably enough," so we drove in and he parked.  Somebody came down and wondered if everything was okay.  And in the morning there was a lot of chitchat about, "Wasn’t the moon so beautiful?  But it sounded like there was somethin’ goin’ on out on the river."  People were sleeping, but they didn’t get up to look to see what was going on.  And so we kind of got away with [it].  It was just a beautiful evening, and we got away without really interrupting anybody’s sleep.  Then we were out of there in the morning.  But for the way the day started, and then to have the light of the silvery moon shining back into the cavern, and we’re all just kind of goin’ around and changing boats and a lot of fun chitchat.  It was a great night.

STEIGER:  What kind of boats did the GCYE guys have?  Did they have a bunch of little boats, or did they still have those big ones?

WHITNEY:  No, they were all....

STEIGER:  The little singles?

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  But were they Rogue Rivers?

STEIGER:  The orange ones?

WHITNEY:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  For a while there they had....  Well, maybe not, if he was still trainin’ ya’.  They had the orange ones, but first they had these gray ones--they had Green Rivers.

WHITNEY:  They weren’t Green Rivers.

STEIGER:  They were orange, yeah.

WHITNEY:  I’m pretty sure.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that was next, that was later.  First it was....  My first trip when I went, they had--which would be really fun to take again--they had this snout boat that Brian and Dan started out on.  Brian was like thirteen years old and Dan was in high school.

WHITNEY:  The Youth boat?

STEIGER:  Yeah, when they had four rowing stations and then this big sweep.  That would be fun to get that thing on a training trip and run that thing again.

WHITNEY:  Oh, exactly.  I’ve asked McCallum why he doesn’t do that.

STEIGER:  Why don’t we do it?  Why don’t we get a training trip together or something, and take that thing?  I remember seein’ that on my first trip ever--those guys were down there.  Then I remember seein’ it on several trips.  And then they kind of went to this triple-rig.  Then they had three 10-mans, and I saw Brian and Neff.  Neff was the boss and Brian was [unclear].

WHITNEY:  And Moody.

STEIGER:  Did some of them.  But Brian and Neff, there was one year where we would see those guys all the time, because Moody was workin’ at ARR still.  And then finally they broke 'em up, and they had some little boats.  But first [unclear].

WHITNEY:  I was on an ARR trip, so it was before ’86 or ’87.  And Dick was runnin’ sweep and they brought that into Little Colorado.  I was sorry I never saw them in action anywhere.  I’ve forgotten who was rowing, but it was one of those high-water--’84, ’85, ’86 were all high-water, and so everybody was goin’ way up, camping way upstream, a mile from the river kind of thing.

STEIGER:  They probably bought that boat because that would have been a good one for <Crystal> back then.  (laughs)  The one boat you could make the cut in.

WHITNEY:  Boy, you know, you talk about characters, I do remember Hawk runnin’ what we called the Enterprise, the full-size Western rig that was a row rig, eighteen-foot oars.  He’s in <Salt Lake> talkin’ to Bob Skinner--no, somebody in the Western office--I’ve been trying to get a picture from him, see if he had a picture for the 2008 Whale Foundation calendar.

STEIGER:  Oh, that rig, yeah.

WHITNEY:  But I remember, gees, where were we?  It was one of the Garnet camps, and he went by at 7:30, 8:00 at night, just almost dark, and still out on the water.  But I did see, I remember, the pendulum run at <Bedrock>, where he pulled in, and he had this figured out for the length of rope, and that he’d row back out in the current, and the rope would become taut, and it would just swing him past <Bedrock>, and just swing him into the eddy.

STEIGER:  He tied himself off.

WHITNEY:  He tied himself to shore, and so he didn’t have to try to row the move.

STEIGER:  And that worked?

WHITNEY:  And that worked.  And another time I saw him at <Crystal>, and he ran <Crystal>.  He went right through the old hole, and had a good straight run, came out of there, and just couldn’t have been happier.  You know, you could see him from shore, he was jumpin’ up and down--a nice straight shot through the old hole.  Let’s see, that was a Fort Lee trip, I think, so it was before ’83.

STEIGER:  Yeah, well, if the old hole was there, it would have had to have been.  So who we’re talkin’ about here is this guy named Hawk who ran for Western River Expeditions.  But I remember he was a marathoner, and a lot of times you’d see his motorboat tied up--I saw this a couple three times--and everybody’d be just sittin’ on the boat, and you’d stop in, "Is everything okay?"  They’d say, "Yeah, we’re waitin’ for Hawk.  He’s trainin’."  He’d be off runnin’.  He’d make everybody wait for him.

WHITNEY:  I think he and Jet--Jeremiah Jet--if they were someplace together, they’d race each other up the cliff.

STEIGER:  These guys would go runnin’.

WHITNEY:  Waiting for water, just something to do while they’re waiting for the water to come up.  And I have his name--I’ve forgotten his name offhand now, but I have it--there’s somebody else who ...

STEIGER:  ... would be a fun guy to talk to.

WHITNEY:  Yeah, exactly.  And Bill Skinner.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I actually have a Bill Skinner [interview], I did talk to him.  Interesting.  Ball out guy, boy.  Hawk had these aquiline features, he looked pretty hawk-like.  This boat that Whitney’s talkin’ about here was--my God, was it like four tubes?  It was a "J" rig that was rowed, but it was like the biggest rowboat in the history of <Grand Canyon>, I think.  Pretty much that would have to be the case.  It was like a double snout rig, wasn’t it?

WHITNEY:  Right.  I think you’re right, because a "J" rig is five tubes, right?

STEIGER:  It had three or four--maybe just three.

WHITNEY:  It was a beamy boat, it was wide.  It could have been four tubes wide, I think.

STEIGER:  This thing would have dwarfed a snout rig.

WHITNEY:  Oh yeah.  He’d be out until after dark sometimes, before he’d get tied up.

STEIGER:  That was real short-lived.  Was that in the middle of motors versus rowing, where they trying to develop their rowing program or something?

WHITNEY:  You know, it’s funny, I never really talked to him.  I don’t know why, if I didn’t just make a point of pulling in....

STEIGER:  Now, Western has a rowing program, but it seemed like they didn’t then.  Then they just had these things that he would do.  I mean, there was somebody else, Steve Lowry or somebody that was doin’ it with him.  Seems like sometimes there’s be a couple of boats, but it was only for a short while that we even saw him doin’ that.

WHITNEY:  It could have been Steve.  I think he was even cookin’ on that boat sometimes.

STEIGER:  Just to make his schedule, just keep goin’.

WHITNEY:  Goin’ down the river, cooking and rowing and livin’ on the raft.  It was pretty short-lived, though, you’re right.  But I remember seein’ him a couple of times one summer for sure.  But it’d be great to get some recording time with him.  I have a number for him, too, if you want it sometime.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  There’s so many people that would be good to talk to.  And there’s so many that have been left behind, that we didn’t get to talk to:  [Earl] Leseberg, Ron Smith.  Clare and Bob and Tony--the pioneers.  And here’s Jerry Sanderson just sittin’ up there.  He’s another guy.  It’d be fun to talk to Hoss, too.

WHITNEY:  And Pat Diamond, too.  There’s so many.  And Vicky McKay.  The wives and the women who held the companies together while the guys were down there.

STEIGER:  Fred always mentioned all those guys.  Even after Carol was gone, Fred talked about that--everybody’s wives, how much work they did, and how responsible they all were.  I think Fred pretty much felt like if it wasn’t for--it was Carol that kind of pushed him into gettin’ started.

WHITNEY:  I’ve been reading through [my notes].  Let me see, I did make a couple of notes.  I was trying to get some stuff straight about when Fort Lee Company, when Tony moved.  He lived in <Page> because he wanted to raise the kids--he didn’t want them to have to be commuting to school, so he commuted from <Page>.  He’d stay down there once in a while.  I was trying to get the year right when he finally moved everything--when he bought--I think it was a Coca-Cola building, the warehouse in <Page>--and moved everything up there.  After the warehouse burned and they still just had a shed.  And that’s when I got there.  I mean, when the warehouse was there, it was just a really slick operation, to be able to do everything inside--swamp coolers runnin’, and they had "I" beams, and they could lift the frame out, and then move the boat over and paint the whole thing, and then drop the frame back in, and pack the whole thing in the shade.

STEIGER:  And so then they just tailored that thing down?

WHITNEY:  Yeah, the boats all sat on these big wide plywood platform flatbed trailers.  They could lift 'em, put 'em on the ground, I think, or back up on the trailer.  But there could be a couple at a time.  And so they’d just get 'em all packed out and they’d be on the trailer, and they’d just go down to the ramp and launch it like a fishin’ boat.

STEIGER:  And they de-rigged 'em at the end?

WHITNEY:  De-rigged 'em at the end.

STEIGER:  But then they would rig 'em in the warehouse on the trailers.

WHITNEY:  Rig 'em back there where the park building is.  I’d forgotten how that worked exactly, but I assume that they probably rigged 'em on the ground by the warehouse, and then they had all the chain hoist and all that stuff to use for putting everything back together.  But then when the fire started--Tony always thought it was arson--but that the fire had started in the paint shed.  It was a complete loss.  Bob had a little old Volvo in the warehouse, and it was roasted.  Actually I think it’s still buried behind the pad there.  I think there’s a hole in the ground with a Volvo in it down there.

STEIGER:  A bunch of stuff went in that hole.

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  And Tony can’t quite remember the exact year.  There must be some record of it, probably with the park.  But then it went on for a couple more years anyway.  I showed up in ’73, and ’74 and ’75, so probably around....  He should remember, too.  ’77 was that low-water year, and he did a trip with Sleight that was Seldom Seen and his macho crew that Vaughn wrote up in his first book.  I think that they were still at the Ferry then, but then like in ’78 maybe, he moved the whole thing up to <Page>.  I was tryin’ to get that chronology right.  (pause)  I just wrote down about a couple of big rainstorms.  (pause)

STEIGER:  Got any Gloeckler stories for me?  That guy is incredible.

WHITNEY:  Not as good as the one with Bart and everybody.  That was a great storytelling night at V.C. that night.

STEIGER:  You were there, weren’t you?

WHITNEY:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  God, that was a great night.

WHITNEY:  That was one of the stories that kind of has the idea of oral history really comin’ into something.

STEIGER:  That was the one....  I remember I had a little microcassette, and I just taped that and I wrote that up and it went into the News.  That was the one that made Krista think she ought to do a book.  And I remember I just put that in there because I was thinking....  It wasn’t even the BQR then, it was just the News.

WHITNEY:  It was in there?  I have that then.  I think I have every one of 'em.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Because I thought, "Oh, let’s put somethin’ in that isn’t just politics, goddang it--or science or something.  Let’s put something in there for fun!"  That one went in there, and then the next one....  We kind of got off on that tangent, and then the next thing that went in there was that one about you at Havasu--which I had also recorded with that same little microcassette recorder.  It’s funny how we change all these things.  I was reading our little discussion of that in this transcript.  It cracks me up how many things, how many little embellishments I put in there.  Who knows if they’re even....  I mean, I had it Mike Graves instead of Karl.  Wonder how I got that in my mind.

WHITNEY:  I don’t have any fun calamities stories about runnin’ with Bill--all these late-night music stories.  I remember a great session at the back eddy with Dugald.  I can’t remember what trip he was on--it might have been a Dory trip--and he brought his guitar down.  It was one of those trips that Bill brought Jim Sobek and who else?  Jay Beck and some other people.  I think it was one of the first trips that Kirk Burnett [phonetic] was on and it was just....  You know, the music started at <Lee's Ferry>, and was pretty much every night.  Every night got a little bit later.  Actually Ed Smith was runnin’ that trip, and we had a great bunch of people.  They were as much into hearing the music as anybody, and so even though some nights got pretty late, they were really very tolerant.  There was some really great music between the mandolin and Kurt brought a fiddle and two or three guitars.  I remember Doogie came down one night and played a bunch too.

We did a three-boat....  What was that trip?  It was a USGS.  It was the centennial of the USGS?  And David Love and some other high-powered....  Larry Schlosser? [phonetic]  There were some other really high-powered geologists on the trip who’d written lots of textbooks.  And Stan Buse [phonetic] and....  Oh, who?  This is terrible.

STEIGER:  Gene Shoemaker?  [unclear]

WHITNEY:  No.  My good old friend.  He was the dean of the geology department at NAU.  I hurt him in 24½ Mile.  He was sittin’ back with me.  This is really embarrassing, can’t think of his name.

STEIGER:  Dean of Geology?

WHITNEY:  He was a structural geologist, great guy, and his name just slips my mind now, but I’ll get it for you.  It’s on the tip of my tongue.  (long pause)  I’ll think of it as soon as we shut the recorder off.

STEIGER:  Not that guy, Dick Marzoff? [phonetic]

WHITNEY:  No.  Chuck Barnes!  Chuck Barnes.  And that was the trip that Teresa got a scorpion sting on the back of her thigh, and it was in that little camp on the right below Little Colorado.  She should have been flown out, but she walked around with this horrible poisoned look for about three days.  She really toughed it out.  But it was a great trip, a three-boat trip.  I wrecked in <Hance>, I got turned around.  It was low water.  I was trying to run straight, and I came in and I couldn’t get my bow downstream, and I wound up driving left.  And by the time I realized that it was the point of no return, I spun around and I was gonna try to back down, but then I wound up backin’ right over the whale rock, and I knocked the motor off my boat.  Bill was just great.  He was just downstream, and he motored upstream and basically just kind of pushed me to shore, down in the shallows on the left lower part of the rapid.  He just came in, and I’m fumbling around with thumb screws and stuff.  I mean, I still had the motor, but it had come off the carriage.  He just came in and did everything.  He just knew exactly how I felt, so I just kind of stood back and he just came in and put a new motor on--his motor, his boat and everything--no big deal, this shit happens.  That was just one of those days where if there was a rock in the river, I went over and hit it.  You know, I mean, I just couldn’t win for losin’.  And then I hit my motor someplace else in a little bastard something.  And it was gettin’ really late in the day, and it was still really low.  We were just above <Granite>, and we were comin’ in above <Granite Falls>, and there were a couple of hikers that’d come down and they had a camp, kind of a downstream camp.

STEIGER:  The big one?

WHITNEY:  The big one, yeah, and there were just a couple of hikers there.  I was ready to quit for the day--everybody was, really.  So he went in and talked to 'em, bein’ as nice as he was, he didn’t really get a warm feeling from 'em, so he came back and said, "Well, I think we need to keep goin’."  Sort of collectively we were sayin’, "Just go back up there and tell 'em that we’re campin’ here.  We’ll feed 'em.  We’re ready to quit!"  So he went back up there and talked to 'em, and then we wound up camping there.  And then a private pulled in on us, even later.  It’s gettin’ pretty late.  So we told them they could.  At that point, what did it matter?  We were a three-boat trip, and so those guys kind of camped upstream.  We were going to bed, and they hung like a Coleman lantern off of a  tripod of oars maybe.  And it was like, "You gotta be kidding!  This is the kind of experience you could have in a city park.  What are they doin’?!  Either cover that thing up, or turn it off!"  It was a horrible, glaring, looked like Stalag 13.  And I could see it.  I looked over and Bill’s just kind of stewing slowly over there.  (mutters under his breath), just kind of grumbling about it.  "You see that light?"  "Yeah, I know, it sure is bright.  [I wish they’d] shut that thing off."  So there was that kind of stuff kinda goin’ back and forth.  It’s quiet for a couple of minutes, and finally he just popped up and just basically kind of yelled over there as serious as a heart attack, said, "Turn ... that ... light ... out!"  (imitates rheostat turning light down).

STEIGER:  They turned it right on down.

WHITNEY:  Just came right on down.  But I could see that it was just sort of festering in him.  "What are you doin’ with a light like that in the bottom of the <Grand Canyon>?!  You wouldn’t even want to do that in a camp in the woods someplace."  Well anyway, we got up the next day and kept on runnin’ the trip.  But it was really a fun trip.  I mean, the geology, so many great seminars.  I think that was the same trip that ... wrote the guides, the two guides, you know, the blue and the orange, the yellow one, the ones that we only had for the longest time on the geology ... did all the volcanics at <Lava>.  Great stories from....  Ken....

STEIGER:  Was it....

WHITNEY:  Hamlin!  Ed Hamlin.  I was lucky, he rode on my boat most the whole trip.  So we had some great conversations at the back of the boat, and a lot of wonderful explanations about all the geology down there, and some great presentations.  He gave a great presentation down above <Lava>.  A lot of stories about goin’ down there.  Those guides were just written for something for him to do on [goat?] making his way to <Lava> on Cross trips.  I mean, that’s how he got there.  He would just outfit the trip.

STEIGER:  But <Lava> was what he was really lookin’ at.

WHITNEY:  All the volcanism down there.  I mean, Vulcans Throne, and all of the different flows, and separating those out.  And he named the Graywall and the Blackwall, those flows that you see farther downstream.  And Satans Ramp.  He named Satans Ramp, that one that you--it’s that great big flow that comes down on the right, above <Whitmore>, before you get down to the Grassy Knoll Camp and the Chalk Rock Camp.  There’s that one where the lava just poured right down and filled up that whole canyon.  Used to climb up there, and stories about sendin’ people up on helicopters.  Somebody got stranded.  They dropped 'em off on top of just a chunk of lava that was up on top of something.  "We’re gonna go and drop somebody off over here.  Then we’re gonna refuel and come back and get you.  We’ll be back in an hour.  You need to do your survey and your collections or whatever you’re gonna be doin’ up there."  And then they had some problem with a generator part, and they didn’t get back there for like seven hours or something, and the guy’s just roasting on top of this [chunk of lava] with full exposure to the sun.  Never talked to him again, stuff like that.  Really interesting stories about all of his research.  He did his doctorate on the Canadian Shield.  He was up in Ontario and <Quebec>, working on the schist on the Canadian Shield, where you have these really precipitous rivers with big drops, really challenging canoeing waters.  So that was an especially fun trip.

STEIGER:  And it was the hundredth anniversary of USGS?

WHITNEY:  Yeah.  It was of Powell bein’ the director.  So it was ’88 or something like that.  1988 or 1990.  But there were some really fun and very interesting and really bright people there.  I think I said David Lovett [phonetic].  I didn’t say Davis Lovett, not the golfer, but David Lovett.  He had hosted John McFee.  They had some stories about him.  I think he was writing Coming Into The Country--not at that time, but he’d written it, I think, before that.  But a lot of stories about John McFee and his [travels?] and stuff was pretty interesting.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that guy’s quite a writer too.  (aside about howling dog)

WHITNEY:  It’s so much easier to get the stories when you sit down with the people that you were runnin’ with.  They remind me of all the stuff, just runnin’ together over the years.  Well, we never got into too much trouble.  We ran about four or five trips together.  The most trouble we got into was on that ARR rowing trip.  (chuckles)

STEIGER:  Yeah, which we sort of covered that a little bit.  It seemed like that was wilder on the run-out than it was even....  That was pretty entertaining.  I remember <Crystal> was big.  I think that was the first time I’d ever rowed it that high.  I remember lookin’ at the skeleton, goin’, "Okay, well, I guess I’m gonna go hit that lateral and then I’m gonna just try to spin around and get straight for the new wave, because I know I’m gonna hit that too!" which I did.

WHITNEY:  I kinda went in there.  I was lucky I didn’t flip.  I was just solo on that big tube Salmon--[heart slice?] Salmon.

STEIGER:  I remember that.  I don’t know what I was rowin’, but the same kind of deal.  It was like, "We’re not gonna make this cut."

WHITNEY:  South high-siding [unclear].

STEIGER:  I kind of have a little mental picture of that too, of you.  Maybe I was behind ya’.  Might have been.

WHITNEY:  Just, "He didn’t get through that lateral."  You were out there.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you were gonna go.  The one and only.  [unclear]  Well, I wish I had an intelligent question to ask, but I think we’re well covered here, I really do.  Like all these extra little stories....  I mean, the times that you’re talkin’ about--talk about characters!  God, I mean, there were so many of 'em down there--and still are.

WHITNEY:  Still are.

STEIGER:  Everyone’s comin’ along.  If they could just get rid of some of these old guys that keep pluggin’ up the works.

WHITNEY:  Right.  (chuckles)

STEIGER:  I wonder when the last time Tony went was.

WHITNEY:  He went with me five or six years ago, another one of those charter trips.  He’s a lot of fun on the river.  He’s got some great stories with him and Ron Smith.  They collaborated on a lot of stuff.  And Dean Waterman.  He was a can-do guy who could make things happen.  He loved the people.  Really, there were so many people that came through.  Well, you’re in that business--a lot of people come through your life, and so many different people who ran for him:  John Soar [phonetic], Whitey, and a lot of people who we’ve mentioned.  In our era, Gary Mercado.  But even before that, people that he doesn’t even remember anymore.  But he’s really at home on the river, and is great to run with.  If anything starts to break down, he’s all over it.  He’s just one of those guys who doesn’t like to leave anything broken for more than about five minutes.

STEIGER:  He was well placed to know everybody, too.  I mean, you weren’t gonna get down the river without passing through <Lee's Ferry> and all that.  I definitely want to go talk to him.  Absolutely.  I gotta go down there now and talk to Vaughn Short and Fred Eisner.  Maybe I can get--anymore, with gas bein’ what it is, maybe I could make a circle and talk to all those guys on that one, if he is down there.  Or if you hear of him comin’ up here, if there’s some time that I can get to him, I definitely would want to talk to him.

	Well, I think I’m gonna stop this for right now.  Or should I keep it rollin’?

WHITNEY:  I don’t know, it’s too late to philosophize too much.

STEIGER:  I don’t think we’re drunk enough.

WHITNEY:  Right, exactly, there you go.  If we need to add anything we can....  Something will probably come up on this trip with Bob, and it’ll remind me of something that might be pertinent from earlier on, but....

STEIGER:  Now, is he already started out here, or is he’s leavin’ home?

WHITNEY:  It’ll be next Thursday.  I’ll call him and tell him to bring a recorder.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I’m gonna stop this now.  Okay, let’s hope we got it.



