Loie Belknap Evans Part 1

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli 

April 5, 2009



QUARTAROLI:  Okay, I think we’re rolling.

EVANS:  Okay!  What are we gonna talk about?

QUARTAROLI:  This is April 4, 2009, [Sunday, April 5, 2009] and we’re at the South Rim of the canyon.  This is Richard Quartaroli from Cline Library, Special Collections and Archives at NAU, and I’m with Loie Belknap Evans.  We’re doing part of the Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Project under the Adopt-a-Boatman funding.  And we talked some last weekend up at the guides training seminar, did a little bit with your brother Buzz, and then with you and Buzz, and Buzz’s wife Jodi.  But now we’re going to do you individually.  So we’re just going to tell some stories.

EVANS:  Okay.  Where are we going to start?

QUARTAROLI:  Well, you can start with when you were born, where you were born, a little bit about your parents and where you lived, and how you got out and got to the rim, got to <Boulder City>.

EVANS:  Well, I was actually born in <Washington DC>, like Buzz, during the war, in 1945.  I guess that gives my age away.  Right toward the end of the war, my dad was over, actually right at that time, in <Potsdam> with Truman, kind of as things were finishing up over there.  And then shortly after that, we moved out to <Boulder City Nevada>, where they had a home that my dad’s mom had bought in the late thirties, 1938 maybe.  But my dad had spent some time out there before-the family had moved out before he and my mom were married.  So he had things kind of set up out there, and had his photo lab down in the basement of the Boulder Dam Hotel.  It was quite a wonderful little place down there.  So I just grew up in <Boulder City>, wonderful place to grow up.  We had lots of family adventures.  We all learned to swim at a very early age, and my mom was quite a swimmer, since we spent a lot of time in Lake Mead.  That’s where everybody learned to swim in <Boulder City>-no pools at that time, so we just learned to swim down there on the lake.  Went through all of our school years there in <Boulder City>.  It was just such a wonderful place to grow up, just with all the activities and the hikes and the weekend trips, and boat trips almost every weekend, especially in the summer, up on the lake with other families, Segerblom family and their kids; either up on Sandy Point or up in the lower part of the canyon.  That was just kind of our playground in those growing-up years.  It was just wonderful. I do remember my dad was so involved, and Buzz was too early on, with river trips.  So at a really young age, if there was a trip that he had been on, we would often get on Jimmy Jordan’s big ol’ cruiser and go up in the lower end of the canyon, <Emery Falls> or wherever, and wait for those early river trips to come out of the canyon.  Those are really ingrained memories.

QUARTAROLI:  How did your dad keep track of those?  He probably hadn’t met Dock Marston at that time, had he, that early on?

EVANS:  Well, early on, I think when he would go up-I mean, he was out there in the late thirties, like Buzz [told you?]-and so I’m not sure how he knew that those guys were coming out of the canyon, and to go up there to get those Nevills pictures and those early ones.  But the ones where I got to go, that was when he would be on a trip.  1950, I think, was maybe his first trip.  Maybe you remember.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, I think it was ’50.

EVANS:  But we’d all pile on the Jordans’ cruiser and go up and meet that trip.  And usually we would have gone to <Lee's Ferry> to see that trip off as well.  I was reading some of the stuff that you sent from the Cline, some of my dad’s notes and things from those early trips.  It talks about a great story about Buzz rolling into the creek.  I don’t know if you read any of those.

QUARTAROLI:  No, I didn’t get a chance.

EVANS:  We were camped, and Buzz woke up cold, and so my dad put him in a warmer sleeping bag, but he rolled off, almost into <Paria Creek>.  He was five years old or something.  Those were great days, sitting around at <Lee's Ferry> under the tamarisks, and swimming in the rivers, swimming Paria Riffle on an air mattress.  We were pretty comfortable in the water in those early days. And then just through the years there were all those interesting river trips that Buzz and my dad were on.  I guess my mom and I were more, at that time, the food packers and the rim runners and that kind of thing.

QUARTAROLI:  She put you to work too, packing the food?

EVANS:  Oh yeah, I got involved in that.  And it was just always fun how many different people showed up at our house:  Dock and all of his friends.  It was quite a hub in <Boulder City>.  It was just a wonderful place, and my mom was always-there was just so much hospitality.  There was always a really interesting array of people that showed up there.  Lots of stories in the living room at that house.

QUARTAROLI:  Stories such as?  Some of the people who came by?  You mentioned Jimmy Jordan.

EVANS:  Of course the Jordan family just lived down the street from us, and they had two kids, and we spent a lot of time with them out on the lake, so the Jordans were close friends.  But yeah, I guess I just remember more, like, Willie Taylor-the different people from those early trips that Dock was on, and always seemed to sort of hang out at our house, when I was probably five, six years old at that time.  Pretty memorable people.

And then later I can remember Jim Ervin showing up-just sort of showing up at our house kind of out of the blue, and telling that amazing story about going up through the cliff.  And I’m not sure how he found my dad, but I can remember him sitting there and chatting and telling this whole amazing story.  That must have been like in the mid [sixties], maybe ’66, something like that.  And then he and John, my husband-actually, it was before we were married that my dad and John went up in the lower end of the canyon, and John thought he found the route out-something he’s really wanted to go back and look at again.

QUARTAROLI:  Ervin didn’t go back with him?

EVANS:  No, he didn’t go back-just described it in great detail.

QUARTAROLI:  For people who are going to be listening in, this is the trip that Ervin and another guy working on the dam took, built a raft or took a boat, I can’t remember.

EVANS:  The Short Cut.

QUARTAROLI:  The Short Cut.  They were going to float down the river, back to work at the dam, and then they ended up hiking....

EVANS:  Well, I think-nobody knows what happened to the friend.  I think he ... drowned?  Do you remember?  Isn’t that right?  He died somehow.  A little suspect, possibly.

QUARTAROLI:  Possibly, yeah.

EVANS:  Yeah, nobody knows.  And it was such an unlikely place, where he went up out of the canyon.  My dad didn’t make it all the way up-it was pretty steep-but John made it all the way up and out.  So I guess [they] probably found the right place, and it was very feasible.  I can’t remember who-somebody took them up the canyon, and I think they had Sportyaks, so they could then just kind of drift out of the canyon and get picked up again.  But I do remember my mom and I flying up early in the morning with Earl Leseberg and spotting 'em and dropping 'em some ice cream.  We did that a lot.

QUARTAROLI:  Like Art Gallenson would say, "It was a delivery of emergency medical supplies, that had to be kept cool, so they were packed in ice cream."

EVANS:  Absolutely.  Yeah.  And Earl was always-we did a lot of flying with Earl Leseberg.  Of course in those early days there were no rules about flying in the canyon.  You know, those early days, it was people like Earl who really, really bailed a lot of boaters out, because you could have an SOS in the sand or something, and you knew that they needed help.  I think those early pilots played a bit part in safety.  We used to have air checks on some of our river trips.  But even after the rules-and now Earl’s gone-but even after the rules were there, he just couldn’t help himself, and he would just say, "I think I see a signal mirror down there, I’d better go down."  (chuckles)  He was always a lot of fun.

QUARTAROLI:  Was Earl there from your earliest remembrances?

EVANS:  He was.  And I think he drove a boat for Bureau of Reclamation.  He was out on the lake a lot.  I don’t know when he actually got the operation out at the airport.  I just know when Buzz was in high school he took flying lessons from Earl when he was maybe sixteen.  That’s when we couldn’t get Buzz back in a car.  "Do you want to go?"  "No, but I’ll fly over you."  So we did a lot with Earl, a lot of canyon flying.  He would take my dad up in a Super Cub and land on some of those silt bars up in the lower part of the canyon, drop my dad off for a couple of days to go look at mescal pits, and come pick him up.  Did you ever fly with Earl?

QUARTAROLI:  I did.  I did, both Earl and Art Gallenson, a couple of times each.

EVANS:  Yeah.  We had some pretty exciting flights with Earl, just droppin’ right down and flyin’ right up <Lava Falls>, get a little spray on the windshield.  I think that must have been when it was legal.  (chuckles)

QUARTAROLI:  Well, at least it wasn’t illegal.

EVANS:  That’s right.  Exactly.

QUARTAROLI:  What about-I think Earl’s kids were probably younger than you.

EVANS:  Yeah, a little bit younger.

QUARTAROLI:  So you probably didn’t hang out with them much.

EVANS:  No, but I knew them fairly well, especially Mark, who became a pilot too.  I remember all of them pretty well.  And actually Earl ended up buying my folks’ house in <Boulder City> in ’88 or ’89 when we finally sold it.  Yeah, the kids were definitely younger, but I do remember 'em pretty well.

QUARTAROLI:  Were there just two?  I remember Mark and....

EVANS:  Mark, Dave, and Sissie.

QUARTAROLI:  Dave.  I’m not sure I met Dave.

EVANS:  I think Dave was older than Mark.  I saw Mark maybe a year and a half ago in <Boulder City>.

QUARTAROLI:  You mentioned the signal balloons, and they fit in with [unclear].

EVANS:  They do.  Cliff was one of my dad’s partners in the early days with the photo shop, when the lab was down in the Boulder Dam Hotel.  My dad had Cliff Segerblom and Mark Swain, so they were partners with that original business.  And then Cliff really got more-I mean, he was a wonderful photographer, but then he really got more into-painting became his thing.  Probably one of the best <Nevada> artists ever:  watercolors, acrylics, all kinds of things.  We boated a lot with them up in the lower end of the canyon.  But then on the low-water Sportyak trip in ’63-is that right?-Cliff and Robin and Tick all went on that.  They’d had enough at <Phantom>.  And it took so much longer.  And I think it was so-it was rugged-you know, that muddy water, just thick muddy water.  And I think you’ve probably seen the pictures of the Sportyaks going out on the mules.

QUARTAROLI:  Right.

EVANS:  Yeah, it was in the calendar, wasn’t it?

QUARTAROLI:  Right.  Yeah.

EVANS:  Yeah.  So we did a lot of boating, and when we had our Sportyak business they were all-the kids, Tick and Robin, worked on some of those trips.

QUARTAROLI:  What about Mrs. Segerblom?

EVANS:  Jean loved the boating.  Actually, we used to go to <California> every year with the Segerblom family to see Cliff’s Swedish grandparents in this little town of <Carlsbad California>.  So for years, I mean, that was another one of our things, we’d go down to <Carlsbad> for a couple of weeks and just hang out on that wonderful beach down there.  Of course now it’s all houses.  That was a really fun memory.  But Jean Segerblom was a teacher at the high school in <Boulder City>-wonderful government teacher.  I had her for my junior and senior years.  Just a super teacher.  She loved government.  I can’t remember what year she finally-she tried a couple of times to run for the Nevada State Legislature, and I think she was defeated a time or two, but she finally made it.  I think she’s like the fourth generation.  Tick, her son, is now in the legislature, so it made like four generations in her family.  And she’s ninety-one, I think, this year.  Yeah.  Cliff’s been gone a long time.

QUARTAROLI:  Does she still live in <Boulder City>?

EVANS:  Uh-huh, yup, very active.  Their house is like a museum, with all of Cliff’s art work.  If you’re ever down there, it’s really worth seeing, and she loves to show off all of his art work.

QUARTAROLI:  So is that how he made his living then?

EVANS:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  As a professional artist?

EVANS:  Uh-huh.  And very prolific.  I mean, just really.  So much art, of all kinds.  And then she was a teacher.

QUARTAROLI:  I know you’ve got a picture in the [unclear] of him painting [unclear].

EVANS:  On an artists’ workshop, uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  When we had the opening for your dad’s exhibit at the Cline Library, there were....

EVANS:  Jean came up, and Tick came up-her son, Tick.

QUARTAROLI:  I remember meeting a couple.

EVANS:  I’m trying to think, Robin may have been there too.  I think they may have all come.  Cliff was gone at that time.  Jean definitely came, and Tick.

QUARTAROLI:  What was Tick’s real name?

EVANS:  Richard.  But I think he tried that for a while-he’s an attorney in <Las Vegas>-but you know, we knew him as Tickie.  So if you hear someone say "Tickie," it goes way back.  And even in the legislature, he goes by Tick.  I think it was probably Robin couldn’t say-one of those.  We spent a lot of time with that family, growing up.

And then I guess the Sportyak business, that was a big part of our lives.  That idea sort of hatched after that original low-water trip of my dad just thinking that it would be wonderful to have a business where everybody got to row their own boat-just kind of the idea of why should the guides have all the fun?  And so he made some major changes to the Sportyaks, longer oars, and did a little prototype to make a little pack, and then had somebody make these little yak packs where you could stow your gear.  And then for a short time he and my mom worked for Ron Smith, Grand Canyon Expeditions.  They moved to <Salt Lake>.  That was in the late sixties.  That had always been a really great long-time friendship.  So they did that for a while, and then it just seemed that it was better to move on.

QUARTAROLI:  How did they meet Ron then-just from knowing him from doing river trips?

EVANS:  Yeah, I think so.  Well, definitely we did some trips, the Geographic trips.  Was that ’68, I think, possibly, in the canyon.  Does that sound right?

QUARTAROLI:  It was around that time.

EVANS:  That was a Grand Canyon Expedition trip, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Just before the centennial.

EVANS:  Yeah, just from doing river trips.  I’m not sure exactly how that friendship really first started, but I did that trip where Sheila and I hiked in, I think it was in the fall of ’67.  We hiked in at <Phantom> and joined Ron.  That was the trip that Ed Abbey was on, and a few other people, real low water trip, one-boat trip.  And then it was after that, that my mom and dad got more involved with moving to <Salt Lake> for a few years and working with them.  And then they moved to <Kanab>, kind of moved everything, the whole operation, to <Kanab>.  The Sportyak idea, and actually the first Grand Canyon River Guide, that came out when they were really working for Ron, so that must have been ’69.  And then the whole Sportyak thing really got started under Canyonlands Expeditions.  That was before we had Fast Water, and those first early trips were really with Canyonlands, which was Ron.  So that’s how that kind of started.

QUARTAROLI:  So your parents were partners with Ron and Sheila Smith?

EVANS:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  In both Canyonlands and Grand Canyon Expeditions were kind of the same company.

EVANS:  Right, same company, yup-different areas.

QUARTAROLI:  Different permitting.

EVANS:  Yeah.  And really, when it moved, kind of the whole operation moved to <Kanab>.  And then my dad was really more involved with the Sportyaks and that was more part of Canyonlands.  I think he probably did a few-I know he did a few Cataract trips with Ron in the triple-rigs, that kind of thing.  His real love was developing that Sportyak program.  And so he got that whole thing organized with Canyonlands Expeditions.

QUARTAROLI:  What rivers were they doing at that time?

EVANS:  The Sportyaks?

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah.

EVANS:  <Desolation> on the Green, and I think that was it, really.  Later, when our company started, Fast Water started, we did the <San Juan> and the Dolores.  But I think it was just <Desolation Canyon>.  And I worked on, I went on, a lot of those real early trips, and that’s when I really got my start boating and learning to row.  So I led a number of trips for Canyonlands Expeditions, sort of based out of Green River, working for A. C. Ekker.  And actually, one of the really fun things, there was a whitewater workshop-and I wish I could remember the year, I think it probably was maybe ’71-and the idea was to have a big whitewater workshop, invite interested prospective boatmen, to sort of find some new boatmen for Canyonlands Expeditions.  It was a spring trip, I was the only girl on the trip, and John, my husband, our Husky dog was on the trip.  And I think we had about twenty-one.  It was a big trip.  Freezing.  It was freezing.  We started at <Ouray> and there were a lot of interesting people on that trip that went on.  Our friend Don Roberts, who worked for us for years.  Blake Hopkins-Fox-was on that trip, way back.  I’m trying to think who else was on that trip.  A lot of them that made it....  It was kind of funny, because everybody was sort of buckin’ for a job and tryin’ to do their best, and they were just learning to row Sportyaks.  And A. C. Ekker was being A. C. Ekker, and he had his gun and he shot a deer and dressed it out.  He was makin’ biscuits in the flour sack, and it was quite a trip.  It was probably a ten-day trip.  I think it warmed up like about the tenth day.  It was cold.  But watching all these guys, and then meeting afterwards to decide who was gonna get a job.  A lot of guys, a lot of people, got their start rowin’ a Sportyak.

QUARTAROLI:  A. C. Ekker, he was just on because he was already outfitting.

EVANS:  He worked for Ron.  He was kind of running out of Green River.  He was running that operation.  He was a cowboy, but he was running that boating operation.  So that was pretty interesting, working for A. C.  So I did that for a couple of years, so I led a lot of those early Sportyak trips.  It was an interesting time.  We had, for the most part, really good crews.  And I always loved how my dad was.  He just always just sort of, it was like, "You can do this.  You can do it."  I sure remember that first trip of being in charge and having to figure out where I was-especially in high water and all those Sportyaks and trying to figure things out.

QUARTAROLI:  Trying to get everybody in.

EVANS:  Trying to get everybody in.

QUARTAROLI:  Same camp.

EVANS:  Oh yeah.  And making sure their skills were good.  A few scary happenings.  But it was fun.  And it was interesting-interesting reaction from some of the boatmen and my crew and passengers-weren’t sure they wanted a girl to be leading the trip.  They were a little surprised, thinking I was just the hostess at that evening meeting.  And it’s like, "Oh!  You’re taking us down the river?"  So that was kind of fun.  It was pretty early on.

QUARTAROLI:  How did you handle that?  Recently we just had some grant money from the Arizona Humanities Council and did four [unclear] boatmen, and they talked about some of those aspects of acceptance or nonacceptance.

EVANS:  I never worried about it.  I usually had people, some crew with me, who just went, "You know, she knows what she’s doing."  And just doing it.  I didn’t have anything to prove, and I think it usually became fairly clear early on that everything was gonna be just fine, and I knew what I was doing, and people had a wonderful time.  So I don’t know, I didn’t....  I guess I had plenty of confidence that everything was good, and I usually had really good crew backup. So then I think it was ’74 when we decided to do our own thing with the spot yaks and kind of broke off from Canyonlands Expeditions.  It was an interesting time.  Early on, all you had to do was tell the State you were going.  And then there were the Utah boatmen’s licenses.  Eventually you had to get your Utah boatman’s license to do it, and had to answer all those great Coast Guard things that had nothing to do with anything that you were doing.  But the BLM was so tough to deal with in kind of those early days when the State decided that the BLM should be the agency in charge.  And so a lot of people wanted permits, and so they decided to give passenger days....  And of course our trips were really long, so if you get a small permit, you use 'em all up pretty fast.  And the problem was that you needed to demonstrate some kind of history.  Well, our problem was that our history was with another company, and so we didn’t have any of our own history, even though we had spent all that time down there.  And so it was pretty arbitrary, and we got a very small permit in the beginning.  I guess gradually we must have been able to get some more days to operate, because our trips tended to be ten days and sometimes fourteen days.  We’d do exploration specials down there.  And they all started at <Ouray> early on, and fought the mosquitoes.  It’s a nice stretch of river, but it was wild, those high-water trips with the mosquitoes.  But we did it.  It was just a wonderful thing, a really life-changing experience for a lot of people of all ages.  Just very controlled.  My dad just loved the river, and he just loved sharing everything, and so he did it in such a gentle way.  It was so much instruction, getting people really used to rowing-especially in <Desolation>, because it starts so gradually.  You start with small rapids, and they get better and better.  There are places where you just skip a few grades.  All of a sudden you go from third to fifth.  But for the most part, people, just being able to learn and be involved and that confidence in rowing their own boat, knowing how to read the river, it was just really fun to watch what would happen to people on those trips.  Total participation.  We had cooking groups, everybody had to participate.  I really think they were life-changing for a lot of people, a lot of people.  We had all kinds of groups and all kinds of people.  Kids:  I think twelve is what we said, but we’d take kids younger if they were good swimmers.

QUARTAROLI:  About how big were the trips?  How many people would you take down?

EVANS:  You know, fifteen was about what we liked to take.  To ride herd on more than fifteen Sportyaks was a lot.  Fifteen and maybe four crew.  But we occasionally would have twenty people and four or five crew.  That’s a lot of Sportyaks to watch.

QUARTAROLI:  Would you divvy 'em up then?  You’d see how they grouped up, or was everybody just kind of organic?

EVANS:  We were really pretty good about having a lead boat and a tail boat and really trying to keep....  We really did not like to get the group split up, and so we were pretty good about just keeping everybody....  I mean, you had nice space.  But we weren’t big on letting the group get split up.  Really tried to keep that kind of together, and it usually worked pretty well.  It was interesting, working with different people, because-I mean, this is a little stereotypical, but when you’re instructing people, there were certain categories that were easier than others.  Kids always did great.  Kids take instruction well.  Women generally were wonderful, because they just maybe didn’t have the strength, but they had the finesse, and they wanted to do it right.  Doctors, lawyers, and airline pilots were really tough, didn’t take instruction well.  Some did.  It was really interesting.  And then actors-we took a couple groups of actors, and they were the best, because they take their life-they have to follow direction.  And it didn’t matter, whatever, terrible conditions, wind, you tell 'em what to do, and they’d just do it.  It was kind of an interesting thing, trying to get all those people....  We introduced a lot of people to boating.  You still hear people say....  They haven’t done much boating since, but they never look at running water the same again.  They look at it and go, "If I were in my boat, I know right where I’d go."  It was pretty neat. So we did that, I guess until 1986, right when my dad passed on.  And it was just hard to keep it going.  I couldn’t go on all the trips.  Our kids were at such an age that it was just too much to kind of keep it going.  So Outward Bound bought our boats and got our permit, and they kept it going for quite a while, actually, until they wore the boats out, basically.  And then I think they went with some other individual type boat.  But that was kind of a nice thing for us, because John did work for Outward Bound, and it was kind of like keeping it in the family a little bit.  We got to do some safety reviews with them, got to go on some of their trips.  Lynn, our daughter, went on one of their trips, although she had to step in and do a little instructing.  She didn’t think Outward Bound was doing everything it should.  (chuckles)  She grew up with it.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear] boating aspect?

EVANS:  Yeah.  I think it was just she was probably-she was in college at the time, and went on one of their multi-environment courses in the mountains and the desert, and then it was, I think, a week on the <San Juan>.  I actually think it may have been one of their last Sportyak trips.  And I think it’d been going for a while, and I think that careful instruction that we started out with and tried to pass along to Outward Bound, some of it was just gone.  It wasn’t the way she remembered it when she learned, and she could see that there were a few people who were not getting what they needed, and a little scared.  So I think she asked if she couldn’t give a little advice, and so she kind of took over and did some of that.

QUARTAROLI:  Was it maybe a focus change for them?  Like they were expecting people to exert a little more initiative, so they give them more [unclear].

EVANS:  I do.  I think that is, from what I know of Outward Bound, that is part of what they do.  But I think when it’s a safety issue, or somebody is scared, you can’t just let the river do the teaching.  You’ve got to have some basics to do it.  Otherwise, you don’t get anything.  And I found that.  I love what they do, but I found that on just one of the safety trips that I went on, that there was a lot of just sitting around waiting for the students to hear what the river was saying.  But if you don’t give some basics, enough to hear what it’s saying....  You know what I mean.  It was definitely a different approach than what we had.  And I don’t think we-I guess we did coddle people a little, but it was very gentle, and it was wanting to give them enough so that they could really get it and really catch it.  Like the first few times of saying you’re gonna get up and go for a sunrise hike, and maybe a few people go, and then it’s so wonderful, and then everybody’s like, "Well, I’m going next time!"  I think it’s just a different focus with Outward Bound, of wanting it to be a little motivational.  And sometimes it works.  I think it does work.  But we definitely had a little different approach, wanting to make sure everybody got the message.

QUARTAROLI:  You mentioned a little longer trip, the exploratory trips.

EVANS:  Uh-huh, we would do one of those a year, usually-exploration special, fourteen-day trip.  Now I don’t think the BLM will let you go more than nine days down there.  My dad just loved <Desolation Canyon>.  He’d have the topo maps, and he just always had ideas of, "Boy, wouldn’t it be great to go check that out?"  Or, "Let’s maybe go up on Peter’s Point."  And so he wasn’t on all those trips.  I did a lot of those trips, but he would have this list of things that would be, "go up the Golden Stairs...."  We also would hike up the Van Dusen Trail to the Wilcox Ranch, up to see Don and Jeanette.  Budge Wilcox was still around at that time.  It was like hiking out of the <Grand Canyon>-you know, <Desolation>’s so deep.  And it was pretty amazing, getting some of those people up that old cattle trail.  And that led to something really near and dear to my heart.  I’m a horse person, and I grew up with horses.  I just had always wanted to do a cattle drive, just a life-long dream.  So getting to know the Wilcoxes, from being up there....  At that time-this was in the early eighties, I think-mid eighties, something like that-they were still running cattle.  They would winter some of the cattle up on the high plateau, up on the Tavaputsat 10,000 feet, lots of great grass.  And then they would do a cattle drive down the Van Dusen with, I don’t know, 800-900 head of cattle, and take 'em out, take 'em all the way down, and spend a few days right in front of the Rock Creek Ranch, just doing whatever they do-branding, castrating, all of that.  So I got to do this with them twice.  And it was in October, and we would cross some of the cattle up above <Rock Creek>.  They’d get some on the other side.  Some would go up Steer Ridge, around that old cattle trail that goes-I don’t know if you’ve ever done that trail that goes all the way up to Steer Ridge.  It’s wonderful up on the ledges up there.  Some of the cattle would go up there.  We’d swim most of them across, above <Rock Creek>, and then Bob Quist was the chuck boat, and he would have his boat, and a side of beef that would hang in the tree every night.  It was so great!  So we just spent a few days just sort of spreading the cattle out down there in <Desolation Canyon>.  But to ride those wonderful old cattle trails from there all the way into Green River was just-with all that history of Butch Cassidy and the Florence Creek Ranch, where Budge grew up-or I guess it was his wife, Pearl, that grew up there.  It was pretty amazing-McPherson’s, Pearl McPherson.

QUARTAROLI:  So you’d go all the way to Green River?

EVANS:  All the way to Green River.  Rode all the way to Green River, mostly on the east side of the river.  We crossed a time or two, but it was mostly the trail that just went down the east side of the river.  You know how it goes along <Coal Creek>, Poverty, down there, up above Rattlesnake and all the way down.

QUARTAROLI:  Would you still be driving cattle at that point too?

EVANS:  Nope.  Mostly we’d set 'em out.  A couple of the cowboys may have ridden back up to the ranch, but the two times I did it, I rode all the way out to Green River.  It was pretty amazing.  And then Bob Quist would take a boat downstream?

[Q: missing question.]

EVANS:  Uh-huh, he would just meet at different camps.  Once in a while he’d catch catfish and we’d have fish for dinner.  But usually it was that beef.  [unclear] breakfast too.  Hardly had lunch, but you’d always usually have steak and potatoes for breakfast and dinner.  So he would just, until we got to a point where we knew we were gonna ride on out, we didn’t need him anymore.  But every now and then he’d help with the boat.  Horses don’t like to cross the river so much, so we’d use the boat to help tow the horses, keep their heads up and tow 'em across the river.  It was pretty memorable.

QUARTAROLI:  I don’t know Bob, I just know Clair Quist.  Do you have any Bob stories?  I know I’ve heard some.  Did he do any Fast Water Expeditions trips with you?

EVANS:  Well, there’s one really memorable trip with Bob Quist.  We did a real high water trip.  It was one of those high water years, maybe ’81, ’82, ’83?  Somewhere in there.  It was kind of a friends and family trip.  It was probably even late June.  I mean, the water had actually dropped, but I think it was still probably running like maybe 35,000 up there-pretty big for Sportyaks.  And it was fine on the upper end, except we were movin’ like a freight train down the river.  But then it became pretty evident....  I bet we had, I don’t know, maybe fourteen people on that trip:  my dad, a couple of rafts, but mostly Sportyaks.  But it became pretty evident that it was just too big for the Sportyaks.  And my mom was on that trip.  Rapids that usually are nothing, like up above Wild Horse, there were just the darnedest white, huge waves, and she flipped in there.  She was the first one to flip.  She was undaunted.  She just said, "Oh my gosh, I’m glad it was me, and not somebody else!"  But shortly after that, we got down to Steer Ridge, and we just felt like....  We kind of made people walk around stuff, and let a few of us just run the boats.  So we got down to <Rock Creek>, and we just felt like-it was just too much.  It was so much stress, and trying to ride herd on all these people who were pretty scared.  So we had planned to go up to the Tavaputs Ranch.  We had no idea it would take us longer than we thought to get down there, because of the high water, just because we walked a lot.  So we decided, we got down there, we thought maybe John and I could run up that trail to the ranch and get on the radio, call Bob Quist to see if by any chance he could bring a big boat down and pick everybody up.  So we took off about three o’clock in the afternoon, up <Rock Creek>, and we got up to the top of the Van Deussen, and usually they would leave a vehicle down there, because it’s still another five miles to the ranch.  But we were late, so they thought we weren’t coming, so there was no vehicle.  So we hiked all the way up to the ranch.  We got up there about ten o’clock that night, and they were a little surprised to see us.  So in the morning....  All they had was a radio at that point.  So we got ahold of Bob Quist on the radio and told him what was going on, and he said, "Well, I’m headin’ up to put in a trip tomorrow.  No problem, I’ll just bring a thirty-three down and pick you up."  So we had a nice evening up there, hiked down the canyon, and then the next day he showed up down at <Rock Creek> real early in the day, put all the Sportyaks on the boat.  Maybe we have pictures of that.

QUARTAROLI:  I don’t remember seeing that.

EVANS:  I mean, put all those Sportyaks on that....

QUARTAROLI:  And all the people.

EVANS:  And all the people.  I think we had one other small raft.  And we went on down, we spent another night or two, just continued the trip.  But he was so great, sort of "no big deal."

QUARTAROLI:  So he was puttin’ on one of his own trips?

EVANS:  He was putting on one of his own trips, yeah.  So he just then himself brought the thirty-three down and picked us up, with a motor.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, and at that water, it’d take a motor rig down there.

EVANS:  Oh, it was huge!  It was huge, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  I couldn’t imagine.

EVANS:  Yeah.  I mean, some things were totally washed out, but some of them, like Joe Hutch Creek-the Upper Joe Hutch-was....  Usually you have that huge boulder field, and it was just enormous.  But it was fun, and even in that big raft it was fun.  So that was kind of an interesting trip. We had another....  I just don’t think it was that easy to get river flows back then.  Somehow we showed up another time in Green River, and we had a huge charter trip from Stanford that we were supposed to take down Deso-big trip.  I remember driving across the river at Jensen and going, "Oh my!  It’s just too high!"  Somehow we’d arrived a couple days early, and my dad was there, and another boatman, Billy Dale.  My dad said, "I think there’s time, why don’t you and Billy just go down to Sand Wash, and why don’t you take a Sportyak...."  He had this foam boat, the Snicklefritz.  Do you know about the Snicklefritz?  Well, it was a boat that one of our people, Hans Kraus, this old German guy, carved out of foam.  It was just a great boat.  It really looked like a bath tub.  It was sealed on the outside, it was self-bailing.  His original oars, he always thought that you should be able to face forward and pull, so he designed 'em with a gear in 'em, so that when you pushed, it pulled-or when you pulled, it pushed-because he thought if you’re going downriver, you don’t want to be pushing, you want your power stroke.

QUARTAROLI:  It was reversed.

EVANS:  Just reversed.  I never tried it with those oars, but he thought that was just the cat’s meow.  My dad loved that boat, and I’m sure there must be some pictures of the Snicklefritz somewhere.

QUARTAROLI:  Are those oars still around?

EVANS:  I doubt it.  R.J. could have 'em.  I don’t know what happened to those oars.  They were pretty amazing.  You know, what a concept.  You could face forward and pull, and yet you’re going downstream.  Pretty cool.  So anyway, he took us down to Sand Wash, Billy and I.  I got in the Snicklefritz and Billy had a big Sportyak, and again, I’m guessing it was probably thirty-five [35,000 cfs].  It was probably that next year.  So we took off, and we camped one night at Steer Ridge, and he picked us up the next day down at Swayze’s.

QUARTAROLI:  Two days.

EVANS:  Yeah.  It was fun, and we didn’t stop for anything.  And then having that self-bailing boat.  It was just....  Billy had to bail a few times, but it was a lot of fun.

QUARTAROLI:  How big was the Snicklefritz then?

EVANS:  It was only about eight feet long.  It was pretty little.

QUARTAROLI:  And you said Billy had a big Sportyak?

EVANS:  There are two sizes of Sportyaks:  there’s a seven-footer, and then there’s an eight-footer.  And the eight-footer we used for larger people.  You could actually put a little ice chest in each end, and it kind of acted like a splash shield; and eight-foot oars.  It was a great little boat.  My dad was big, but he always rowed the little tiny Sportyak, he liked that-'til he got the Snicklefritz, and then he really loved that. So then we totally decided there was no way we could put that whole group from Stanford on the river.  We called the BLM, and they were very accommodating.  And we had time somehow to do this.  We switched the whole trip to the <San Juan>, which was also running.  It was running like 9,000 [cfs] which is huge down there, but it was a much safer thing.  It was a little tough.  You know how fast the <San Juan> goes.  That first day, trying to get people in, when it was moving so fast and they’re learning to row, that was a little challenging.

QUARTAROLI:  Where would you start then, <Sand Island> or <Mexican Hat>?

EVANS:  We started at <Sand Island>.  I think we probably made an eight-day trip out of it, a lot of hiking.  I mean, it was moving so fast that we had to stop a lot and hike.  But it worked out.  It was a really interesting trip.  We had a few complainers on that trip, but we also had a man....  Well, when we would do a charter trip, we couldn’t really screen people like when we would....  My mom would really screen people when they would call for reservations, just to see.  You know, "Now, do you really like water?  Should you really be down here rowing your own boat?"  But when it would be a charter trip, we wouldn’t always get people screened like you should.  And that trip was so interesting, we had a man who was probably in his sixties, and totally deaf.  And we didn’t know.  And he did come with a woman who could sign.  Wonderful, wonderful man.  But usually that would be something you might want to know ahead of time, because you’re giving all this instruction in high water and how to row your boat.  But I’ve always said I think he heard more than anybody.  He’d just tuck in behind me, and he just got it.

And then there was a man who pretty much hardly had any use of his legs.  He’d been that way....  He was on crutches.  Didn’t have a clue until he showed up.  He was extraordinary.  He’d do all the hikes, he went all the way up the <Honaker Trail>.  I mean, I don’t know if we’d known ahead of time if we would have said no.  But he was so comfortable.  So it kind of made some of the whiners on that trip have to stop whining, because what could you whine about?!  But we had really interesting people like that, on some of those trips.  So that was kind of an interesting one.  Worked out great in the end.

QUARTAROLI:  I remember people telling stories, you’d drive with everybody piled on the truck with all the gear, and you’d get somewhere and you couldn’t run the river, so you’d just go drive somewhere else and put in, do a different trip.

EVANS:  Yeah, just do a different trip.  And fortunately the BLM let us do that.  That was kind of nice on that one.  We had some interesting....  Do you remember the old kapok life jackets?

QUARTAROLI:  Uh-huh.

EVANS:  Well, we used those.  We liked those kapok life jackets.  I don’t know if you ever got in situations where the river rangers, the overzealous river rangers, were squeezing the kapok.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, I’ve heard where they popped 'em.

EVANS:  We had a trip-I wasn’t actually on that trip-but it was leaving Sand Wash, and the river ranger pretty much popped-and they were all brand new life jackets, and wouldn’t let the trip go.  Fortunately there was another outfitter that had extra jackets.  Boy, did that get my dad riled up!  Because kapok doesn’t have to even be in plastic-it is flotation.  They were in plastic bags inside the life jackets, but kapok is flotation all by itself, it does not have to be in plastic.  But you could not convince those rangers of that.  And so my dad went to war.  He did a lot of research on the kapok jackets, and a lot of testing.  And actually, he would really soak 'em.  A body has a lot of water in it, so he knew how much it would take to float even a saturated kapok jacket.  I mean, he just gathered all these information and then took it to one of those early Western River Guides meetings.  Did you ever go to any of those in <Salt Lake>?

QUARTAROLI:  No.

EVANS:  They were a hoot!  Anyway, he always had something that he showed up with.  And it’s not like the river guides meetings now, where you have a pretty wonderful feeling with the agencies, and there’s just a lot of sharing, give and take, good stuff.  But in those early days, when the agencies kind of-it was the boaters on one side and the agencies on the other side often.  And the Coast Guard would always come.  Those poor Coast Guard guys-boy, did they get it, from all sides!  He really had all this information and presented it, and had to make 'em really back down on that whole thing.  I mean made the BLM have to back down on that whole thing, because it was silly.  It was a power thing.

QUARTAROLI:  Kapok was around when I started, but quickly got phased out into something else.  So I was always under the impression that when the kapok got wet, then you didn’t have the floatation.

EVANS:  Nope, still there.  And it would be interesting, I wonder if any of that’s in the Cline.  He had files on this whole kapok epic.

QUARTAROLI:  I’d have to look that up.  But looking in Dock Marston’s collection about the same time period, Dock would go to those meetings, and he’d have notes about "the Park Service wants this, and they want that, and they don’t know what they’re doing."  Not just the Park Service, but whoever was in charge of the jurisdictional folks.

EVANS:  It was tough.  And my dad really struggled, especially with the BLM, because it was very arbitrary in some of the decisions they made.  There was a point where all of the guides, the outfitters, really got together and kind of got a financial war chest to really....  People would write a management plan that had nothing to do-nothing was practical.  And I’m so glad that it’s definitely gotten so much better.  But they were tough days, really tough days.

QUARTAROLI:  We still question some of the things [unclear] come up with.

EVANS:  Sure.

QUARTAROLI:  At one point they tried to condense 'em and make 'em shorter, and they ended up makin’ 'em longer.  And that was the intent.  They intended that.  I tried, and it ended up two pages longer than it was last year.

EVANS:  And I think there’s so much good with the sanitation things, some of that.  But some of it goes overboard.  And it’s like, "There hasn’t been a problem, but there could be a problem."  So why do anything if there hasn’t been a problem?  But overall, I sure think it’s just so much better feel [sic].  And I think the BLM [unclear].  I think its better.  I think it’s pretty good now-not like it was in those early days.

QUARTAROLI:  I think we’re gonna take a little break now and change tapes.

EVANS:  Oh good!

QUARTAROLI:  I’m mostly doing electronic, and that can go forever, but I’ll just change the tape and we’ll take a little break and then get back.  I’d like to see about more of those WRGA meetings that you talked about-hear a little bit more about that.

