I want to do a good session.  I feel like we haven’t really, in terms of <Grand Canyon>.  Kind of meanderin’ around here.  Historically, I guess what we should say about that trip, this was 1982, and it was called the BTS, Boatman’s Training Seminar.  And it was held on the river.  I’m pretty sure, prior to that, there’d been a few of those at the Park Service at the South Rim.  Everybody would go.  I went to a couple of those.  And then for a while there, the park just quit doin’ ’em, it wasn’t that much fun goin’ to the South Rim or somethin’.  I went to a couple of ’em, and then it seemed like it wasn’t happenin’ for a while.  And it seemed like that trip in particular had been put together by Kim Crumbo--it was his idea, and he was the trip leader, and he made it happen, and it was really good, because like you say, there was a whole bunch of people from different companies that came together.  There was a lot of tension.  What I remember--and the reason I was kind of thinkin’ there was another motorboat--was that there were a bunch of motorboatmen on it, and a bunch of oar boatmen.  Like Drifter, was he on it?

Whitney:  Drifter was on it, yeah.

Steiger:  Well, and Suzanne and Martha--there was that whole--and Dennis.  I mean, there was this whole....

Whitney:  Jeffe Aronson, Tony Anderson.

Steiger:  Yeah, there was a real mix of motor and rowing, and it really did a lot to bring--it seemed like it really defused tension.  That was where it was almost, in a way....  I mean, we hadn’t all gotten together before then.  And there were a lot of good friendships that were started, and it was a really beneficial thing.

Whitney:  And things were really changing then too.  I remember some trips in the seventies.  Again, I was just kind of along for the ride.  I was yee-ha’ing my way along, and havin’ a great time--kind of like a swamper-passenger.  I wasn’t really serious about 

seeing that job in my future.  I just remember Bob was always passin’ beer out to people--privates--and bein’ friendly, and just kind of talking and just being interested in other people’s trips and stuff.  I remember him coming in, and there’s somebody that--I think it was a commercial rowing trip.  I can’t remember who it was.  And he pulled in to say hi to somebody and dropped a six-pack in the bilge, and "Hey, how are ya’?"  Another boatman saw that and said, "Eh, thanks for that.  Sorry I yelled at you last trip," or whatever it was.  That was my first realization of the motor/oar tension.

Steiger:  Yeah.  It was so thick you could cut it with a knife.  For a while there, it really was.

Whitney:  I saw some of that, but I think of sort of the first part of the eighties, after that BTS, and maybe a little bit before that.  I mean, I don’t really remember in ’80 really feeling that tension as much.

Steiger:  No, it was already startin’....

Whitney:  It was already startin’ to mellow out.  It was sort of the beginning of a new time in the canyon.  I don’t know what people call it, the old-timers, and in the sixties, the hundred-passenger trips.  And then the motor/oars in the seventies.  But then the eighties came out, and after that, it just seemed like....  I mean, I just ran alongside AZRA all summer long.  I remember scouting <Horn Creek> from the left, and looking over, and there’s Sharon Hester and Martha and Suzanne, and they’re scouting it from the right, and we’re just looking at each other for an hour.  Nobody wants to run.  And it was from that BTS that sort of spread all that camaraderie across the whole community.  I think it was sort of a beginning of--I don’t know what you call it.  Everybody started to become more professional, thinking more in terms of more of a career, and international river running’s heyday.

Steiger:  So did you start thinking that this was gonna be your career?

Whitney:  No.  It’s funny I say that, because I didn’t really think so either.  You know, it’s a career that’s just a year at a time, and after twenty years you realize that’s been your career.

Steiger:  Yeah, there it is.

Whitney:  There it is.  But you just sort of keep doing it, and whatever it took to kind of maintain that lifestyle of being able to travel and guide in other places, and be able to come back to the <Grand Canyon> every summer.

Steiger:  So how was ’83 for you?

Whitney:  Well, you know, it was funny.  In ’83 I got a call from John Yost, and he said, "They’ve got these trips.  You want to do these trips in <New Guinea>?  And then at the end of the season over there, the BBC’s gonna come and do this special.  It’s going to be the first ascent of the Wagi [phonetic] River, and it’s going to be part of this ‘Great River Journeys’ series" that the BBC was doing.

Steiger:  Great idea.

Whitney:  The Nile....  They had all these classic rivers.  And then they needed a whitewater river experience to film.  And so the water was comin’ up, and stuff was starting to happen, but I didn’t envision 90,000 [cfs] down there.

Steiger:  So you were in <New Guinea>.

Whitney:  So I saw like maybe 60,000 for the first year with Del Webb.  That was really different.  There were two very different styles between Fort Lee Company and Sanderson River Expeditions.  And it sort of became the Sanderson "way."  I remember it was a difficult transition for me.  I guess we all could have been a little bit more mature about how we conducted ourselves.  But we had a very different way of doing things, as far as we knew.  And I kind of arced with Bill Sanderson at first.  And June was always nice to me.  But the warehouse scene was very different, and you punched in.  We arced at one point, and then I thought, "Well maybe....  You’re just here to run a boat, you know."

Steiger:  When you say arced, you mean you guys got crossways with each other?

Whitney:  Yeah, we just got a little bit crossways--nothing very serious.  And then the good news, the best part of that was really that one day he said--we were putting a trip together and he said, "Let’s go down to the dam."  So we got in the car, a few of us went down there.  The jet tubes were all running, the diversion tunnels weren’t running.

Steiger:  This is ’83?

Whitney:  This is ’83, probably May.  I think I headed for <New Guinea> in June.  So we went down there, and the whole place was quaking.

Steiger:  This was at sixty [60,000 cfs]?

Whitney:  Not even that yet--fifty or somethin’, you know.  I mean, it just seemed like the entire mass of concrete that was there, was quaking.  And we could stand right behind the jet tubes, and they were all....

Steiger:  You guys went down through the tunnel?

Whitney:  Went down through the tunnel.

Steiger:  It must have been loud.

Whitney:  Oh, I remember too that there was so much water coming around the dam through the Navajo Sandstone, that we had our wipers on full blast at that point in the tunnel.  The tunnel was just raining water.

Steiger:  All the way down?

Whitney:  As soon as you got down well below lake level, below the top of the lake, but just before you broke out into the sun again, the wipers were on full speed.  And that’s before.  Then it was just a couple of years later, or maybe even the next year, that they resheeted the inside of the tunnel, so that it was dry.

Steiger:  Which doesn’t mean they’re holding back that water--they just found a place to pipe it on down.

Whitney:  Yeah, it’s just runnin’ off--go around it, man.  So yeah, we got down there.  We had access to that place.  They had the one-day trip.

Steiger:  Well, and here’s a guy who watched that whole thing being built.

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  What did he think of it?  What was his take on it?

Whitney:  You know, yeah, that’s a good question.  We talked about the river, but we didn’t talk about....

Steiger:  What did he think of the dam in that state?  What was his take on what was going on there?

Whitney:  You know, he didn’t really say.

Steiger:  But he wanted to go down there and see.

Whitney:  He wanted to go down there, yeah he did, because I think he knew that the jet tubes were runnin’ and he wanted to see what the effect was, from all of his involvement.  I’m not sure, I don’t think he was a high-scaler, but he was definitely in on the construction of it--then in security, too, I think.  I should ask Byron about that.  But he did want to see what was goin’ on down there.  So we stood, we looked at it, and the water’s just gushing out and creating like maybe a fifteen-, twenty-foot hole out in the middle of the river in the tail race out there.  It’s just a giant hole where all four tubes are arching out into the river and then converging.

	We started talkin’ about the river a little bit, and people who were runnin’ holes, and this and that, different styles and everything.  I said, "I’m just not into runnin’ big holes down there, like some guys, for the company."

Steiger:  You said that?

Whitney:  Yeah.  And he said, "I don’t either--not anymore."  And then we were down there, and this is where you need Brad sitting around or something, but I think it was a Criscraft [phonetic] trip.  It was a hard boat, hard hull trip.  Maybe in ’57, which is when I think....  There was high water.  I don’t know if there was higher water later, but that’s the water that he thought and I think put the logs up on Boulder Narrows.

Steiger:  Yeah, it was one of those three years in the late fifties.

Whitney:  So they went down there, and it was high water, and he was drivin’.  They went around to the left, and he thought he had the power and felt pretty comfortable, and so he just kind of eased over towards the hole to look down in the hole that Boulder Narrows was making, because it was ... Niagara.  And he said, "I got over there and I got a little too close and I felt the whole boat being drawn in backwards, down into this hole.  I just punched it, put everything we had in it.  We just got out of there.  I’ve never gone near a big hole like that ever again."

	And so we had this thing in common:  we had this little river story that he told, and both about running big holes, and "some guys in the company do, and I just don’t," and he didn’t either.  So we had kind of this thing in common.  Then we were friends after that, and I was glad, because he had some other stories, and we’d always go down to the rig, down to the Ferry, and always made sure that we had a little riggin’ juice, that there was a twelve-pack that came along.

Steiger:  Was it Coors, or....

Whitney:  Good question.  It wasn’t Bud[weiser].  It was something else.  It might have been Coors, because it was such a popular beer then.  But yeah, he was a good guy.  He made it fun down there, too.  He loved being down near the river.

Steiger:  He was a good [welder?] too.  One of his sisters told me that he was the best boatman of all the boys, she thought.

Whitney:  Really?

Steiger:  Yeah.  With all due respects to Jerry--just that he had finesse.  I forget who it was who told me that.

[both talking at same time, neither discernable]

Steiger:  [unclear] wild adventure.

Whitney:  Yeah.  I ran a couple trips, anyway, and just remember seeing Lava at 60,000, and was tempted to run the ledge because at that stage it was this big, clean, glassy wave.  I remember being up there, scouting, and saying, "I don’t know how that could really hurt you."  (laughs)  And then seeing some trout swimming through the crest of the wave.  I looked down there and said, "Did you see that?  You could see a trout.  A trout just swam through that wave."  We looked, and sure enough, a minute later, it was clear enough, and you could see a fish just comin’ down through the wave, and swam through the wave, right to left.

Steiger:  Do you think they were just doin’ that for fun, or just gettin’ sucked in there?

Whitney:  I don’t know--to think a fish is looking for a fun ride like that.  But it happened a couple times.  Whether they were chasin’ something, hard to say--if they could even see something going that fast.

Steiger:  [unclear] just hangin’ out in the eddies and layin’ low.

Whitney:  Yeah.  But I ran right, I remember.

Steiger:  You did?!  Oh my God.  How was that?

Whitney:  Yeah.  And Hoss was down there too.  I remember I think it was the last trip before I took off, and Crumbo was there.  It was kind of a Lava Follies thing going on, and Hoss was there, and he ran right.  Kim was like, "Have a good run.  Be safe!"  And then Hoss, you know, just runnin’ down, runnin’ right.  It was a big ride.

Steiger:  That’s pretty big.  You could tip over, I would think, even in a motorboat if you got sideways.  Or could you?  Was it smooth?

Whitney:  Well, no, it was big.  I mean, that trip, I remember, when Crumbo was there, I said I ran right, but I know that there was one, because it was comin’ up, that we were running left.  I know it was ’83 when Hoss ran right.  Whether it was that higher water or not....  I remember running left, and there was plenty of room.  It was everything that you could do to hit the holes at the bottom--I mean, run those bigger waves so that it wasn’t just a flat dry run down the left-hand side.  Because you could go left and not hit anything.

Steiger:  And miss everything.

Whitney:  Miss everything.  So the point was to try and get a big splash at the end.  So there was that--I remember there was that left run.  Could be a dry run....

Steiger:  Unless you worked at it, yeah.

Whitney:  So I missed all the great historic 90,000 carnage.  It was a wild year.

Steiger:  So then you came back, and in ’84 you jumped ship, went to Arizona River Runners.

Whitney:  Yup.  Came back from PNG and decided that I was gonna look for another company.  I’d been down in <Marble> and come by ARR, and I think Owen was there at the time, and I met Pam and Fred and Carol, and talked to Tony about it.  And I just liked the feel of it:  dogs in the office, and a small company.  It was just that small family-run business.  It just seemed like it would really fit.  And so I asked Fred for a job, and he said yeah.  And that was ’84.  So he sold in ’86 and I started feeling like every company I go to, they sell a couple of years after I sign on.

Steiger:  Was Steve Viavant  there?  Or he’d already taken off?

Whitney:  He’d gone, he’d already taken off.  I mean, that old guard was gone:  Don Neff and Viavant.

Steiger:  So it was you and Stuart and Connie?

Whitney:  Actually, it was Dick and Brian Hansen, and Stoner.  And Ed Smith did a couple of trips.  There were just six boats, right?

Whitney:  Six, but only four ran all the time.  Then there’d be like number 5 and number 6 would go every now and again.  Seemed like that was about the way that went.

Whitney:  So Dick and Brian were workin’ together.  And then Owen and I ran together.  And [unclear] trip with John.  And then you and Ed came.  Remember, you guys ran a couple trips here and there.

Steiger:  I was in there.  I was like boat number 6.

Whitney:  So it was just four boats, right?  But I thought Stoner was runnin’ all the time, too.

Steiger:  Oh, I know--let’s see....  I was in and out of there.

Whitney:  You were there.

Steiger:  I was there, but....

Whitney:  Maybe not all season.

Steiger:  I was doin’ like the fifth or sixth boat.  And then at somewhere, where was it, I guess ’85 and ’86, that’s when we got busy.  That’s when we were makin’ our first movie, so I wasn’t there much in ’85, and I didn’t see the <Grand Canyon> at all in 1986.  So I missed those two years, but I was there in ’84.  Oh, I know, in ’84 I was doin’ the science thing for a while.  We were supplying the cable cars.  That’s what I did that year, so I was off there.  That was definitely boat number 6.

Whitney:  I remember there was a trip with Stoner that was a pretty wild trip.  Jack Schmidt, and Julie Graff, and a guy who ran this dredge.

Steiger:  Oh, I remember, yeah, you driving that thing.

Whitney:  That was the first phase of science.

Steiger:  Right, you had this thing off the nose of your boat, this big ol’....

Whitney:  Yeah.  That was wild, ’cause I remember rigging the boat, and I went up to V.C to get something, came back, and all of a sudden everything had been loaded on the boat.  We had the dredge and everything on top of the food, with all the gear.  And somebody put like three sheets of plywood on the back of the boat and right behind the motor--you could hardly get it out of the water.  And I looked at that and I thought....  (laughs)

Steiger:  "You’ve got to be fucking kidding me!"

Whitney:  It was scary.  Went out there and there wasn’t really....

Steiger:  Do you have any pictures of that?

Whitney:  Yeah.  There really wasn’t any weight on the side tubes.  It was just like the boat was completely loaded with a winch with cable, and a dredging beam....

Steiger:  I remember you ridin’ so low in the water.

Whitney:  Oh! so low in the water.  I remember I came back in, and I was lookin’ for somebody to agree with me, and I remember sayin’ somethin’ to Stuart, and he said, "Looks pretty low."  (laughter)  "Well, yeah, but...."  And then Moldy [phonetic] was there, and he looked at me and said, "You ever done much backin’?"  (laughter)  This isn’t really goin’ my way.  So I went back up and Pam was in the office, and I said, "You know, this boat, I’m sorry, but this boat is not river-worthy.  It’s a crazy rig.  It’ll take an hour of moving heavy metal around to get to the food.

Steiger:  Did you make her send another boat?

Whitney:  Yeah.  "We need another boat.  We need just like a gear boat so we can turn this into the dredge.  It can’t be a dredge and a kitchen and a porto and everything else."  So that took some negotiating.  And USGS, they didn’t really have the money for it, and to pay another boatman.  And so we had to kind of jump through all those hoops, but fortunately--and I’ve forgotten the guy’s name, but I had him.  He was on a geology trip that I was on one time.  Good guy, good manager.  So he requisitioned a second boat.  He made it happen so we could have a second boat.

	So then we went down there.  I remember some guy was gonna be there reading some side-scanning sonar stuff, and he was all anxious to get goin’.  If this trip didn’t leave on time, he was gonna go back to <Denver>.  I said, "If we don’t get another boat, I’ll go back to <Denver> with you."  It’s like, "this is nuts!"  So we got the other boat, went down there, and we started to rig it up and get the dredge on there, and I thought, "You know what would be easier would be just to turn the side tubes around, put ’em on backwards," so that the back end was even with the boat, level with the boat, so that you basically had four tubes across.  And the "J" part of the tube [would be] stickin’ up, that you couldn’t really use.  So we had the side tubes backwards.  Arizona River Runners, looking back, because I remember Whale came over and said, "I’ve always wanted to do that!  I’ve always wanted to run my tubes backwards."  It looked like a really goofy rig, but it worked perfectly for the weight, because then you could....  They had these four-by-fours or whatever they were, to support the dredge, and they could go all across the side tubes and the boat, could use the whole front end.  And then the front basket frame was empty, so that you could swing this three-foot black iron pipe that we would drop in the river and back down, and see what we could hang up on, or scoop up with it.  Jerkin’ the boat around in the river was wild.

Steiger:  Did you have a way to cut that thing loose?

Whitney:  No.  Well, he had some way to free spool it, I think, off, if we really got in trouble.

Steiger:  You’d need to, yeah.  That would have hurt their feelings, too.  (uproarious laughter)  But boy, I tell ya’ what, if you ever really hung that thing up, you’d definitely want to....

Whitney:  It seemed like it wanted to a couple of times.  I still have a rock that came out of that dredge, right at that narrow point right above the ledges, and it’s really rocky.  Of course everywhere that they wanted to dredge--and Jack and Julie were trying to figure all this stuff out--was wherever there was a debris flow coming into the river, to see how much and what size.

Steiger:  What’s down there, yeah.

Whitney:  What kind of stuff had made it to the bottom of the river.  So that got pretty interesting in a few places, but it worked out well to have just one boat be a work boat, and then the other boat be the kitchen.

Steiger:  Yeah, that really made sense.

Whitney:  It was fun running with Jack.  There were places we came up with just beautiful clean sand, and then other places where the whole thing would be full of water, and there’d just be one big ol’ rock stuck in the top of the black iron pipe.  Went all the way down <Scorpion Island> at the end of that trip--good ol’ <Scorpion Island>.

	So that was some of the ARR shenanigans, and then the great--was it the first ARR rowing trip?  You were on that.

Steiger:  (laughs)  Was that the first and the last, the only?

Whitney:  The first and the last.  The Dale Whitmore fishing trip.  You and me and Stuart and Ray Pope and Russell....

Steiger:  Boy, did I get in trouble for that one!

Whitney:  When Fred saw that last helicopter comin’ out, completely full of ten pounds of life jackets....

Steiger:  He was so pissed.  I don’t know who--did I put those on there?

Whitney:  Oh, we had Bryce Bealer [phonetic].  Remember, he was a paraplegic.  He was in a wheelchair in Mondell’s boat, down in <Marble Canyon>, and we carried him up and flew out.

Steiger:  Yeah.  That whole thing was just such a cluster-fuck.  What I remember was this guy’s....  Seems to me there were only a couple of those guys that were real fishermen, and this trip was a special trip.  Fred....  It’s kind of funny.  The back story is that ARR, there was this big internal battle at Arizona River Runners in the mid-seventies about whether it should be motors or rowing.  And poor Fred Burke, who’d started the company, he just wanted to make a little money with this thing.  He wasn’t interested in runnin’ green-and-white Arizona River Runner dories.  (laughter)  Because he had done the math, and he could see where four people in the boat for eighteen or nineteen days wasn’t gonna pay near as good as fourteen for seven days.  So he was dead set against rowing, but finally he gave in a little bit and we’re gonna do this one trip.  It was gonna be from <Lee's Ferry> to Little Colorado, a fishing trip, and everybody’s gonna helicopter out.  It was in the fall, and these guys all showed up and had tons of gear.  They had so much gear:  everybody had waders and vests and tackle boxes... they had just all this stuff.  We let ’em bring it, not even thinkin’ about the helicopter.  Then we get down there, and it was a hot day, and all this stuff had to be helicoptered out.  There went the profit, right there.  It got hotter and hotter, and we kept puttin’ less and less stuff on the helicopter.  I don’t think it was me that put those jackets on there, but he was so....  [unclear]

Whitney:  That’s how we love to tell the story.

Steiger:  It wasn’t me, goddamnit!  (laughter)

Whitney:  On the record!

Steiger:  I knew we were in trouble.  We’d better, at some point in this document....  So now, how are we doin’?  It’s five now.  I don’t want to disrupt the routine here.

Whitney:  Oh, let’s keep goin’.

Steiger:  We need to tell some Fred stories.  (aside about recording equipment)  Like there had to be some moment where you started to make up your mind about him.

Whitney:  Yeah.  I wasn’t sure what to make of Fred at first.  He came from such a different background from Tony Sparks and Jerry Sanderson, Bill Sanderson, and those guys.  I knew I liked what I saw down there.  Like I said, it was family style, and small.  Just, "Here’s your boat.  Go run these trips."  And then when I first showed up there was....  He was in the restaurant and just, "Hi, how are ya’?"  He didn’t know me from Adam.  I’d just met him that one time down there, just drivin’ around, visiting around.  And then I sort of let myself into the office, and I was making some copies at the Xerox machine, and I kind of look over my shoulder, and I realize that Fred’s watchin’ me, and I’m usin’ his stuff.  And he was really hands on.  It all seemed to go pretty well.  I guess where I realized how important it was to him, how the trip was run, food was served in a certain order.  And it was really important to him, this is where it got the flavor of "Fred the cowboy and the rancher."  His idea was not so much....  You run the river, and don’t go too far up those side canyons where somebody can get hurt.  But the food, you know, was like--you want that to come out like you’re watchin’ somebody runnin’ a chuck wagon.  People like to see, like it’s some kind of a performance.  People like to see that you’re preparing the food, and biscuits and gravy, and gettin’ up in the morning.  [unclear] we talk about make the Bisquick and roll it with a whiskey bottle and cut it with a Coors can.  You’d lead them through the menu so that you had something pretty good the first night, then you could kind of have the spaghetti and whatever in the middle, and then end with the steaks.  It was all really important how the food went--like it was orchestrated as an important part of the trip.  So I could get in some hot water with Fred from time to time for....

Steiger:  Being irreverent about it?

Whitney:  Yeah.  Either that, and then also doing what was easy with the menu, too.  I mean, if you had to get going in the morning fast, or you needed a quick dinner, maybe something would go out of sequence.  I remember one morning there was--and Carol was on the trip, and some of the kids and the family, and some friends of Carol’s.  I think it was a trip with Paul Hinshaw, and we’re down there around Elves’ somewhere, and we’re tryin’ to kind of get goin’, and we didn’t get up and start the charcoal right away, and I’m thinkin’, "Well, maybe I could kind of switch something around here.  We could have eggs and something, and then we don’t have to wait for the charcoal to come on.  We can get up and get goin’.  So we’re just standin’ on the boat, and this is where I realize that word gets back to Fred, and he would watch everything, be at the take-out and talk to somebody on the trip, and they’d say, "Yeah, it was pretty....  Especially that really exciting part where we hung up in <Deubendorff>, and we were there for a few minutes."  So you’re on the drive back and nobody’s saying anything, and Fred’s goin’, "So how’d everything work out in <Deubendorff> this trip?"

So we’re standin’ on the [boat], "What do we have for breakfast?"  And we’re sort of kibitzing about that for a couple of minutes, and Carol walks by and she says, "Why don’t you just make the fucking biscuits?!"  "Yes ma’am!"

Steiger:  [Make] what’s on the menu.

Whitney:  Yes, that’s right, what’s on the menu.  So jump to, "Get that charcoal!  Let’s get that goin’!"  And realized that there was not really micro-managing, but he had an idea about how he wanted those trips to run.

Steiger:  Biscuits are important.  [unclear]

Whitney:  That’s not a great Fred story, but it never really....  I might have done somethin’ like that a couple of times.  It was harder on Pam than it was on anybody else, probably, because he’d rant about anything that didn’t go my way down there on this trip, and "are they followin’ the menu?" and she’d have to hear all about it, and we’d have to hear about it.

	I did two or three trips with Carol, but I never did a trip with Fred down there.  Pam’s got some great stories--I know you do too--about what he was like down there.

Steiger:  Oh, he was fun.  He was more fun on the river.  I mean, he didn’t get....  For me, Carol was fun too, but she basically would just party on.  Fred was good, he was fun.  I’m not gonna get goin’ on him here.

Whitney:  You should interview Pam sometime.  You guys need to write the history of the V.C days, because she’s got so many great stories of bein’ in the canyon with Fred, but also other trips to <Africa> and to the South Pacific.

Steiger:  Oh, just that whole thing.

Whitney:  I really got to know them better....

Steiger:  After the fact.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  They were pretty generous.

Whitney:  Just a couple of years.  It was ’84, ’85, and....  When did he sell?  I think it was ’86.  There were three years there.  (to wife) Pam, what year did Fred and Carol sell ARR?  Was it ’86?

Pam Whitney:  [unclear, far from microphone]

Whitney:  So there were those three seasons.  They were great.  Fred was great about his ideas, about takin’ care of people, too.  I mean, that whole thing.  [unclear] educate the boatmen, too.  Everybody had to stand up and say somethin’ at the last night dinner.  Just this whole little show that went on.

Steiger:  Did that go until the very end with Fred and Carol?  I guess they did.  You had a motel room the night before?

Whitney:  The Holiday Inn.

Steiger:  And one at the end.  And that was everybody got all cleaned up and had a dinner.  It was that way.  Made speeches.

Pam Whitney:  Made speeches.

Whitney:  Right to the end?

Pam Whitney:  Right to the end.  [unclear]

Steiger:  That was great, because you could sneak off with the girls (laughter) into the rooms, after the fact.  Got pretty good tips, too, as I recall.

Whitney:  Yeah, you’d get down to Pearce, and everybody’d--the whole thing was to have everybody help de-rig until they weren’t havin’ fun anymore, and then get ’em on the bus and they’re off to <Kingman>, and then we’d finish the de-rig, and that big flatbed trailer, and meet everybody in <Kingman> and have a big dinner, and everybody had to....

Steiger:  And on the way to <Kingman> Fred would find out everything that had happened on the trip.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  I remember, it seemed like when I first started workin’ there, you got ’em--it wasn’t in <Kingman> then.  It started out it was in <Page> for a year, and then it was at the Caverns pretty quick.

Pam Whitney:  When they did it at the caverns, they didn’t come and go from the Caverns.  They still came to <Page>, because they did the orientation in <Page>.

Steiger:  Oh, and then they just went....  No, for a few years didn’t they meet and orient ’em at the Caverns and then fly ’em, for a couple of years?

Pam Whitney:  Maybe before me.

Steiger:  Seemed like that was....

Pam Whitney:  It may have been before me, but [unclear].

Steiger:  So they would meet ’em at <Page> and then they’d fly out of the Caverns at the end, back to <Page> or wherever.

Pam Whitney:  Back to <Page> or to <Vegas>.

Steiger:  Yeah.  But it was like that whole trip....  So here’s two motel rooms and a fun-filled plane ride, seein’ the canyon.  And the whole thing was like 350 bucks.  The first I recall, like ’72, it was 345 bucks.  Then it was like $475 or somethin’ like that, with all that.  But a motel room cost what, fifteen bucks?  No, there was Motel 6, it cost six dollars a night.  So the motel room was probably like ten bucks a night, or somethin’.

Pam Whitney:  [unclear]

Whitney:  Was Earl doin’ all that flying?

Pam Whitney:  Earl was doing most of the flying.  There was also Lake Powell Air.  It just depended upon who Fred was having the fight with.  He’d get Earl, Earl would make him mad because he wouldn’t want to take people’s bags because they were too heavy, or the people were too heavy, so [unclear].  Or he’d be late, and they’d get into a big fight, [unclear] for a while.  Then we’d get off, and [unclear] be okay again.  That’s when there were choices.

Steiger:  (aside about recording equipment)  Okay, so we’re rollin’.  This is the River Runners Oral History, and this is our second little disk that we’re startin’ on.  This is an interview with Tim Whitney, and it’s June 11, 2007, and we’re at the house of Tim and Pam Whitney, and Pam’s in and out of the kitchen.  Now that those guys are done workin’, we might start hearin’ from her a little bit.

Whitney:  Start cleanin’ up the stories a little bit.

Steiger:  Yeah, she knows the real stories.  So we might hear from her a time or two.  And while we weren’t runnin’, Tim was bemoaning the fact that nothing’s ever happened to him in the <Grand Canyon>.  (laughter)  Doesn’t have that many good stories to tell!

Whitney:  I’m sure you can remind me of something that did.

Steiger:  Well, the one that leaps to my mind is a story I tell practically every trip, or every trip that we’ve seen a Western boat on, and that’s you savin’ that gal down there at <Havasu>.  I know that you’ve already told me that, and we’ve got it written down in Christa’s [Sadler] book and stuff.  I want to take this opportunity just to ask you....

Whitney:  Why did I do it?

Steiger:  No, I never heard the aftermath.  I’m so proud of you for doin’ that.  I mean, I don’t think I ever would have done it.

Whitney:  It can all be really simple.  It was just gonna be a little swim down a rapid that we used to do all the time.  And... until a lot of rubber got in the way....

Steiger:  You used to swim the rapid in <Havasu>?

Whitney:  Yeah, every once in a while we’d go to that little point.  It was probably ’83, ’84, ’85, high-water years, and just pull out, go down--pull off the cliff, go drift down the quieter water.  And just swim across the creek, go to that little point just on the upstream side of the creek, and just jump in and float the rapid in our lifejackets.  We used to swim 217 all the time.

Steiger:  You swam <Havasu>?

Whitney:  Yeah, the <Havasu Rapid>, just float down to the boat.

Steiger:  You would go up to the mouth and wade out and swim down to the boat?

Whitney:  Just jump in.  There’s a little point when you pull in there, and it’s on the upstream side of the creek where there’s still clear water.

Steiger:  Oh, yeah, where there’s a rock stickin’ out.

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  Yeah, I know that rock well.

Whitney:  We just did it a couple of times.

Steiger:  You actually did that, screwin’ around?

Whitney:  Yeah, just for fun.

Steiger:  And swam down and caught your motorboat?

Whitney:  Well, as I remember, somebody’d pull out, just kind of pull off and just kind of float out there.  A couple of us would just jump in and float the rapid down to the boat, and get on, go down to lunch.

Steiger:  Kind of like a guides-only thing?  Or you’d do it with people?

Whitney:  No, just guides-only thing.  But I remember there were a couple of times--that’s kind of why we stopped doin’ it--a couple times early on, it’s when 217....  I had some people from the Phoenix Suns on a trip, and we swam 217, and it was the last time that I did it, because there was somebody who shouldn’t have been doin’ it, who kind of got either egged along or caught up in the momentum.

Steiger:  Drank a little water?

Whitney:  Yeah.  And wound up over on the right-hand side at the bottom, before the last little "S" turn, and didn’t really know what to do.  And I thought, "This isn’t a good idea."  Somebody said--I think I said it, I was driving, drop everybody off, run the rapid, and then wait for ’em to float down to the boat.  "You should have seen you guys:  all these tiny little heads drifting down through this rapid."  And some guy who didn’t swim said, "Yeah, it’d take a tiny head to go swim that rapid!"  (laughter)  Where else did we swim?  It was my third trip down the river before I ran <Hermit> in a boat.  I mean, I remember my brother is also the same guy who taught me how to ride a two-wheeler.

Steiger:  Did he get you started skydiving too?

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  You’ve got a lot to thank him for!

Whitney:  "Give it to Tim--he’ll eat it, he’ll do it!"  So take me to the top of a hill, put me on a bicycle and say, "Now just keep your balance and the faster you go, the easier it is to stay on there," and then run into a fence and go head over heels.  He said, "Yeah, you should swim this rapid, this is a really good rapid to swim."

Steiger:  <Hermit>?

Whitney:  <Hermit>.

Steiger:  First time you saw it.

Whitney:  First trip down the river.  He said, "Well, I’ll just drive.  You just run off the back of the boat, then I’ll run it, and you just float on through there, and I’ll just pick you up at the bottom."  It was a Mae West lifejacket.

Steiger:  Pretty high flotation.

Whitney:  Yeah, but not enough.  (laughter)  And the one instruction was, "When you see the wave coming, just turn your head to the side, and throw your arms up so that you kind of go up over the top of the rapid."  Well, I mean, you know, I threw my arms up, I turned my head to the side, and went through the top three feet of the wave.  I was freezing and half drowned by the time I came out at the bottom.  So on the next trip, I brought a wet suit!  I really got smart, I brought a wet suit.

Steiger:  ’Cause you knew he’d make you jump in there again.

Whitney:  Well, at that point I thought it’d be fun, but it’d be nice to have a little more flotation.  Nobody ever thought about putting on two lifejackets, which was kind of hard to do, actually, with a Mae West.  So my first two trips down the river, I swam <Hermit>.  Where else did we swim?  We used to swim 217 and....

Steiger:  Three Springs is where I used to do it all the time.

Whitney:  Three Springs.

Steiger:  Which is kind of a standard ARR, just because they decided that’s one you could--nice, long, straight.

Whitney:  National.  But there was another, somewhere.  Oh! I know!  Three Springs, but we’d jump off the rock into the rapid.  Remember that?

Steiger:  Oh, yeah.

Whitney:  Where you’d climb up and there’s a big--kind of looks almost like a marshmallow rock.  You’d jump into the rapid, and then you’d bob up and you’d run the rapid, and then eddy out on the left, come back.

Steiger:  [unclear] fun there.  And 204½ was another--Fred went and found that one.  That was another ARR standard.  When Fred and Carol were along, I remember that’s one that we did.  It used to be pretty easy.  I remember Brad tellin’ the story about him and Cooper down there in a Canyoneers boat, with thirty-five people on this one boat--this one-boat Canyoneers trip, and they asked, "Would anybody like to swim <Diamond Creek> Rapid>?"  Maybe it was 217, I can’t remember.  And everybody jumps out.  (laughter)  There???s all these people, and you gotta go gather ’em up.  [unclear] without runnin’ over anybody.

Whitney:  [unclear] all spread out.

Steiger:  But seriously, when I think of <Havasu>, and just how muddy that water is.  I mean, when it floods, just how muddy that must have been for you, with that gal.

Whitney:  Yeah, it was.

Steiger:  You couldn’t have had much time to think about it.  You see her comin’, and you had what, how many seconds would you say, to consider what the hell you were gonna do?

Whitney:  Yeah, I know, I think about it.  I think about it pretty often, actually.  It’s just one of those things.  It was pretty amazing that it came out as well as it did, really.  But I probably wouldn’t have, if I hadn’t been wearin’ a life jacket.  I’m sure I would have had to do something else, like other people did.  Carl McDonald and other people tried, as she was comin’ out of the mouth.  But it just seemed like clear sailing.  I mean, you’re just lookin’ at somebody who’s a goner.

Steiger:  Carl McDonald--was that the guy on the....

Whitney:  No, he was on a Wilderness trip, I think, and he was up at the mouth.

Steiger:  I have that bein’ Mike Reyes [phonetic].

Whitney:  No, it was Carl McDonald.

Steiger:  So was Mike Reyes even there--threw the life jacket out to her?

Whitney:  I don’t know if Mike was on that trip, but they saw her go by in the mouth, you know.  That’s the most that they could do.  Six inches below the surface it was black, it was that muddy.

Steiger:  I’m going to say here, just to tell a condensed version of this.  It’s written down in several Pages, but it wouldn’t make it into a BQR thing.  Basically what happened was there was a big flood--let’s see if I got this right--and I heard the story because I did the next trip with you, and you told it to me then, and you were actin’ weird.  You didn’t say a word about it all the way down, and the morning of <Havasu> you started actin’ all weird, and I was thinkin’, "What’s wrong with you?!"  And you said, "This weird thing happened last time."

Whitney:  8/8/88 [August 8, 1988].

Steiger:  Yeah, and you told it to me.  Basically what happened, Whitney and Richard Quartaroli were down there running a two-boat trip, and they get down there and tie up down below, and there’s a couple of Western boats in the mouth, head to tail, and a couple of Wilderness boats.  It’s high water.

Whitney:  Big black rain cloud had just turned the corner and gone right up <Havasu Canyon>.  I mean, it come across the canyon, or up the river, and just went right on up there, and we thought, "That looks like potential trouble.

Steiger:  So they’re not gonna stay long, they’re just gonna take a peek and go.  Whitney stayed down at the boats, and Q. takes the people up, and he’s just there a minute or two, and he goes down to talk to the guys at the mouth, he’s not with them, and he just barely gets to the mouth and this wall of water comes crashin’ down there, and it washes this person out.  And it also breaks the Western boat loose, the two Western boats that are tied head to tail, simultaneously.  And the woman gets swept down to Whitney.  Nobody even knows it’s a woman then, ’cause all you could see was just a face.

Whitney:  We go out on the boats to help the Western guys pull in, because they’re kind of pin-wheelin’ down the rapid, tryin’ to get organized.  So it’s like grab a jacket and get on, and went out to the back of the boat, ready to grab a line or help them pull in.  And then this face in the water goes by, just this face, pointing her nose toward the light, and gasping for air.  So I had my lifejacket on, I just jump in, thinking we can float down a little ways and pull in.  No big deal, just float on down, grab onto the wall.  People know that we’re out here, so they’ll come get us.  And then the Western boats get downstream of us, trying to pull in--so much for trying to help them pull in, they’re doin’ it, but now they’re in the way.

Steiger:  And Tim and this woman get swept clear under those guys and he almost loses her, but gets her back.  Pretty much undoubtedly saves her life, ’cause I don’t think she’d have made it.  She sounded like she was pretty well goin’ down.

Whitney:  She wasn’t swimming.

Steiger:  It was all she could do just to get up, and if you hadn’t bought her that extra time, and hadn’t been there to get her....

Whitney:  But then, you know, I had to kick loose of her, too, under those boats.  I needed to not be....

Steiger:  You needed to save your own skin.

Whitney:  Right.  And then popped out.  She popped up and sort of went down again.  I really....  I didn’t want to have to....  I was done, I just wanted to get out of the water.  But then I had to reach in there again.  I thought now it’s me too.  Before, I thought I was in complete control, and now I was as much a part of the problem as she was.  Somehow we wound up getting between the Western boats and the wall, and we know how big those boats look when you’re down on the water.  Luckily they just were able to not slam the wall, or they would have just squashed us in the process.  We were able to swim out there a little bit and kind of grab onto the boat.  And I guess too that--I think his name is Darrell [phonetic]--I guess he got his motor out of the water, too, because we went under.  One motor was runnin’, the other one wasn’t.  Then it just started seemin’ like it was a good prop chop opportunity.  Seemed like bein’ under those boats forever, and then came out.

Steiger:  So did he see you go under?

Whitney:  I don’t know exactly.

Steiger:  But it was still goin’ when you guys came out?--his motor.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  And then this woman came back.  You’ve done a couple more trips with her?

Whitney:  No, she never came back.

Steiger:  Oh, she didn’t?

Whitney:  Not that I know of, no.

Steiger:  I thought she had, or that you’d been in communication.

Whitney:  Been in communication.

Steiger:  I’m gettin’ all these stories wrong!  Because I have her comin’ back and runnin’ another trip with you--which I thought was amazing, "you gotta be kidding me, man."

Whitney:  No.  It was really funny, too, because it was really quiet in camp that night.  Everybody was so stunned by the whole thing.  Nobody really talked it out or got it out, and kind of the next morning they’re gone.  And so we communicated.  We have never even talked on the phone, but by letter--and not for a couple of years now.  She went back, she had a floral shop in Lower <Manhattan>, I think.  We communicated for a while, but I think there was a great sense of....  Well, obviously, relief and appreciation, but I think sometimes in those situations where people either right away they just like get back to their own life, and you don’t really want to think about that, or recognize it.  We talked about it a couple of times in a letter, like, "If you ever come to <New York>, let me know."  And lots of complimentary things about saving her life and stuff like that.  But there’s also, I think, sort of underneath it all, like a little sense of embarrassment or shame or something, that you had that experience, like you’re beholding to somebody maybe.  I don’t know what the feeling is exactly, that you owe somebody.  In the old days, "I owe you my life," so whatever it was, it was sort of expected that you go to the ends of the earth for somebody who saved your life.  There may be a little something like that, too, which is sort of embarrassment, I think.

Steiger:  I don’t know, I don’t know how many people there are that get to go through their lives where you actually saved somebody’s life, where you saved ’em.  Just to actually jump into a flood, that’s pretty good.

Whitney:  You know, I thought about that too.  I question myself why did I?  I’d rather we weren’t really recording this, but at the same time I just thought, "You know, I never really...."  I’m in the river a lot, you know.  I like being in the river.

Steiger:  Swimming.

Whitney:  Swimming.

Steiger:  So it didn’t really strike you as being that....

Whitney:  Exactly, I was comfortable.  I’d have been comfortable just jumpin’ in the river and floating down a little ways and swimming to shore.

Steiger:  So it didn’t seem like it was going to be that bad of a deal.

Whitney:  Exactly.  I mean, I was comfortable with being in the river, so that made it easier.

Steiger:  Even though it was full of all that shit.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And it wasn’t like a huge flood.  It wasn’t like the ’95 flood, where it’s washin’ trees and stuff out.  I mean, there was debris in the river, and it was obviously a muddy flood, bringin’ other stuff out in there.  But there wasn’t anything in the river that was going to create a real problem, like a big log that could knock you out or something like that.

Steiger:  You didn’t see writhing rattlesnakes or anything.

Whitney:  Exactly, right.

Steiger:  Oh, damn!  I tell everybody that you did.  All right, I’m not takin’ that out of my story, because I’ve seen that.  Have you?

Whitney:  Yeah.  Not rattlesnakes, but king snakes--a couple of king snakes.

Steiger:  I mean, I’ve seen snakes get flushed out of there in a big flood.  Also, you go up there, GCD will get there, a lot of times you go to <Last Chance>, and you get in there and then you just bust ass and get up early--like if you’re goin’ to <Mooney Falls> or somethin’--get in there 6:30 or 7 a.m. and start up the trail.  And you start up the trail early.  I’ve done this a couple of times where I was assigned to go to Mooney with whoever it was that wanted to go, that could go.  And you’re goin’ up there early, and it’s like there’s fifty million snake tracks goin’ across the trail.

Whitney:  Little Mohave too.

Steiger:  I’m not kiddin’.  I mean, there are so many of ’em.  I’ve done that hike a few times, and you see a couple, two or three.  But I just laugh thinking, "Oh my God."

Whitney:  That’s classic.

Steiger:  But after a few people have gone up there, you just kind of wipe out all those tracks and stuff.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  Tiptoeing through those grapevines.

Whitney:  Yeah, it was a couple of years ago I almost stepped on a Mohave up there.

Steiger:  A green one?

Whitney:  Yeah.  Big, fat, a fatso.

Steiger:  Did he chase you?

Whitney:  No, he just went....  He was just a little ways, not even halfway to <Beaver>--just one of those places where the trail goes down near the creek.  And I almost stepped on it.  Somebody called it out, they saw it.  They were lookin’ ahead and they saw it.  It just went on down towards the water.  But closer than I wanted to be.  That’s classic early morning, huh?

Steiger:  Yeah.  One time I was going out of <Diamond Creek> and a van full of people--and I remember Dennis Silva [phonetic] was one of ’em.  I don’t remember what the heck trip it was.  But we were goin’ out, a whole bunch of boatmen in a van at some take-out, and we see this Mohave, or green rattler.  We go whizzin’ by him.  Our truck’s already gone, and for some reason we’re all in a van.  And we see this snake, and we go, "Cool, there’s a Mohave.  Let’s go see this guy."  And we kind of bipped on by him and hit the brakes and skidded to a halt.  Here’s like six boatmen jumpin’ out, runnin’ back to see the Mohave rattler.  And this snake starts runnin’, coming right after us!  He’s chasin’ us, and he chases us right back.  We jump in the van and peel outta there, because he was comin’ right for us.  I’m not kiddin’.

Whitney:  Really?!  I’ve never heard of that.

Steiger:  Yeah, he was comin’ right after us.  He was like, "All right, c’mon!"

Whitney:  "Who’s first?!"

Steiger:  Yeah, "I’ll getcha."  Well, that was my Grand Canyon story that I had in mind.  Shit.  Carl McDonald.  It wasn’t Mike Reyes.  I blew that, because I think I tell it that way.  I don’t know if it’s in there written down or not.  But she never came back?

Whitney:  No.

Steiger:  I tell people that she came back.  I’m gonna have to "X" that out of there.

Whitney:  Well, if she did, I didn’t know about it anyway.  But she didn’t come with me.

Steiger:  But she was a runner.

Whitney:  Yeah, she was a runner.  She was in really good shape, just slim and lanky.  And her daughter was on the trip, and her son-in-law, who was quite a bit her daughter’s senior, he was an interesting guy.  He sold French Mirage fighter jets for a living.

Steiger:  Wow.

Whitney:  So he actually got--he was in pretty serious trouble.  I mean, the pictures of him, when they finally got him out of the creek, he was just comin’ out as a completely washed-out limp noodle.  I mean, he couldn’t....

Steiger:  So she wasn’t the only one that had been caught by that.

Whitney:  No.  What happened was, they went down to the creek.  "We’ll take some pictures, and then we’ll go back to the boat.  Nobody crosses the creek."

Steiger:  So they told ’em, "Don’t even get in the creek."

Whitney:  "Don’t even get in the creek."  So they stepped out in the creek.  I mean, you have to see it.  But we know that the water just all of a sudden surges and rises, and you’re just off your feet, and there’s nothin’ to hold onto.

Steiger:  So it wasn’t like a big wall came....

Whitney:  Yeah, it just rose up under them.  There was, I guess, kind of a wall, but not a wall like you’d see in <Cathedral> when a big rainstorm in V.C...

Steiger:  [unclear]

Whitney:  Yeah, exactly, or like something rolling over a dry creek bed.  So the daughter got a hand out.  Catherine got swept over the falls and out through the mouth.  And her son-in-law--remember there was a little ash tree that was right there at the crossing.  It was just out, kind of growin’ in the creek.

Steiger:  I don’t even remember.  On our side?

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  On river left.

Whitney:  Exactly, that’s right.  And so he was out there, and it rose up, and he just got ahold of that thing, and basically it just pasted him against the tree.  So Richard’s up there, and a couple of other people, and they get ahold of a line somewhere, and they’re tryin’ to reach out and convince him to let go, because they’ve just got to get him from there to here.  I mean, we’re just talkin’ a few feet.  But now the creek is probably up against the wall, and I sort of envision Richard standing in knee-deep water or something like that, could reach out, and if the guy just let go, they could boop, boop, boop, and haul him in, and he’d be done.  But he wouldn’t let go.  So he was out there with the river pasting him to this tree.  In thirty seconds you’re done, let alone three, four, five minutes of it.  And I think it even started to subside--I don’t know for sure, but it didn’t seem like that ferocious a flood.  But there is a picture, I’ve seen a picture of when he finally let go and they’re haulin’ him in, and he’s just....  He was a tall guy, so it’s just all arms and legs just completely strung out, bein’ dragged to shore, like a shipwreck crawlin’ up on a beach kind of thing.

Steiger:  Exhausted.

Whitney:  Here’s a quick one from <Havasu>.  It was the early eighties, and we’re down there, and I don’t know, I probably shouldn’t use any names, huh?  It’s okay, it happens.  So I run into Steve Lowry down there, and we’re bouncing into each other along the way.  So we’re up the creek, we’re walkin’ back, and he says--I’m runnin’ a trip with Brian--and he says, "I’m gonna run down to the boats and take off and run Lava, and we’ll see you in the mornin’," I think at the helicopter pad.  We weren’t runnin’ six-day trips yet then.  So anyway, "I’ll see you tomorrow."  So we get down kind of towards the crossing, and he comes roarin’ back and he says, "Whitney, my boats are gone!"  So he’s got two boats tied up down there, and there’s this old guy who’s sittin’ on one of the boats.  So he’s got his whole two-boat trip, whatever it was, thirty-some people, and we’re all down there, no lifejackets, nothin’.  And the boats are pinwheelin’ down the river.  He doesn’t know how long they’ve been gone, where they are.

Steiger:  And the jackets are on the boats?

Whitney:  And the jackets are on the boats.  And there’s this old guy with ’em.

Steiger:  Hopefully.

Whitney:  With two boats, hopefully still tied together, pinballin’ off the canyon walls, as far as he knows.  Everybody’s been talkin’ about Lava, so as far as he knows he’s on these runaway boats on his way to <Lava Falls>.  So we just did what anybody’d do, really.  We put everybody on our boats.  So we had like thirty-some people on each of our ARR boats--people with no lifejackets on.

Steiger:  Were you guys tied up down below?

Whitney:  Yeah, tied up.

Steiger:  Had he been below?

Whitney:  I think he was below--I’m not sure.  I think he was.  We always had fun runnin’ into each other down there, you know, and stuff.

Steiger:  Yeah, he was pretty together.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  So the thing was, we just put everybody without lifejackets on the duffle pile towards the inside, and all of our people kind of around the outside, sitting on the side tubes.  But with both boats with thirty-some people on each boat, high-tailin’ down the river.

Steiger:  [unclear] water.

Whitney:  Yeah, and lookin’ for these runaway boats.  We get down just above <Tuckup>....

Steiger:  Wow, so you went a ways.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Not much eddy for two Western boats, to grab two Western boats.  [unclear] National.

Whitney:  Let’s see, was it that far?  It seemed like it was....  Well, it was above <Tuckup>.  I don’t know if it was right there or not, but that’s what I kind of remember anyway.  And they’re tied up to shore, kind of like to nothing--not like a beach or anything, but just to where this old guy had finally got it together, got down the motor, got a boat started, and there was a ripped tube.  It just scraped against the muav and opened it up.

Steiger:  Took him all that long to figure out, "I’d better go back here and pull on this pull cord."

Whitney:  Well, it just took a while, took him a while, I guess.  So they’re tied up to shore, so he got it together and he saved the day.  So we’re goin’ down there, and everybody’s really in good spirits--even Steve.  He’s like, "This is a first.  Hopefully they can’t be that far.  I mean, you know, we’ve only been gone for an hour.  So we’ll catch ’em."  Really everybody’s in pretty good spirits.  We get down there, get a little bit closer, within shouting distance, and somebody yells over and says, "Hey, Henry, were you scared?"  And he just turns his head and he nods yes, real solemnly.  "I was really scared," you know.  But then there was this big cheer and everybody saluted him for rescuing the boats.  They got on board, and off they went and off we went.  Old <Havasu>, boy, that’s a story-maker.

Steiger:  That’s a pretty good story.  Oh man, especially if he didn’t know where <Lava Falls> was.  [unclear] down there and they were gonna run it this afternoon.

Whitney:  "By myself."

Steiger:  So whatever happened to the boats?  How the hell did they get loose?

Whitney:  I don’t know.  I think it was just that old poly-pro line, I think.

Steiger:  Just frazzled?

Whitney:  Just frazzled on the edge.

Steiger:  Must have been down below.

Whitney:  But both of them.

Steiger:  Which means they were all tied to one rope.

Whitney:  Yeah, I guess.

Steiger:  That’s not too good down there.

Whitney:  It’s just one of those things that happens in the canyon.  "Okay, what do we do now?"  And there’s really only one solution.  You know, I’m not worried about breakin’ the rules--let’s just get everybody back with their stuff.  Just take care of it.

Steiger:  Shall we say anything about Gloeckler and Bruce, about runnin’ for those guys for ... what’s it been now?  Practically twenty years?

Whitney:  Twenty years, twenty-one years.  I don’t have my gold watch yet, I know that.

Steiger:  Gloeckler and Bruce Winter... twenty-one years.  And then you’d been goin’ for eight before that.  Boy, that’s quite a while.

Whitney:  Yeah.  Really, I mean, those guys have been great.  Just old-time river runners.  They’re just dyed-in-the-wool old White Water boatmen, runnin’ for Henry and Gracie [Falany].  Bill, since he was a teenage prodigy out there in <California>.  I loved that interview in the BQR, those old pictures of Bruce and Bill, and some great stories that those guys have about runnin’ together.  They both still love to run the river.  Bill’s still down there a bunch.  Bruce comes at least once every year.  Fun to run with.

Steiger:  Yeah, really fun to run with.  Those guys have done good.

Whitney:  And done a great job with the company.  Fred was so cheap, as we say--so cheap he squeaked.

Steiger:  Yes and no.

Whitney:  But there were times.  He was a penny pincher.  He spent it in some places, but then take all the old Mae Wests and take ’em up to <Page> and take ’em apart and take out the bad panels [and sew the good ones together].  Those guys have slowly but surely pulled all the equipment together.  The great thing there is that it’s like interchangeable parts.  You can just get off one set of rigs and step onto another set and it’s all the same.

Steiger:  I hate to say it, but I gotta give Dick Clark--he’s the one that started that company on that road.  Before Dick came, everybody had their own boat, and you got your own boat and could do whatever you wanted with it.  You had to fix it, you had to deal with it.  Whatever went wrong, you had to deal with it.  But people rigged ’em differently, and all this stuff.  And Dick came and said, "No, everybody’s gonna have the same straps, the same rig, totally.  Everything’s going to be just....  We’re gonna put ’em together exactly the same, and that’s gonna be it."  We fought him tooth and nail, but he had a point, for a big operation.  I always felt like for Fred....  I’m not bein’ a very good interviewer here, but just since I was there.  What I appreciated about him, more so than almost any other outfitter, the time I started workin’ for him, he always cared.  He tried to coach ya’.  He didn’t want to just take advantage of you, he tried to get you lined out.  "Here’s what you want to do."  But also, I mean, from Day One, what he didn’t have to do, we always had medical insurance.  We had the money market fund.

Whitney:  No question about that, he was way ahead of his time.

Steiger:  And he paid way better.  When you add it up, the free room and board all summer.  When you added up everything that he was givin’ ya’....  He got his pound of flesh for you livin’ there.  You had to go fix the toilet whenever it stopped up, and we had to go fix the water line, and had to do all that shit, but boy he gave a lot.  And I didn’t realize that until I started workin’ for everybody else.  To this day, I’m proud of Bill and Bruce for that, that they carried that on.  And you look at the rest of the industry, and ARR’s right up there with AZRA, I think, if not in front of AZRA, just for bein’ the best deal for boatmen that there ever was.

Whitney:  There’s no question about that.  When I said "so cheap he squeaked," it was just--you know what I’m talkin’ about, and certain times when if money had to be spent here or there, there was always resistance.  I mean, where they had the box of rope bits.  I’ll never forget that.  You know, like daisy chain, piecing pieces of rope together to have extra stuff on board.  But we know that whole aspect of running a river company like a ranch was....

Steiger:  It was gonna cost ya’, but compared to some, it’s just like whoa.  I didn’t appreciate it when I was there, but I did afterwards, when I look back on it.

Whitney:  And he did say he knew that the crew were the people who really made the name for the company, which is why he really wanted to know everything that happened on the trip.  It’d be great to see more of that now, that kind of hands-on stuff, where you really help control the people’s experience, you know that they’re getting the same kind of a trip all the time.

Steiger:  Well, he picked ’em.  There were definitely people that went down the road because of things Fred heard on his little fact-finding mission afterwards.  But I think that came out of an obligation to his clients, too.  He wanted to know what went on.  It seemed like to me that he always felt it was important to meet those people, and make sure that--not so much that it was finding out everything about what happened, but it was reconnecting with these people that he’d taken money from.  Between him and them, you know, okay, "I took your money, now how’d it go?"

Whitney:  Yeah, he definitely did.  That was before anybody ever seemed like anybody was having post-trip questionnaires and that kind of thing, and he was....

Steiger:  He never wrote it down, but he found out most of what went on.  So that was good.  But those guys have done a great job, too, following him.

	Now, where are we at for history here?  I think it needs to be said in here that....  So Tim started out with Sobek, Fort Lee, Arizona River Runners, been working down here for almost thirty years.  But Tim married Pam Whitney, who used to be....  What would you call it?  The managing....

Whitney:  Her card said vice-president of Arizona River Runners.

Steiger:  Which made her the managing director of the team.  She kind of ran it for the last several years.

Whitney:  She was the glue.

Steiger:  Tim and Pam got married and then started a--and I think this makes you guys unique here--started a travel business, Rivers and Oceans.  And you guys book trips not only in the <Grand Canyon>, but all over the world.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And Fred was really at the start of that, too.

Steiger:  Was he drivin’?  Was he pushin’ you guys to do that?

Whitney:  In ’86, the last year before he sold it, I guess bookings were down a little bit, and so he offered everybody 10 percent commission on anybody that they could get signed up on a trip.  So I went to my list and called up a bunch of people, and I got--I can’t remember exactly--but I got several people signed up on a trip.  It helped the numbers, and Fred paid me the commission, and I had an extra couple thousand dollars in my pocket at the end of the season.  So that was some great incentive, and it really wasn’t too much work, just to call up some people and say, "Hey, there’s some space here, you can get on this trip."  I’d kept my lists over the years, of people, and who would like to come again, that kind of thing.  So it was great, it worked out well for everybody.

At the end of the year, that’s when they put this trip together, which was just hilarious.  Talk about a place where--who would have thought that we’d wind up in a place like this.  But Fred found this deal at a Club Med in <Guaymas Mexico>, and so he was going to take everybody in the company on one final hurrah.  I’m trying to think of a good analogy of a bunch of Grand Canyon River Guides winding up at a Club Med with all these well-dressed, sweet-smelling, young California money.  And we’re down there drinking [bi-ay-nas?] of beer, and a lot of good stories about that trip.  So he and Carol basically took the whole company down there.  It was just eight or nine, ten people.  That was the big final hurrah.  Forgot where I was goin’ with this.  So....

Steiger:  Rivers and Oceans, the travel agent thing.

Whitney:  We come back from that, and so Pam and I started talking about, well, you know, if I’m gonna work for the new owners, and is she gonna be out of a job?  So this whole thing that Fred had just done this summer, maybe we could start bookin’ trips in <Grand Canyon>.  We could set ourselves up as a central reservation booking service for river trips in the <Grand Canyon>, and then maybe in Baja too.  There was that symmetry, the river used to run down there.  After a <Grand Canyon> trip, where’s a great place to go?  Well, Baja.  It’s got whale watching and sea kayaking and these panga trips and all.  Tim was runnin’ horseback trips into the Sierras down there, and you get way back into this beautiful Sonoran country.  So that’s when we started, was in the fall of ’86.  It was really the spring of ’87 when we really got goin’, but we started to put the thing together then and realized at that time there were still twenty-one companies, and there was no Internet, and the only way for people to find out about river running in <Grand Canyon>, if they didn’t have some word of mouth, or had bought the Viewmaster slides up there at the South Rim somewhere, and it had the name of a company on the side of the boat, there really wasn’t a way of finding out....  You had to go through the Chamber of Commerce.  So people would write to the Park Service, and the Park Service would send everybody a list of all the outfitters, and so you’d write to all the outfitters and get twenty-one brochures, and they all had a picture of a boat in a rapid, and a beautifully set dinner table, and a lot of people havin’ fun, but you still didn’t necessarily know the difference between six-, seven-, eight-, twelve-, thirteen-, fourteen-, sixteen-, nineteen-day dory trip kind of thing, all these different things.  And so that’s how it started.

Steiger:  Wow.  And you guys are comin’ up on twenty years of doin’ this.

Pam Whitney:  There are twenty years.

Whitney:  Yeah, this is it.

Steiger:  Boy, that was a fast twenty years.  It’s pretty unique, because I send everybody to you guys just because I don’t know who....  And it’s just as a service.  You guys got it dialed in now where you know just where the openings are, what all the prices are, and with your questionnaire you know who’s gettin’ positive feedback.

Whitney:  But it couldn’t just be <Grand Canyon> after a while.  It very quickly became <Utah> and <Idaho> as well--rivers in the West, not so much the shorter one-day trips and two-day trips in <Colorado> and <California>--that kind of thing.  It was kind of our back yard.  And then Baja and <Alaska>, and then whatever we could do to get diving, which is the other....

Steiger:  Dimension of the ocean.

Whitney:  Yeah.  I mean, that’s the "Oceans" part of it:  the sea kayaking and wildlife and whales and Orcas and that kind of stuff, but also just the diving, which is the other thing that we have promoted and designed so we can be in trips in the South Pacific and the Mexican Caribbean.

Pam Whitney:  [unclear]

Steiger:  Pardon?

Pam Whitney:  The trip we did with you to Samoa.

Steiger:  Yeah, thanks to the delayed company bonus.  I don’t know why I didn’t get to go to Club Med, damn it.

Whitney:  You didn’t want to.  You and Ed had a trip.

Steiger:  Oh, we had to go on that trip.  I’d have went!  Was that the kayak trip?  That was the one where I blew out my shoulder or something.

Whitney:  You were going to do, I think, the last ARR trip with Fred and Carol.  You and Ed did the trip.  But we went down there, and it was just....

Steiger:  What did we do?

Pam Whitney:  I don’t know what you guys did [unclear].

Steiger:  There was one last trip, and we had to do it.

Whitney:  Yeah, and you and Ed did it.

Steiger:  Yeah.  I can’t even remember what happened there.

Whitney:  I’ll tell you one thing about that trip down there....

Pam Whitney:  That’s when there was that volcano.

Whitney:  No, the earthquake.

Pam Whitney:  Earthquake in <Mexico City>.

Whitney:  Yeah, and we were delayed coming back, and I finished the trip with Owen, and Fred picked us up at Pearce Ferry.  We came home, we cleaned up, and then we immediately got in the car and we went to <Wickenburg>--because they’d moved to <Wickenburg> at that point--and off to <Mexico>.  I mean, we had basically just time to take a shower, it was that quick.

Steiger:  Moments.

Whitney:  Three days before that, I was lying in the cool room at <Deer Creek>, takin’ five, and I had my head against one of those big slabs in there.  In my ear on the side of my head, I felt this "PUMB!" that felt like....  It didn’t rattle anything, but it sounded like something shifted about five miles down.  I mean, it was a very interesting and serious thump.

Steiger:  And that was an earthquake in <Mexico City>?

Whitney:  And about a week later there was an earthquake in <Mexico City>, and we were delayed comin’ back to the States from <Guaymas> for about a day--I guess just a day.  I don’t know, but it seemed like there was something very deep and felt pretty titanic, that I felt and heard in the cool room, just a week before that earthquake happened.  Actually, it’s kind of wild.

Steiger:  It is wild.

Whitney:  Fred was really funny on that trip too.

Steiger:  It should be said here that Fred had this tradition--it wasn’t every year, but he did a lot of company bonus trips, which is pretty unique in the river business, where the outfitters gonna take the whole company--or everybody that wants to go with him--on some kind of fun trip.

Whitney:  That was the first one for me, but wasn’t there houseboat trips and stuff?

Steiger:  Did you go on that one houseboat trip?  Oh, God, we went on this one houseboat trip.

Pam Whitney:  The week-long overnight.

Steiger:  Yeah, we’re not gonna record any of that.  (laughter)  Never mind.  Fred insisted on hirin’ professional guides to take us, and we were like, "We can drive this damned boat!"  And he’s like, "No way!"  And then we get down there and we’re like, "Okay, we’re gonna have to kill these guides, because they’re gonna know too much by the time we get off of here."

	But before we get off the topic, I wanted to get back to Rivers and Oceans.  So here you guys have been doin’ this--you’ve been bein’ a guide, but you and Pam together have been kind of doin’ this other uniquely placed thing, where you kind of funnel all these people through.  Like how many <Grand Canyon> clients would you say that you’ve booked on trips in twenty years?

Whitney:  Oh, man!  I don’t know.

Pam Whitney:  What’s the question?

Whitney:  How many people we’ve booked on <Grand Canyon> trips over the years.

Steiger:  In the last twenty years.

Pam Whitney:  The last twenty years?

Steiger:  Yeah.  I mean just vaguely.

Pam Whitney:  Probably 20,000.

Steiger:  Are you kidding?!  Twenty thousand?!  Holy moley.

Whitney:  Probably in that neighborhood.

Steiger:  What does that do for your....  Has that changed your perception of the business as a whole?  Has that changed the way that you look at river runnin’, or the tourism industry.  How has that evolved just for you guys personally, or for you personally?

Whitney:  Well it’s changed a lot since the Internet has really gotten strong.

Steiger:  So business went from no Internet to the Internet.

Whitney:  Yeah, to where you just know that the volume, the numbers of people who are doing a lot of their own research ahead of time....  In a lot of ways it’s good, because if they come to us and they’ve already done some work and looked around, done some research, then they know a little bit more about what to expect.  But still they don’t necessarily know about the nature of a trip.  And really, as much as anything, that’s where we can really help [them].  We can help find them space on a trip someplace.  I mean, over the years it’s a pretty well-oiled machine, and there are aspects of it that are work and a job, but there are other aspects where it can be really enjoyable, when you find....  I mean, I got a call a while back from a guy who was looking to charter a boat with Cross River Expeditions, to go down to Little Colorado in Crash Canyon and do a memorial trip for his father, because his grandfather was on the United flight that crashed on Chuar Butte.  And so his father put together a memorial trip with Cross and went down there on the anniversary of the crash.  Anyway, it was that summer, some years later, and as a memorial trip for his father.  And then his father had died, so he wanted to do the same thing.  All he knew was that Cross River Expeditions ran the trip for his father.

Steiger:  He wanted to book the whole trip?

Whitney:  Wanted to book the whole trip and go down there and do a memorial for his father and for his grandfather at the same time.  I don’t know if he was a stockbroker, things were really fast and furious in his office, and he said, "I have to go...."  And I’m goin’, (hurriedly) "Wait-wait-wait-wait-wait, make sure you call me back.  Call me back, I want to help you put this trip together."  And then I never heard from him.  You get people who call once in a while, and they were down there twenty or more years ago, and helicoptered out around <Deer Creek> somewhere.  I haven’t talked to anybody who helicoptered out a Fort Lee Company trip early on, with the Little Colorado.  So there’s that aspect, which is really kind of fun, because you’ve been around long enough where people are comin’ back, who you took down the river.  Now they’re bringin’ their kids, and we’ve all done that, too.  So still it’s just a fun aspect to who you run into on the phone, you know.

Steiger:  So the guy that wanted to do the Cross trip, you didn’t end up bookin’ him?

Whitney:  He never called back.  I was always sorry that I never heard from him, because I don’t know what happened.  I said, "We could do the trip.  They’re not in business anymore, but...."  Mostly he did the talking, he told me what the whole set-up was.

Steiger:  They wanted to just go there, and then be done; or they wanted to go....

Whitney:  He wanted to do a trip in honor of his father and his grandfather at the same time.  It didn’t have to be necessarily an anniversary.  His father had just passed away, and so he wanted to commemorate both of their lives by doin’ a river trip in the canyon.

So yeah, it’s been good, it’s been fun, and it’s also--the other part of it is branching out and developing new destinations, and especially the diving part of it is the other thing we love to do whenever we can--underwater photography and video, and put some trips together to far away places with strange-sounding names.  Get out there.  And we’ve been really lucky with a couple of groups of people who want to do a dive trip pretty much every year, and often it’s to some really fun exotic location in the South Pacific, which is a real spoiler, because the Caribbean’s nice, and it’s always fun just to be underwater, as you know--just to be weightless and diving in nice clear tropical water’s always fun.  But the South Pacific is such a spoiler because of the diversity and numbers of species.  There are more different kinds of fish.  And it doesn’t always have to be high voltage diving.  There’s always sharks and giant mantas and stuff like that, that are really fun to take pictures of.  But the Caribbean is a little bit limited in terms of the numbers of species of fish, and just not as abundant, and not as wild.  There can be some wild times--the whales come through, and you can dive in <Belize> now.  Three days before and after the full moon of April, May, and June, whale sharks come into this reef down in <Belize> and they feed on the spawn of a couple of different species of snapper that are down there.  Been goin’ on for thousands of years probably.  But the South Pacific is just so much more color, diversity, and quantity, numbers of fish.

Steiger:  Pretty clean water, too.  Different.  Seems kind of different somehow.

Whitney:  Even on that trip we did to Samoa, you could just see that there’s just so many more exotic fish.

Steiger:  So much fun.  What is your strategy on the <Grand Canyon>, and boating in the <Grand Canyon>?  Oh, you know, there’s another thing we didn’t even talk about.  I know this is goin’ on and on and on, but maybe we should say somethin’....  Tell me about your personal strategy for boating, but first maybe we ought to say something about the Whale Foundation.  You’ve been involved in that for quite a while.  What’s up with that?  Why are you doin’ that?

Whitney:  I often ask myself that question.  Yeah, why am I doing it?  I don’t know, I’m just drawn to being part of a team of people who just want to try to give something back, and create something that wasn’t available to Whale.  There are some really serious aspects of what the Whale Foundation’s about, mental health counseling for people who are in trouble or in pain.  But a lot of it is....  For me, I really am into the fund-raising part of it, to create and build the coffers of the foundation, to be able to provide the scholarships and fund the health fair, which was a great success--more so than ever this last year--where river guides aren’t covered, or either they’re uninsured or their underinsured, they’re still not completely out of the loop.  Tom Meyers had the idea, and it was just a great one, to get all these professional people together and just give it out for a day.  "Tell me your medical history, or if you are at risk for something.  Then maybe we can get you a voucher so you can get a free examination for something," or all these vouchers for just general good health type stuff, about checking for cholesterol, diabetes, all this other stuff.  It’s just a really great group of people to work with, and to provide a place for....  I don’t know how to put it exactly.  First of all, it’s a place that you can go, you can call, and get some help, and nobody has to know your name or anything, so that you take all the onus of the stigma of asking for help, out of the picture, so it can be anonymous.  What I’d like to see is that we could eventually raise enough money where some things could be endowed, like the scholarships.  Or there could be either more of them, or people could get more money.  It’s helpful, and every little bit helps.  People could use a little bit more.  And also, to be able to afford to pay some of the professional providers something for their time, so that they don’t get completely burned out.  You can only give so much for so long for nothing, and it just starts to wear you out a little bit.

Steiger:  Well, it’s good work.  I was talkin’ to Sandy Reiff, and she was givin’ me some numbers just about how many people have actually availed themselves of the Whale Foundation.  It was something I took for granted, until I availed myself of it this winter.  And I appreciated just gettin’ to talk to the people that I did get to talk to.  There were a couple of people who helped me out a lot.  You’d like to think that it’s just our generation [unclear, laughing] the foundation’s there for.  I would like to think that.  There’s a certain generation of boatmen that--I’m talkin’ you, me, Stuart--who kind of got sucked in fairly young, and ended up spendin’ all this time down here.  And there’s any number.  There’s a bunch of names.  I could rattle off twenty names or fifty names, I guess--people who have made a life of this, but started out in the early seventies, mid-seventies, early eighties, and didn’t listen to some of those things that some of those old guys like Fred were trying to tell us about just plannin’ for your life.  I mean, boatin’s really fun, and it’s really good, but you’d better have a few other aces up your sleeve.  If you’re only doin’ the river guide thing, you can get yourself in big trouble.

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  You’d like to think that the new generation will get the word.

Whitney:  I think that’s happening, too.  That aspect of it has changed, and I think overall in the community....  That’s exactly right.  That’s not the only generation that’s calling, but I think probably pretty much our generation from the rivers, who are using some of the services.

	The other thing was, early on it was a few years ago that I just volunteered to jump on for a little while, and it just wound up being a lot of good projects, and some stuff that just sort of reached out in the community.  It’s just a great sense of the larger family of Grand Canyon River Runners.  But what was happening, too, what I noticed was how much appreciation there was.  And when the word started to really get out, it went from Sandy and Robby and Bill Carlson and Bob Grusey and Sarah Hatch, and all of a sudden there were twice as many directors on the board.  And there was all this energy, and it started to grow, sort of leaps and bounds, all these ideas on how we could raise money, and we could do this, and the health fair, and the scholarships, and the wingding, have a big party to celebrate everybody who’s alive, and not just get all these great people together because somebody had passed away.  And checks were just comin’ in the mail.  I mean, people were just sayin’, "This is great stuff, you guys.  Go get ’em!  Wish we’d had this twenty years ago."  And these were all Grand Canyon people who’d moved on to something else.  The checks were just comin’ in the mail.  There was so much support that yeah, sounds like we’re on the right track here.  It was really mostly about mental health counseling at the time, about being able to have anonymous, confidential discussion with somebody if you’re depressed, or you got some other problem goin’ on.  So that was really encouraging.  And then it sort of grew from there, into....

Steiger:  Well, I’m just depressed because I can’t get any more trips!

Whitney:  When we put the calendar together last year, we got a picture from Connie, for the monthly picture.  And then we needed a picture of her, and then this little bio.  We said, "Gotta write something here.  Doesn’t have to be much of anything, just something about the picture or about you.  You know, just a little something."  What she wanted to put down was about the monthly picture, and then her little head and shoulders shot, and then what she wanted to have there....  I was fighting with her tooth and nail, "Well, just tell me somethin’ about it, I’ll write it for you."  What she wanted to have on there was, "You’ll look like this too if you don’t get a real job."  (laughter)  Goes straight to thirty years in the business.  I mean, that just kind of summed it all up for me.  When we saw about how many people supported what was goin’ on and thought whatever we can do to--we take care of our own.  And it’s not for anybody else but river guides.  You can’t save the world, and there’s a lot of people that need stuff.  But we can do a little bit here and there.

	It was Walt’s idea to have the wingding, and that came from Dugald’s [Bremner] service.

Steiger:  Walt Taylor.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And he went to Dugald’s service and said, "God, there’s so many great people in this community, and it’s too bad that we have to get together--the only time that we really get together like this is when somebody dies.  So why don’t we throw a big bash, celebrate everybody who’s still alive.  That’s where that got started.  And of course kind of threw in the upscale, just sort of the elegant nature of the whole thing with the white tablecloths and beautiful flowers and all the rest of it:  just have a great setting and try to raise a little money at the same time, and showcase boatman art.

Steiger:  Yeah, good concept, good idea.  I don’t know, I think I’ve only retired about seven or eight times now.  That’s gonna be a tough one.  That’s the hard part.

Whitney:  Yeah, exactly.

Steiger:  I don’t know how you get around that one.  I guess Martin Litton’s gonna go again in August [ninety-two?] or whatever the hell.  That’s gonna be interesting.

Whitney:  Are you gonna be on that trip?

Steiger:  I volunteered to go ride with him.  I don’t know, I’ve gotta call him and see what’s goin’ on with that.  I got a video job that might be....

Whitney:  Go with Martin.  That’s just too...

Steiger:  It might conflict.  Yeah.  Well, I want to see who-all’s linin’ up to do it.  I got a video job and then a GCE trip right after.  Actually, I could only go for half of it.  I’m not sure that that’s....  I don’t know, I’ve got to talk to him.  I’m not sure that’s gonna be in his best interest.  [unclear]  That’d be quite an opportunity [unclear].

Whitney:  So classic Martin--still settin’ the pace, leading the way.

Steiger:  Yeah, settin’ the bar.

Whitney:  Setting the bar--exactly.

Steiger:  Georgie was, what, eighty?  She was only eighty-four.  Young.

Whitney:  Yeah.  (laughter)

Steiger:  Young!

Whitney:  Just a pup.

Steiger:  Well, I think we’ve about run this into the ground for now, but maybe we need to do another one.  What are we forgettin’ right now that you want to talk about?  Seems like this is a long time.

Whitney:  I should think more about....  That wasn’t a very good answer on the Whale Foundation.

Steiger:  Oh no, that was good.

Whitney:  It’s funny, I don’t quite know how to articulate that exactly.

Steiger:  You said a bunch of good stuff.

Whitney:  My whole time in the canyon, I guess, in a lot of ways has been as much about the people, as about the river and the canyon.  I really relish the camaraderie that we all have down there.  As I get older, too, I know when I see old friends from our generation down there, I kind of--that’s really fun to kind of gravitate to....  Just like the graduating class of whatever, you know--1980--and everything that we went through together, and all have in common from those times.  But everybody who’s down there, pretty much we’re all down there for the same general reason.  That’s a lot of what the Whale Foundation is about for me, too, I think.  It’s about the people.  Not so much the do-gooder part of it.  I mean, I kind of shy away from the do-gooder part.  I am into trying to help my pards where I can.  Whale Foundation is a good vehicle for that.  It’s grown a lot, and it hasn’t always been perfect, but that’s a work in progress.  Like I was in on the start of GCRG, and it seems like everything changes after about ten years.  I mean, everything kind of moves along, and you grow, and you’ve got lots of good ideas.  Right about ten years into it, everything sort of changes a little bit, and you have to be ready to go kind of in the new direction.  There are different people, and there’s new blood and new issues and different times.  It all started out such a great idea.  Kenton was just visionary about it, and it went for a long time, taking over the GTS.  Controversial stuff kind of comes along, raise the bar, deal with that.  The same kind of thing is happening with the Whale Foundation.  There’s a lot of growth, a big spurt of growth, and we had to realize that we had to kind of rein ourselves in and get organized, because there was a lot of unfinished business in terms of just organizational stuff.  So there’s been a lot of that, too, just sort of grunt work of making sure that the organizational part of it is working kind of routinely.

Steiger:  Yeah, there’s a lot of work.  [unclear] GCRG.  That’s gonna be twenty years old, too.  That was ’88.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Did you go to that first meeting?

Whitney:  Kenton called me up and he said, "Okay, it’s time."  We’d been talkin’ about it.  Where was the first meeting?  I’ve forgotten where the first meeting was.

Steiger:  I didn’t go, because I was in <New York City>.  But it seems like it was at Hatch or something.

Whitney:  Yeah, it was!  It was.  Because I remember that we met at his house pretty frequently after that.  It was at Hatch, and I don’t know what I was doin’, if I had just left on a trip.  I was there for the initial conversation.  I remember him introducing GCRG to the outfitters at the South Rim at the outfitter meeting.  That was pretty interesting, just because everybody thought "union, union, UNION!"  But I don’t know, I went somewhere to do something, and came back, and I was on the board.  So that was the classic, if you’re not around, you’re on, you’re in.

Steiger:  If you don’t watch out, you’re it.

Whitney:  That was good stuff, just more advocacy stuff.

Steiger:  We could talk for four hours on just that shit.  And quite a cast of characters.  Quite a cast of characters for you, to have both the <Grand Canyon> deal, and then all that Sobek stuff too.  You did get to go all over the world.

Whitney:  It still is a fun mix, to get in a couple trips here and there.

Steiger:  And we haven’t even talked about the clients.  You’ve had some pretty high-powered, pretty interesting....

Whitney:  Well, I haven’t done the [unclear] <Hollywood> trips.

Steiger:  Me either, but I don’t know that I’d want to.  Sounds like a lot of work.

Whitney:  I tell ya’ just one that comes to mind, because it’s not about the guides, it’s about somebody else.  I’ll never forget, Joe Tilly, who was from <Texas>, he was just a great character on a trip, and a lot of fun.  He’d worked for Larry Bell.  He told a story towards the end of the trip, and I thought he’d really--you know, a brush with greatness.  He really had rubbed elbows with some pretty amazing people.  So he worked for Bell Helicopters for a long time, and he was one of the chief design/engineer type people.  When they finished the final design for the Long Ranger, that was always the belt, the Jet Ranger--I don’t know, four-passenger or something.  It was a smaller helicopter.  So then they extended it and made it the Long Ranger.  There was no name for it, but he just told about how....  It was after hours, and they’d finally finished the final draft of the whole new design for this helicopter, and they didn’t have a name for it, and because they’d extended the tail, he just said, "We’ll just call it the Long Ranger," and he left it on Larry Bell’s desk, and everybody went home.  That’s what it became.  But just talking about working for Bell Helicopters for so long, and all these interesting design people and engineers.  So at one point they brought Neil Armstrong in as a consultant and to talk, and to give a presentation and stuff.  He came and he spent several days there, I guess, and worked with all the engineers and other people in the company, and they just loved havin’ him around.  And then before he left, he gave his own private slide show of the moon shot and landing on the moon.  Joe’s tellin’ this story, you know, and he’s going, "Well, I mean, there are like 350 engineers in this auditorium--all the people who were working for Larry Bell, and all the design work.  So they’re getting Neil Armstrong’s private slide show, and he’s going through it...."  (technical difficulties)

Steiger:  This is still Tim Whitney, and it’s still June 11. Pammy’s eyes have rolled back into her head; me and Tim are startin’ on our second beers, and now we’re gonna say something really profound.  (laughter)

Whitney:  I’ll have to look that up first.

Steiger:  When we had our technical glitch, we were in the middle of a Neil Armstrong story, and he was showing slides of his moon trip, right?

Whitney:  Right.  So Joe Tilly, Bell Labs.  So they’re getting this private slide show and [unclear], "Here we are taking off.  And here we are orbiting.  And here we are on the dark side of the moon.  And here we are undocking and going to the moon and walking around on the moon, and taking off from the moon."  So there’s this whole thing, and this whole monologue on the whole story of the first moon walk.  And he says, "So then he gets to the point where you see pictures of the lunar module is going to dock with the command module.  And then there’s a slide that he shows of the lunar module being like two feet away from the command module, and he says, ‘And it’s at this point of the mission where I realize that we have a 50-50 chance of coming home.’"  And he said, "You could have heard a pin drop."  There were 300-plus people in this auditorium, and it was dead silence.  After everything that he’d been through....

Steiger:  To make it there, and....

Whitney:  To make it there, and actually successfully take off from the moon.  So many places where they could have been stranded, basically, and to have that line, "If we can’t dock with the command module, it’s all over."  Like let alone burning up on the pad or somewhere along the way or something else.  There are plenty of places where it could have gone either way, but he’s saving it right until that very point.  I mean, it’s still not necessarily over, but Joe Tilly telling the story, "He’s a foot away from gettin’ back to the command module, and he lays out this line about 50-50."  Just a fun story.

Steiger:  Man, the people that we get to come into contact with--pretty amazing.  I know you were talking with me when we drove up there to do the Sobek trip about Jan Wenner [phonetic].  There’s another character.  Just an amazing dude.  I think that’s one of the perks of this job, is you get to go with all kinds of heavy hitters, famous or not.

Whitney:  Yeah.  You know, listening to him talk, too, and just telling....  What was really interesting about Jan Wenner was that he was as interested in our story as he was in telling his own.  He had plenty to talk about, being the original Fillmore West groupie, early on, and writing about the bands, and going from music to Hollywood to politics, and he just knows everybody, but he was really just as interested in what you had to say, and what your whole story is, as anything else.  But just by the sheer star power of all of the people who he....  I mean, there’s not many people who can say, "Well, I just talked to [President Bill] Clinton last week, and he said this about that."  Or all of the people he’s run into and run around with over the years:  Hunter Thompson and Jackie Onassis, and all these people.  Pretty interesting.  Plus the fact that he just settled into the trip, never combed his hair or shaved his face for the whole time.

Steiger:  Had no problem.

Whitney:  He got right into it.  He got hit by a north canyon sandstorm a few hours into the trip, and just took it all in stride.  Interesting guy--really interesting guy.

Steiger:  I should say for this document that Jan Wenner is the founder, I guess, and publisher of Rolling Stone [magazine].

Whitney:  Publisher and editor.

Steiger:  He started it, didn’t he?

Whitney:  He started it with his wife.  As he said, Annie Liebowitz [phonetic] really helped give them great recognition on the shelf, because she was the cover shot artist photographer, and she was just a budding art student at Berkeley, I think, and just go in on it.  They just kind of cruised along for a long time, and then it was the [John] Lennon interview that really put ’em on the map.  It all went from there.

Steiger:  I’m trying to think of an intelligent question.  We’ve gone so long here.  Usually you go a couple of hours, and everybody....

Whitney:  That’s enough.

Steiger:  You run out of gas.  What am I forgettin’?

Whitney:  I’d like to be able to think about this some more, now understanding a little bit more of the direction.

Steiger:  As you can tell, it’s totally random, eclectic.  I just sit down with somebody and try to get some kind of history, and try to get kind some kind of a feel--just try to get....  I mean, the whole thing is just a massive historical document:  These were our lives, these were our times in the <Grand Canyon>.  As far as what’s to be learned from ’em or anything, I don’t know.

Whitney:  What did you mean [when you said], "What is your strategy about...."  What do you mean by that?

Steiger:  Oh, like about river runnin’.  Like my strategy is I’m gonna do it as long as I possibly can.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  That’s what it’s come to for me.  Now more than ever I desperately need to find something else to do, but I don’t want to.

Whitney:  Well, I know exactly--we all know exactly what you mean.  I hadn’t done a trip in about a year, and found myself on this last trip--oh, somebody made some comment about "how long you been doing it?"  And it’d been months since I’d been in the canyon, and it just came out, I just said, "If you didn’t ever have to quit, why would you?"  You have somebody like Gloeckler there, who understands the value and the need and the desire to be down there every once in a while, who’ll just give you two or three trips a year kind of thing, and be fine with that, let you come and go.  It makes it harder for him to schedule everything, but he knows how important it is to get down there once in a while, at least, no matter what else you have goin’ in your life.  So it just continues to be a good mix.  Rivers have been good to me, and just keep tryin’ to do it as long as we can:  private trips.

Steiger:  And so on and so forth.  Well, I’m about to shut this thing off.

Whitney:  That’s enough for now.

Steiger:  You know, I know we forgot a million good stories.  We’ll have to do something in the BQR.  It’s usually the surprises, the stories, that go better there than somebody’s opinion.  We got tons of stuff here already.  But let’s just say we’ll do another little session here at some point.  And the things to think of are just river stories that pop to mind, funny things, or things that happened to you down there, that are noteworthy, or have meant something to you.  I mean, if something comes to mind right now, but when you look back at your time on the river, I think some of the most valuable things are just experiences that you had, where everything either fell apart or came together just right.  You know, something like that.  And also people.  You talked about the community, the river-running community as being kind of what the wingding’s all about, and the Whale Foundation and all that stuff.  Seems like that’s the other thing we could spend a whole session just talking about: the characters that we’ve known.

Whitney:  Yeah, absolutely.

Steiger:  People that have been significant, the characters that we’ve gotten to hang out with and stuff.  I mean, these are two kind of ....

Whitney:  Jim Norton.  There was one guy.  I’ll think a little bit more about it.

Steiger:  I remember a story.  I remember seeing him down there, and he was like....  Where the hell was he?  They were like at <Deer Creek> or someplace like that, and he had one day to get out, because they’d been screwin’ around and just lost track of time.  Were you in the middle of all that?

Whitney:  Yeah, that might have been the same trip.  He went from <Deer Creek> to Separation, with a stop at <Havasu> the same day.  Walt Gregg and I were down there.

Steiger:  I remember I was seein’ everybody else at Fort Lee.  We don’t know where the hell Norton is, and here comes Norton a day late!  (laughs)

Whitney:  That’s the same trip.  I can’t believe we’re on the river [the same thing?] exactly.

Steiger:  And it was like, "What happened to you, dude?"  And it’s like they were havin’ such a good time up there, that he decided wherever....

Whitney:  What’s <Deer Creek>?  136?  To 242 in one day.  Got in there.

Steiger:  [Mile] 136 to 242?

Whitney:  Yeah, from <Deer Creek> to <Separation>.

Steiger:  In one day?

Whitney:  Yeah, with a stop at <Havasu>.  Plus he needed to stop and let a spider off the boat.  There was a spider, and he got ahold of the spider, cupped it in his hands, and he had to pull over to let the spider on shore.  We have to do this some more another time, but there....

Steiger:  Oh, we will.

Pam Whitney:  [unclear]

Whitney:  Oh, they loved him.

Steiger:  Everybody loved him.

Whitney:  And he had a wave on the river.  When he waved, it was a wave as big as the West.  I mean, his hand just was like the sun comin’ up and goin’ down.  It was amazing.  Long story short, just to start the story:  Old Ford Torino, with a trailer with all of his own gear.  So he basically backs in, pulls everything off of his Fort Lee rig.

Steiger:  Because he’s got his special....

Whitney:  He’s got his special everything.  I mean, he’s got a kitchen that looks like the world’s largest tackle box.  You open it up, and four or five drawers kind of open up, and big forks and spatulas are dangling inside.  It’d take four men and a boy to get that thing on and off the boat.  He’s got so much stuff, he’s standing on like four cases of beer in the motor well.  I always said it looks kind of like the pots and pans man was comin’ down the river, like there’s gonna be stuff for sale.  He’s just got stuff everywhere.  He’s got all the time in the world.

Steiger:  Not rushed.

Whitney:  Not rushed in the slightest.  Who knows if he....  Might have had some trouble in <Badger>, I don’t know, and that kind of delayed the trip.  So it’s eight days later, and you’re down there, and he’s run from <Deer Creek> to Separation, and we’ve come up from what used to be a great old camp, that 243 Mile Camp.  We camped there on the Hamilton trip.  So it was kind of a double camp, and you could hear other people, but you could camp two boats in there, and you could kind of have your own thing, but everybody’d get together, you’d march into....

Steiger:  You call that 243?

Whitney:  Yeah, on the right.

Steiger:  I always thought that was 242.

Whitney:  [Mile] 242, okay, 242, where you could see the bells.

Steiger:  Yeah.

Whitney:  [Mile] 242, that’s right.  So we’re thinkin’ after dinner, it’s dark, we’d go look for Norton.  I mean, where is the guy?

Steiger:  Go upstream and see if he’s....

Whitney:  A bunch of people pile on the boats, we take both boats, and we motor back up to Separation.  And lo and behold, no sooner than we just about get there, and here he comes with flashlights--everybody’s got a flashlight.

Steiger:  They were just gettin’ to camp?

Whitney:  They were just comin’ into camp, in the dark.  Lights are flashin’ on the side of the river so he can see where he’s goin’.  We’re thinkin’....  I’m bein’ pretty anal about the trip, you know, makin’ sure everything’s goin’ on here and there, everybody’s havin’ a good time.  And here comes Jim, in the dark, and they hit shore.  And these people are havin’ a great time.  They are just havin’ more....  I mean, there’s nothin’ wrong with anything that’s goin’ on.  They get this kitchen box--it takes four people to unload this thing.  It’s like nine o’clock at night, and they’re just startin’ to fire up the grill, get the steaks goin’.

Steiger:  Because he’s got his special kitchen box.

Whitney:  Yeah!  And we went over there and he said, "You want a beer?"  And I said, "Sure," and he had like a couple of warm Coors.  They’d probably been sitting in the sun for half the day.  He just grabs it, he shakes ’em down in the river, reaches over, puts ’em down, says, "Here you go."  So now the beer’s only 98 degrees.  And at the end of that season he gave everybody a present.  He gave me, Walt, and Pablo....

Steiger:  The whole Fort Lee crew.

Whitney:  Yeah, just the four of us, really.  And it was a church key back from the days when you would open up a can of oil.

Steiger:  [unclear] pop tops.

Whitney:  You would open up a can of oil with a church key, before you had the spout that you would stick in, and open up just like a beer or anything.  Only the church key was about two and a half inches wide.  So on a pop top, you just put it on the can.  (imitates the sound of a geyser)  The whole pop top and everything.  Every beer was like a wide-mouth Mickey, you know.  So he gave everybody, so that everybody’d have a good beer can opener.

Steiger:  So you could really drink your beer.

Whitney:  Yeah, right.

Steiger:  The days before pop tops.

Whitney:  I mean, he was just a character as big as the West.  He was just....  It was always a test.  He could be infuriating, but then you had to realize that that was my problem, it wasn’t his problem, if he was sort of delaying things or anything, because eventually, "Just relax, it’ll all get done."  I mean, he wasn’t worried.  He was going to make sure everybody got a stop at <Havasu>, even though they started at <Deer Creek> in the morning.

Steiger:  Never mind that it was a 109-mile day.

Whitney:  Yeah.  "We’ll get there.  It’ll be all right.  We’ll have somethin’ to eat when we get there."

Steiger:  That’s incredible.

Whitney:  I heard that he was just on the river, or around, recently.

Steiger:  Yeah, he’s sick, he’s not doing well, he’s ill.  Cam [Staveley] and those guys got together and they did a trip with him, because he’s got cancer real bad or somethin’ like that.  So they took him down the <Rio Grande>, and then they decided they’d better go do a <Grand Canyon> trip with him too.  And he started Cam, and several other guys who we know, kind of in that generation at Canyoneers.

Whitney:  The "N" rig.

Steiger:  Yeah.  Incredible.  And Georgie, too.  What did these guys have that they could get away with this shit?  But somehow, he definitely had somethin’.  I mean, Cam Staveley, he is a very buttoned-up dude anymore--just reveres that guy.  He loves him.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And there’s his whole Alaskan experience, and I can hardly remember--was he an outfitter up there?  I mean, Jim Norton spent quite a bit of time in <Alaska>, too.

Pam Whitney:  Yeah, he went to <Alaska> after....

Steiger:  After <Grand Canyon>?

Pam Whitney:  Uh-huh.

Whitney:  I think he’d been goin’ there while he was in <Grand Canyon> too.  I don’t know.  Cam would know.

Steiger:  Whale was like....  Sometimes same kind of thing, he’d drive you crazy.  But I did the whole season, me, Whale, and Connie.  Me and Connie did all the work, and everybody wanted to ride with Whale.  (laughs)  Because he would hit all the waves, and he was just fun to be with.  He was fun to ride with.

Pam Whitney:  But so mellow, so easy.  Also infuriating.  Well, he didn’t work.  As long as you figured that out right at the beginning, that he wasn’t going to do and he wasn’t going to work--but he would every once in a while.

Steiger:  It seemed like Whale felt that his job was to rig his boat.  At the Ferry, he was always the first one done at that.

Pam Whitney:  Oh yes.

Steiger:  And he’d be ready to go.  But beyond that, then his job was to drive the boat, and keep everybody mellow.  And the rest of that didn’t concern him--the rest of whatever went on.

Pam Whitney:  No.  Cooking wasn’t really a priority.  Every once in a while he would jump in, but only when he felt like it, which just happened to be if he was moved.  But normally he wasn’t moved.

Steiger:  Some day I want to sit down and hear the true story of everything that happened on the Rex Allen trip.  (laughter)

Pam Whitney:  You weren’t on that, were you?

Steiger:  No, but I’ve heard from different angles.

Pam Whitney:  [unclear] was on it.  Oh, God.  I know that was so funny.  Really was funny.

Steiger:  All right, I’m gonna stop recording this--except for, since we’re here right now, what have I forgotten?  What intelligent question should I ask for the four hours of tape, of audio we’ve just recorded on our little S.D. card.

Whitney:  I don’t want to have to try and dredge up a real intelligent answer either.

Steiger:  Oh, you’ve said a ton of intelligent shit.

Whitney:  You know, it did strike me the other day--I was talking with Dan, and we were just talking about the early days, and early days for me were much later than early days for you.  And for Dan....

Steiger:  Not relatively.

Whitney:  But things had changed.  And then also, [unclear].

Steiger:  [unclear] first ten years, but....

Whitney:  But also, we were just kind of....  I mean, I did a few trips, and I was just completely, physically, on my own for a few years there--just one-boat trips with me and whoever I could find to come along.  There wasn’t the big crew dynamic of four people on a two-boat motor trip, let alone big rowing trips.  Dan was saying how when he started, the nature of the trip was that the people were almost incidental to the river trip itself.  And I never really had that experience--sort of the strategy of runnin’ the river, or whatever it was.  Yeah, we were having a great time together, being down there, and the hijinks, but it was like the people are who we’re here for....  I was always....  Just because it was me and one other person and twelve people, and usually often one of the youngest people on the trip, but still leading the trip.  It was like....

Steiger:  And really the only one who had a clue.

Whitney:  Yeah, and not much of one at the beginning either.  The way I started was we were tryin’ to learn everybody’s name who was gonna be on your boat, before you even met ’em.  I mean, that’s just what those guys were doin’.

Steiger:  Dick?

Whitney:  Yeah, Dick and Bob.

Steiger:  Bob wanted to do that too?

Whitney:  And Dave and Gary and Mary.  They would just learn everybody’s name on the drive to the Ferry, so we had that down.  It was only twelve people, it wasn’t such a big deal.  But it was not so much about getting people through the canyon, as getting them into the canyon, was the way I looked at it.  I didn’t have any other approach, and so my approach was treat these people like your friends.  And you can get along with anybody for eight days.  But that’s really what the river taught me the most about, was about people.  A lot of times, if you’re just a little bit patient, things will take care of themselves before you jump in.  I mean, a lot of times if there was somebody who was a little bit of a problem on the trip, usually the other people on the trip would take care of it, and you wouldn’t have to intervene as the authoritarian on the trip, you know.  There were times when you could, and people would respect your position.  But it was interesting to hear Dan say that, because I could just see the old Wi-Wo days, and with Grand Canyon Youth Expeditions and stuff...  Just all the high spirits in that crew.  You were right in there with that, you know.  I’m just running into people as I see ’em down the river, and otherwise just running by myself.  Just an interesting perspective.

Steiger:  Yeah, Grand Canyon Youth was very interesting.

Whitney:  I could have got in a lot of trouble over there myself.

Steiger:  The interesting thing about them was that they were....  I mean, I only did a few trips with ’em, but they were rowdy for sure, and kind of way past the line that Fred would have accepted.  But somehow they pulled it off.  Actually [they] more often than not, would always kind of bring it back around, and somehow it would go back into the people, and go back into the trip.  They had a very interesting clientele, and I think for the most part people went away from those trips happy with what had occurred.  It wasn’t like they were just blowin’ people off.

Whitney:  Right.  No, no, no.

Steiger:  But they were pretty entertaining as well.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  And they always seemed to have--or most often--seemed to have a mix that somehow kind of worked.  [unclear]  But back to you, pretty amazing that your first commercial trip, here you are in Papua New Guinea, and all you’ve got to do is learn pidgen, and go up there and get the boats and make a menu and buy all the food and show up at the put-in with all these boats.  That’s a pretty--talk about being thrown into the fire.

Whitney:  Yeah, right.

Steiger:  And also, for me at ARR, hell, I swamped for three years, partly because I wasn’t eighteen yet.  I mean, when I ran my first boat, it was a two-boat trip, and Ross Garrison was the trip leader.  It was my--I’ll bet I had twelve trips or somethin’ like that, and all I had to do was follow Ross.  If I’d have been on trip number 5, and just had to figure it out from there, boy, that’s a whole ’nother deal.

Whitney:  It’s interesting how broad the spectrum is when you think about what all of our different experiences are, from starting out.  Not to preclude what people are learning now, but it’s just I was sort of in the last part of where....  "Okay, kid, we need somebody to drive this boat and you’re it!"

Steiger:  Five trips, you’re good to go.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And it was happening way more....  Ten years before that, or five or six or seven years before that, Bob Quist, "How’ll I know the Little Colorado?"  "It’s the first big stream on the left!" Tony yelling to him, leaving <Lee's Ferry>.  At least I knew where the Little Colorado was.  But he didn’t care, he was just gonna go anyway.  It’s just like, "I’ll do it!"  But your experience, and Dan’s, and mine, how broad the spectrum is of the experience that you provide for people.  With a big crew, with a little crew, unless somebody gets hurt, they just all have a great time and cant’ stop talkin’ about it.

Steiger:  It’s like you said, you’re off treating people like they were your friends or your family--or like you’d want to be treated.  Sometimes you don’t, sometimes you lose sight of that, I think.

Whitney:  One of my last trips with Bob, I remember we were down, we were camped at <Travertine Falls>....

Steiger:  Your brother.

Whitney:  Yeah.  We were out on the boats, I don’t know what was going on.  We were out on the boats until nine o’clock.  Somebody from the trip finally came down and said, "Is the crew gonna cook dinner tonight?"  Well, he never cared much about food anyway.  You wouldn’t want dinner to get in the way of a perfectly good cocktail hour.  We were runnin’ short on toilet paper, and the saying was, "Everybody gets three sheets--one up, one down, and one for a shine."  This is at the end of the trip, and nine o’clock at night, and no food out.  "Yeah, okay, well we’ll put somethin’ together, I guess."  I didn’t even realize that we hadn’t had dinner.  Everybody’s just havin’ a big party, last night of the trip.

Steiger:  "Oops, you all need dinner."

Whitney:  "Oh yeah, that part."

Steiger:  Yeah.

Whitney:  "Is the crew ever gonna go to bed tonight?"  I mean, there was a three-boat trip with me and Ed and Bill Gloeckler, and it was a music trip, and it just went on....  I mean, every night of the trip it got later before everybody went to bed.  It was great music:  Jim Sobek, Kirk Burnett.

Pam Whitney:  It was Kirk Burnett’s first trip.

Whitney:  Jay Beck.

Pam Whitney:  Jay Beck.

Whitney:  And Bill.  And it was just music, music, music all the time.  All those high spirits.  We were at Bass, and it must have been one o’clock in the morning at that point.  We were at the back eddy one night, and Dugald came and played, he brought his guitar over.  So everywhere we went, if there was another guitar, it was really just like a traveling minstrel show, and stopped and played for private trips.  It was wild.  We’re at <Bass> and it’s one o’clock in the morning or something, and somebody’d gotten stung by a scorpion.  There was a scorpion in a tree [unclear] got stung.  We’re goin’ another round of music, and Pam was on the trip.  It was like, "What ever happened to Joe and that scorpion bite?"  She said, "Ah, it’s okay, he died."  (laughter)

Steiger:  No problem.

Whitney:  About one o’clock someone comes down and says, "Is the crew ever going to go to bed tonight?"  So we finally did.  Somebody fell in the river and....

Steiger:  You don’t think of <Bass> as bein’ all that quiet.  But it was?

Pam Whitney:  Every night it just got later and later, louder and louder.

Whitney:  A wonderful, incredible trip.  Just such good music, too.  Nobody could really complain.

Pam Whitney:  Except for the passengers.  That was so funny--Gloeckler.  What ever happened to that guy?  

Whitney:  Why don’t you stay for dinner?

Steiger:  No, I’m gonna roll on.

Pam Whitney:  Where are you going?

Steiger:  I’m gonna go on back there, because I got....

Pam Whitney:  To Prescott?

Steiger:  Yeah, I can do it.  Do that in my sleep all the time.  Okay, I’m gonna stop this.  We haven’t forgotten anything that we need to talk about now, have we?

Pam Whitney:  Nothing important.  [unclear] when Tim proposed to me and when we got married.  You’ve got all that on tape.

Steiger:  Oh yeah, most important.

Pam Whitney:  Well, just checking, because that’s the important part.

Steiger:  "I realized there was the love of my life...."  Oh yeah, we got that.  Great on that.

Pam Whitney:  Just checking [unclear].

Whitney:  Married Fred’s girl on the hill.  Didn’t want her fraternizing with the boatmen.

Steiger:  Yeah, he had to keep an eye on that situation.

Whitney:  Yeah, that might have happened from time to time.

Pam Whitney:  For sure.

Steiger:  All right then.

Whitney:  Give me another shot at it, so I can....



