FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

John Britt

Interview number NAU.OH.28.51



 



John Britt, who was born in <Flagstaff> in 1913. His father came to <Flagstaff> from <Ireland> and his mother, Susan McGonigle, was born in <Flagstaff> in 1889. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on August 18, 1976 



 



Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview 



 



Tape 1, Side 1



 



Born in <Flagstaff>, 1913 



Brothers and Sisters 



Ned, Mary Agnes, Charles, Nori 



Parents 



Father, John Britt, <Ireland> 



Mother, Susan Mary McGonigle, <Flagstaff>, 1889 



Father deputy sheriff in <Williams> 



Father worked in lumber mills 



Arizona Lumber and timber 



Moved to <Flagstaff> because of asthma 



Grandfather Mcgonigle was an <Arizona> state senator 



Grandmother, Mary Cooney 



Flagstaff Lumber company 



Other lumber mills 



Prochnow family, got milk from their cow 



Rucker’s ice cream parlor 



World War I 



Chip Hall, friend’s death 



Father’s employment 



Move to Cooley, Arozina 



Pollack and Zollahoff Mills 



Work for Cady Lumber Company 



Work for Babbitt Brothers 



Mother’s activities 



Political 



Catholic Church 



Classmates at St. Anthony’s 



Bernard Wright, father engineer who built road down to <Oak Creek> 



Michael Lindemann, Prochnow, Victor and Jack Clark, Nackard, Moran, Giclas, Cliff Kramer 



Rowe



 



Tape 1, Side 2



 



Downtown 



Board sidewalks would float during heavy rains 



Riordan family 



Miss Metz, magazines from <Ireland> 



Steinmetz family 



Relations between mill families 



Sunday afternoon family activities 



Daily chores as child 



Split and carry in wood, feed animals, washed dishes 



After school activities 



Fighting with Mexican kids 



Blacks 



Johnson, Mrs. Dorsey 



Pollock’s bank 



Marriage and family 



Wife, Virginia Hayden 



Came to <Flagstaff> in 1929 from <Albuquerque> 



Kress family, tailors and cleaners 



Sandy Donahue and Front Street 



Social life of community 



Days of ’49 (before Pow Wow) snowball fights, water fights with fire department 



Prohibition 



Stole alcohol as a teenager from bootleggers 



Depression 



Death of brother from kidney injury during football game 



Fire department 



Equipment, first fire truck



 



Tape 2, Side 1



 



Fire department, continued 



Types of fires 



Lumber mills, Babbitt lumber 



Flooding 



Diverting the Rio de Flag 



Water shortages in 1930’s 



Lindberg Springs and other springs 



Big snows 



1949 



Epidemics 



Flu, 1918 



Virginia Britt worked for Dr. Fronske 



Jobs held by Virginia 



Babbitts 



Flagstaff Builder’s Supply 



Flagstaff Lumber Company 



Children 



Ned, John, Elizabeth, martin 



East <Flagstaff> bean fields 



University development 



Mother attended Normal School 



Changes in town after World War II 



<Winslow> 



Trains and Santa Fe division 



“Stuttering Bucco- Sisk story



 



Tape 2, Side 2



 



Story, continued 



Telegraph offices 



Other people in <Flagstaff>



 



This is an interview with Mr. John Britt, who was born in <Flagstaff> in 1913. His father, John Britt, came to <Flagstaff> from <Ireland>, and his mother, Susan McGonigle, was born in <Flagstaff> in the 1880s. The interview is being conducted on August 18, 1976, at Mr. Britt's home located at 701 North Beaver in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [Narrator's wife, Virginia Gail Hayden Britt, is also present, and makes a few comments which are mostly inaudible, due to her distance from the microphone. (Tr.)] 



 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. Mr. Britt, when and where were you born? 





JOHN BRITT: I was born in <Flagstaff>, September 22, 1913. Let's see, I was born in the house on South O'Leary Street, that Pop and Mom built. The house isn't there now. It would be about between Brennan Street and Butler, on the west side. It was a two-story house. It was only two houses in the block, as I remember, and that was where I was born. No, it was my older brother, Ned, and my sister Mary Agnes was born there. Ned is dead now, and Charles and Nori were born on South Beaver Street, 302 South Beaver Street. Nori is dead. Charles still lives in the old family house on South Beaver Street. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, he does? 





JOHN BRITT: Uh-huh. Pop bought that house in 1921. And as I remember, the cost of the house was only about $2,200, $2,300, something like that. (laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, why don't I go ahead then and ask you who your parents were. 





JOHN BRITT: My parents was - Mother's maiden name was Susan Mary McGonigle, and Dad's name was John Joseph Britt. Pop was born in <Ireland>, came over and followed the railroad out from <Chicago>, and I guess he had been in practically every state in the union at one time. And then he finally settled down in <Williams>, and he was at one time deputy sheriff in <Williams>, and I have the pistol that he used while he was deputy sheriff in <Williams>. There was a sawmill at <Maine>, and he went to work at the sawmill at <Maine>. Then from there he came and worked for Ed McGonigle, my mother's dad, who was affiliated with the Riordans in the Arizona Lumber and Timber Corporation, and Dad went to work for them. 



What else do you want to know? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: When he was traveling around the <United States>, did he ever tell you exactly why he decided to stay here? What it was that prompted him? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, Pop was havin' trouble with asthma. This is the reason he left <Ireland>. In fact, he came over once and he says the first time he came over it was about, I guess, two months before he landed. And then the second time he came over, he went BACK to <Ireland>, thinking that he could make it in <Ireland>. He couldn't make it in <Ireland>, so he came back a second time. And the second time he came back, it only took twenty-one days to come across. So I really don't know the reason for him settling here, other than probably he felt better here than any other place he'd been. He had been down to <Mexico City>. He worked in the mahogany mills in <Mexico> before coming to <Arizona>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, you told me before that your parents were married in 1911. So he was here for a few years before that? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, he was in <Arizona> a few years. I think he was deputy sheriff out of <Williams>, and then he went to work in the sawmill at <Maine>. And from <Maine>, I think he met Mom, I don't know. I mean, I really don't know how Mom and Dad's romance got started, but I think Pop was in <Maine> when he met Mom. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. Now, your mother's family was in <Flagstaff> for quite a while then? 





JOHN BRITT: I couldn't tell you when they came to <Flagstaff>. They came out here from <Leavenworth Kansas>, and my grandfather, Ed McGonigle, was an engineer. He and the Riordans separated somehow, and he started his own sawmill at Riordan, which was just six miles west of <Flagstaff>. There was a sawmill there, and he owned that. It operated for quite a few years. It was operatin' probably as late as 1924 and 1925. Then he closed the sawmill and went into the… Oh, he started gettin' mixed up with the legislature and politics. He and old Governor Hunt, we used to call him Walrus P. Hunt because of his moustache. (laughs) You know, he looked like a walrus. Walrus P. Hunt, we called him. (laughter) I imagine he'd turn over in his grave… We used to see him quite frequently, visiting our grandparents. Yeah, Mom was born in <Flagstaff>. I think it was in here someplace, where Mom was born. (consults source) Yeah, she was born December 5, 1889, in <Flagstaff>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ah, so her family really was here probably in the early 1880s? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. And Mother's mother's maiden name was Mary Cooney. My grandmother was Mary Cooney. She was just a little ol' thing. She was the boss of the house, though. And besides Grandpa McGonigle, I mean Ed McGonigle, he had Aunt Aggie. Her name was McGonigle, but she married a fellah by the name of Pouchet [phonetic spelling]. I think he got shot for playin' cards, or some damned thing, I don't know what the hell happened. Anyway, they never said a hell of a lot about him. Then another sister by the name of Aunt Kate McGonigle. They lived… I guess she was at 13 Milton Road. Well, it's right there where the Flagstaff Electric Company is now. And Uncle Charlie McGonigle was a brother of my grandfather. He was a woods boss or logging superintendent for the Flagstaff Lumber Company. 



VIRGINIA BRITT: <Flagstaff>? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, for the Flagstaff Lumber Company. Don't confuse it with the PRESENT Flagstaff Lumber Company. They called it the "Flim Flam." ALandT was the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, which was owned by the Riordans. And then the Flagstaff Lumber Company was owned by J.C. Dolan - Joe Dolan - and gosh, there was a fellah by the name of Wheat also. I don't remember much about him, but anyway he had something to do with this. There was a lot of people that you could probably get, that are older than I am, that would remember dates better than I do. For example, one is Francis Decker. Have you heard of him? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, we're going to interview him. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, Francis Decker, and then too, Mrs. Bill Ryan. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, I DID talk to her. And she mentioned that your father was the one that hired her husband. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, Pop was working at the Flagstaff Lumber Company. I don't remember… Well, I remember THEM, the families, bein' awful close - the Ryan families and the Britt family - and the Lindemanns, too. I mean, I don't [know] whether Pete remembers much or not. He's younger than I am. But Pete Lindemann ought to be another one to interview. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I think they've got him _______. 





JOHN BRITT: And then Mrs. Dayton Draine. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: You know her? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: She was a Greenlaw? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, she was a Greenlaw. And then Mrs. Beamer is another one that is a Greenlaw. There was a mill out at Greenlaw which is.... Well, it was just a little bit east of that.... Well, you know where Barker Village is? (





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.) Well, I think the mill was kind of west of Barker Village, as I remember the exact location of it. But there was a sawmill there, that was a Greenlaw. Well, in fact, at one time there was FOUR sawmills goin' here: there was the Greenlaw, the Flagstaff Lumber and Timber Company [editorial comment, think this is really Flagstaff Lumber Company], the Flagstaff Lumber Company, and then the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, and Riordan goin' all at the same time. [That adds up to five--can you guys figure this out? (Tr.)] 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, Mr. Dolan did actually - well, as part owner or whatever of the Flagstaff Lumber… 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: He was the ALandT. 





JOHN BRITT: No, he was Flagstaff Lumber Company first. Dolan sold his deal out to the Cadys, the Cady Lumber Company. Mary Prochnow… have you talked to her? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I think. 





JOHN BRITT: Well, it wouldn't be Mary Prochnow - Mary Lewis - Mary Lewis Prochnow. Oh, heck, she's in her seventies. She would remember a LOT more than I would. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, you remember different things. (laughs) 





JOHN BRITT: We used to buy milk from the Prochnows when I was little. They had a cow, and I remember when I was a kid, walkin' over and gettin' the milk every day from the Prochnow family. It was a BIG family. And Bob is still alive. I don't know whether Charlie is or not. Ray is still alive, Ray Prochnow. He's down in <Phoenix> someplace. But that Prochnow family, they had nothing to do with the sawmill, they had the Commercial Hotel. It was… Mrs. Kent Rucker. You got her name? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: They weren't connected with the sawmills. Mrs. Kent Rucker, her dad had an ice cream parlor. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You remember that? (laughter) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, I remember the wire-backed chairs and wicker seats. It was a nice place, as I remember. They were two different locations. I remember goin' into an ice cream parlor someplace close to the Commercial Hotel, and then again over where… Well, they don't call it Knowles' Bakery anymore, do they? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, Choi’s? 





JOHN BRITT: Is that it? (





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.) There used to be - I don't know whether it was there or on Leroux Street, about where the Shoe Hospital is. Seems to me there was another place over there about where the shoe hospital was, that was an ice cream… And I think Mrs. Rucker's family run THAT. Keller, I believe their name was, I believe. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ya. That was their mom’s parents. Well, let me see. Your father… how long did he stay with the Flagstaff Lumber Company? As long as…? 





JOHN BRITT: Of course I don't know whether he was working for the Flagstaff Lumber Company when I was born or not. But then in about 19… Well, it was after… During the war - I mean, when war was declared, I don't remember too much about World War I, except I do remember a good friend of Mom's and Pop's that was stayin' with us on South O'Leary. He went into the Army. His name was Chip Hall. He had several nice horses, and he and the horses left. I guess he went into the cavalry with his horses [for] World War I. I remember Mom getting back all his personal effects. He got killed in World War I. His name was Chip Hall. I just remember the incident, you know, Mom getting back his watch and some of the other stuff. But he was working for the Flagstaff Lumber Company then. 



After World War I, he sold the house on O'Leary Street and we moved to Cooley, which is now <McNary Arizona>, and we were there… let's see… Charles was born in Cooley. Then we came back in 1920 or '21, and we lived at the corner of Cherry and Humphrey Street. The house is still there. Then he bought the house at 302 South Beaver Street in either 1921 or '22. But when he went to <McNary>, which was Cooley then, he went to Mr. Tom Pollock - I guess his name was Pollock - in Zollahoff. Tom had a bank here. They had the mill at Cooley, and Pop went to work for them, and then came back and went back to work for the Flagstaff Lumber Company. And then it wasn't very long after that, it was sold to Cady. Joe Dolan sold it to Cady. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: At the same time that Pollock and Zollahoff sold to <McNary>? 





JOHN BRITT: I think… Well, I really don't know for sure, but I know about the two places bein' -  buyin' the two places - and I think he bought Cooley first, before he bought the Flagstaff Lumber Company. I'm really not positive about that, but that could be found out, for sure. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, I think that's right. So then when that changed hands, did your father change mills? Or did he stay… 





JOHN BRITT: No, he worked for the <McNary> outfit. He worked for Cady Lumber Corporation. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: When he came back over here? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, uh-huh. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he ever go back and work for the ALandT? 





JOHN BRITT: No, never did. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Stayed there, okay. 





JOHN BRITT: Let's see, the Cady Mill burnt down or closed out, and he went to work for the Babbitt brothers, and he worked quite a few years for the Babbitt brothers. They had a lumber yard here in town, he worked for them. This was probably about 19… I don't know whether it was '32 or '33 or somewhere along there he was workin' for the Babbitt Lumber Company, and he worked there until he retired. Let's see, we were married in… When did Pop retire? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: He retired when we were married. 





JOHN BRITT: He retired before World War II, didn't he? Yeah, Pop retired before World War II. He worked probably fifteen years for the Babbitt brothers. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, now, did your mother have any special job or anything? Or did she just mainly stay home and raise the family? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, Mom was strictly a housewife, but she was very active in… oh, she was… in other words, she never had a political job, she always seemed to be helpin' politicians out. 



 



(laughter) 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: She was very active in the Catholic Church. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, she was very active in the Catholic Church, the Altar Society and the whole bit. I can remember, too, when you're talkin' about churches, there was on Brannen Street - well, I don't know the exact address, but on Brannen Street, it would be probably at the corner of Eldon and Brannen, we used to go to church there. It was a Catholic church there. And then the school, we went to school down at St. Anthony's School, which was the same place that the Nativity School is now, but the Sisters of Loretta, they had a convent - they called it "the convent" didn't they? They called it the convent. And the church… I think the school was built first, and THEN the church. Although I remember some activities at the Brannen Street location, but more so at the old location of what was St. Anthony School. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Across the street was the church. 





JOHN BRITT: No, no. No, no, the church was at the same location that the school is now. Where the present Catholic church is built, it wasn't built until, well, let's see, about 1928 or '29. But prior to that, there was… Have you seen any old pictures of the old Catholic church? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: Well, IT was beautiful, and it was on Cherry Street just about a half a block west of the present Catholic church. The school was a courtyard. There was a courtyard there. Well, you know where the sisters' home is now? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That white… 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, that was… Let's see, that was a Babbitt house - C.J. Babbitt. I think that was the C.J. Babbitt location, C.J. Babbitt residence. But just south of it was the parish house. And just west of the parish house was the church and school, and the convent, they called it. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, okay. I got that. Well, let me see. Now, as far as childhood experiences go, you talked about going to school at St. Anthony's. Do you remember any of your classmates very well there? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, let's see, there was Bernard Wright. His dad was a civil engineer. I think his dad built the road down <Oak Creek>. I think if you look that up… What'd they call that? "The Million Dollar Mile," wasn't it? or some damned thing like that. I think it cost an ENORMOUS amount of money in those days to build that road down <Oak Creek>, and Bernard Wright's dad was the engineer on that. And then there was Michael Lindemann. I don't remember much about Pete Lindemann. He was quite a bit younger. But his brother, Michael Lindemann. And then there was the Prochnows. Dick was about my age, and George was younger. I think George is younger than I am - George Prochnow - maybe just a year or two, though, George is. And Clarks. His dad had a… Don't remember what his name… Dad's name was John Clark. But the kids' names, one of 'em was Victor Clark and the other one was Jack Clark. His dad had a clothing store downtown. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That isn't who Clark Homes was named after? 





JOHN BRITT: No, I don't think so. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Not the same family? 





JOHN BRITT: No, don't think it was the same family. The Clarks lived on the corner of Humphrey and Elm. This was in the Nativity School. Of course if I can remember… The Nackards, of course, I don't remember them in Nativity School. I remember them in high school. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Along with the Babbitts. 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, no, there wasn't very many Babbitts in high school or school when I went to school. I don't remember. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: They were a little older. 





JOHN BRITT: Uh-huh. The Morans, Ed and Pat Moran - you remember them. 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: Ed and Pat Moran. The Morans, I don't know where any one of THEM are. I don't think Pat is still alive. I know Ed may be alive. Seems to me that Pat Moran is dead now. Ed Moran - those were kids that I - they were workin' for the Babbitts at that time. They were an old-time family. See, they used to live on the corner of Elm and Agassiz. Henry Giclas - have you ever heard of his name? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: He ought to be able to tell you an awful lot about <Flagstaff>, too. I remember their family. They lived on the corner of Clay and Milton Road. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! They were way down. Now, did his family work in the mills then? 





JOHN BRITT: I think his dad did work for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. Kramer! Have you talked to Joe Kramer? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: JOE Kramer? I don't think so. 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, wait a minute, it's not JOE Kramer - CLIFF Kramer. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: Have you talked to him? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I haven't, no. 





JOHN BRITT: Well, he married into the Rowe family, and they were runnin' a boardin' house here. Agnes Rowe? I don't remember much about her as a kid, but when I was a teenager, and also maybe in my twenties, I remember Agnes Rowe workin' for the Babbitt brothers. But old Cliff Kramer ought to be able to tell you somethin' about some of it. As I remember, they had a boardin' house. It was… Well, let's see, you know where Taco Bell is? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. 





JOHN BRITT: Well, I think the boardin' house was about there. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ah! So it served the mill area. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. I think the boardin' house… 



[END TAPE I, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2] 





JOHN BRITT: There was board sidewalks. During the rainy season, well, the board sidewalks would float. You could bounce along (chuckles) in the water like ridin' on a raft or somethin'. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You mean during the summer then, or spring? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. Of course in the Riordan family there was Miss Metz. She belonged to a different political party than Dad, and her family belonged to a different political party in <Ireland> than Dad did, and they used to both get magazines. Half the magazine or paper would be written in Gaelic, and the other half in English. And they'd swap yarns and stories and trade magazines and fight in the living room. (laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's right, they were from <Ireland> originally. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. Let's see, I'm tryin' to think. Steinmetz - I don't know if Steinmetz was around. Joe is dead. Leo died just a few years ago. Mrs. Ryan ought to be able to tell you quite a bit about the Steinmetzes. He worked for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well then, the people from the ALandT and then the Flagstaff Lumber Company - or later the Cady - did get along? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh yes. Oh yeah. Shoot fire. I mean, most of the Sundays, I mean there was no oil or natural gas. Or the only fuel was wood, you know. You had to have a pile of wood bigger than a house to last you through the winter, you know. I can remember a lot of Sundays where we'd go to somebody's house and the men would saw wood and drink bootleg booze and cut all the kids' hair. And the women would fry chickens and the kids would turn ice cream freezers. All they had to do was just go out and drag in a log, you know, and they'd fill up the yard with logs and then they'd saw 'em up on Sundays and swap yarns and tell dirty jokes and cut kids' hair or drink booze. And women would fry chicken and make ice cream. This would be the Sundays. There wasn't a heck of a lot else to do (laughs) you know. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Of course it was always after mass. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, it was always after mass. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) That's good! Did you have any special daily chores that your family expected [you to do]? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, yeah, everybody had a daily chore. One of the daily chores, of course, was getting the wood. You had to carry the wood in. For one thing, you had a woodshed, or it was piled up outside, and you had to split wood. But the kids ALWAYS, the boys always, Pop would come home from work, and if he had to do anything about getting any wood into the house, why, you might just as well have gone to the woodshed with him, you just as well started out, if the wood box wasn't full. Of course there was milkin' the cow, feedin' the chickens. After Chip Hall left, why, there was no horses, Pop didn't have any horses around. I think Chip took the horses with him. But we had a cow, and we had chickens, and we had rabbits. We had to take care of all of that. But this was a daily deal, I mean, carryin' in wood. Of course my sister, as she grew up, she did the dishes and helped Mom. Mom never washed any dishes at all. We had to wash the dishes after every meal. So chores, we DID have chores. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there much time for playing or anything after school? 





JOHN BRITT: Yes. We'd go around and help each other out. I mean, help families out, kids gettin' their chores done so they COULD play. Saturday morning, if you got your chores done at home, you'd go help somebody else so we could spend Saturday afternoon fightin' the Mexicans. (laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: There was a little conflict there, huh? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. It was hurry up, get your work done at home so you could have the afternoon to fight with the Mexicans. (laughs) Well, there wasn't really anything, an awful lot to do. It was more entertainment. I think they enjoyed it as much as we did. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were they pretty rough? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, some of 'em were pretty rough. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were there many black families around when you were growing up? 





JOHN BRITT: No. No, there was only two. There was one that was - I forget his name. One by the name of Johnson, and they lived way over on Bonita Street, I think. No, wait a minute, it wasn't Bonita. Where did the Carons live? The Carons lived on the corner of Cherry and… Wait a minute now. Can you tell me what street goes into the City shop? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Kendrick? 





JOHN BRITT: No, no, no. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's way over. 





JOHN BRITT: This is further. This would be further west than Kendrick. Oh, damn, I'm about to say his name. Joe Place. A fellah by the name of Joe Place lived in the old Caron house. On the corner of Cherry and Bonita is where the Carons lived. And just directly behind the Carons lived a colored family by the name of Johnson. And he was a lather and a mason. And then there was another one that lived over on West Cottage, back someplace close to the back of the First Baptist Church there. And he was a janitor and caretaker for one of the banks. There was two at the time. And he used to be the janitor and caretaker there. And I don't remember their names. 



 



But of course when the Cadys came in, Cady and McNary, they brought a lot of colored people with 'em from <Louisiana>. But prior to that, there was just the two families that I remember. There was this lather and plaster and mason by the name of Johnson, and then the one that was the caretaker of the banks. And I don't remember his name. I think he worked with Tom Pollock for a while, too. Pollock had a bank here, too. And the Pollock's Bank was in there about where Jean and Trox is now. Yeah, that was where his bank was. Of course you didn't get here 'til 1927. Huh? Twenty-nine? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: About, I remember that. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Anyway, there wasn't the fighting going on between the black kids and the white kids like there was with the Mexicans? 





JOHN BRITT: No, there wasn't… You know, actually, even after the Cady people brought a lot of these colored people in from <Louisiana>… I mean of course Cadys and McNarys were <Louisiana> people. And they brought in a lot of colored people with 'em from <Louisiana>, with 'em, when they bought THIS thing. I don't remember of any… well, racial difference, as you would call it. I mean, one of the families that came along was the Dorsey family. And I think Mrs. Dorsey used to come in and help Mom out, and she'd often baby-sit for Mom at home and take care of the kids. She'd help Mom with the housework. Lynn [phonetic spelling] Dorsey is still here in town. Her son is still here in town, Lynn Dorsey, and he lives on South O'Leary Street. I'm sure he could tell you quite a bit about some of the things, 'cause he's an older man than I am. I mean, Lynn is a little older than I am - he would remember. He's a nice person, too. Actually, you might - I mean, if you wanted to know somethin' about the colored people or when they arrived in <Flagstaff>, I think he would be one of the ones to see, 'cause I think he's one of the older colored families IN town. I don't know how to put this, but he is not the typical colored family. He's a little above that. You would have no qualms in going to his house. I bet his house is better-lookin' than ours, to be right truthful with you. He's a nice guy. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, why don't we go ahead. We talked about your wife, when she came and everything. When did you get married? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, I didn't get married until 1937. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What's your wife's name? 





JOHN BRITT: My wife's name is Virginia. Virginia Gail Hayden was her maiden name. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: And she came in 1929? 





JOHN BRITT: Came from <Albuquerque>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: (to VB) I'll address the questions to him. Did her family come? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, the whole family came. Mr. Hayden was in the clothing business. Didn't he go to work for Gatsman [phonetic spelling]? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Well, didn't he work for Gatsman for a while? There was a fellah by the name of Gatsman that had a clothing store here, too, and I don't remember. Is there any of the Kresses around? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I don't know. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Well, no, I don't think… MRS. Lauren Kress is here in town someplace. Why don't you call the Town and Country Motel and ask for Mrs. Lauren Kress, or find out where she's at from there. Now, they used to have, years ago - I mean, the Kress family is one of the old families in town, and they had a tailor shop in town. They were tailors here in town - cleaners and tailors. Kresses, Lauren and Katie. I don't know where Katie is, do you? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: I don't know. But anyway, if you can get ahold of 'em… Well, now, wait a minute, that wouldn't be… The Kress that you would find out from the Town and Country Motel wouldn't be the original Mrs. Kress, no. No, maybe it's a dud, because.... No, the original Mrs. Kress died, and Mr. Kress married again. So I'm sure she probably wouldn't know an awful lot. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Uh-huh. I see you've got Sissons down here. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh (laughs) did you know them? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, I knew them. Probably, oh, Hank.... I thought of it a few minutes ago. Giclas! [phonetic spelling] Hank Giclas could be able to tell you somethin' about the Sissons. They lived right across from the old Mercy Hospital. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Any other person? Did you know Sandy Donahue? 





JOHN BRITT: You know, I… Sandy Donahue is a name that has come up so often in the family, and I can't put a face on it. But I have heard the name Sandy Donahue for an awful lot of times. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, he was Irish also. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, yeah. In fact, I have heard some stories about my Pop and Sandy Donahue cleanin' out the bars. (laughs) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about Front Street when you were growin' up? What was that like? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, I remember a few signs sayin' "saloon," but the kids weren't allowed any of those. And over there now where… Well, it was a saloon on Phoenix Street… Well, let's see, how would you put it? Have you got Mrs. Pulliam's name down there? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: She's still around, you'd better get ahold of HER. She lives out in Mud Flats or someplace. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) Which part was Mud Flats? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, uh-huh. Mountainview? 





JOHN BRITT: No, no, not Mountainview. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, it isn't? Further out? 





JOHN BRITT: Nah, it's right here - Navajo Road and… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: The one before Coconino. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yeah. 





JOHN BRITT: You get ahold of Mrs. Pulliam. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Loretta. 





JOHN BRITT: Loretta Pulliam, yeah. You get ahold of her. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: _________ REAL old-timers. 





JOHN BRITT: Her husband, yeah, he was city… 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's Maggie? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, Maggie Pulliam's wife. She could tell you a lot of stories. And she probably could tell you a lot about old G.T. Harrington who was mayor and run the City for quite a while. Thomson was another one that was in the City deal. She could tell you about THEM. Oh, I'm sure Loretta could… You may just spend the whole afternoon with her. She's a nice girl, too. I mean, she's real nice. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did your father ever tell you - I doubt if you would have had contact - with Zane Grey? Did he ever mention having seen him? 





JOHN BRITT: No. Mom knew Zane Grey, and so did my grandparents. I think Zane Grey probably stayed at the house. I don't know whether they're still around or not, but I think we probably got all the books Zane Grey (laughs) ever wrote. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, do you remember much about - well, we talked about the social life of your family, meeting with some of the other families. Do you remember any of the other social life in the community? 





JOHN BRITT: People went house-to-house _______, they played cards and they had parties and stuff like that. Picnics, it seems like there was an awful lot of picnics. Most of the social life was, you know, I mean, around the church: like the Altar Society or something like this. It was bazaars. 



 



Of course… I mean… the Days of '49, that used to be quite a deal. That was a Fourth of July celebration. They used to grow beards, and the women wore long skirts. I remember for YEARS, down there where the present Babbitt Motor Company [is now], was all vacant there, and they'd put up tents and they'd have gambling and carnivals, and you'd throw baseballs at niggers. That was the days of '49. That was prior to the Pow Wow - quite a bit prior to the Pow Wow. It was quite a celebration. Of course at that time they allowed fireworks and everybody had firecrackers and everything. And I think the Days of '49 created a lot of social activity - especially during the summer. I mean there was projects put on prior and even after, to help pay for the Days of '49. They called it the Days of '49. That was the name of the celebration. Has somebody told you that, about that before? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I've heard it mentioned, and that's about all. 





JOHN BRITT: That was the big celebration of the year, was the Days of '49. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: … hauled down the snow. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, they hauled snow down and had a snowball fight on the street. They hauled it down from the mountain. The fire department used to have water fights. I mean, teams, you know, they'd have water fights on the street and everything. (laughs) Doggone, I don't know whether any of the Carl Dixon bunch are around or not. Pat Hogan - have you ever contacted him? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Na, uh, No. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, there probably isn't any use of contactin' him, he's too far gone. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: … Frankie … 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, Frankie Hogan could probably tell you somethin'. She could probably tell you… Well, let's see, rather than goin' to Frankie… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Lora Mae. 





JOHN BRITT: Lora Mae Hogan - Flops Dunnam's wife. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Hm, uh-huh. 





JOHN BRITT: She could tell you an awful lot. I think she's older than I am, isn't she? Yeah. She could probably tell you. She worked for the old Ed Babbitt Motor Company, and she probably bought the first Ford that Babbitts brought into <Flagstaff>. (laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember - you were really little during Prohibition - but do you remember any good stories about Prohibition? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh… Well, you say "little during Prohibition" - we used to… Well, during Prohibition in high school, we'd find out where the bootleggers were and where they hid their stuff, and we'd go steal it and sell it! (laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: So you weren't THAT little! 





JOHN BRITT: Pop, of course bein' a Irishman… And I never DID see my dad drunk, but he always nipped a little. There was probably no time that Pop didn't have any booze in the house. He had several favorite bootleggers. He always had a bottle around for medicinal purposes. (chuckles) But as far as it bein' any problem, I mean, it was just somethin' for us kids to do. I mean, we'd find out where the bootleggers were, and we'd steal, where they hid the… There was one place there, we even had to crawl underneath the house. The bootlegger was in there. We'd crawl underneath the house and he'd… He had a trap door IN the house that he'd open in the house and reach down and get the booze, you know, and sell it. And we would crawl in from the outside, steal his booze, and __________. (dissolves in laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about the Depression? How did that affect your family and other families? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, the Depression kind of DID affect the family. We curtailed on Pop's work. Of course there was five in the family. My older brother and I were in high school. Well, I mean, in the early thirties. I graduated from high school in 1933. When we got out of high school, it was impossible for both of us to go on to college, so we flipped a coin to see who was goin' to college, and Ned won the coin flip, which was a better deal, because he was more athletic. In his sophomore year in college he received a kidney injury, and he died as result of that kidney injury, playin' football. But I have a football that was - both teams autographed the thing and they gave it to him while he was ill at home. And Coach Lavick [phonetic spelling] - I guess he's still alive someplace - yeah, Lavick was the coach. And of course Ned finally died from the kidney injury. But it was impossible… I mean, it was out of the question for both of us to go to school - one of us had to find a job and help out with the family. There was Charles and Mary Agnes and Nori, younger than us. And Pop was only workin' part-time, or HALF of the time. I mean, the NRA [National Recovery Administration] - is that what they called it? It was somethin' like that, the NRA, I mean, where one man held down two jobs, so only each guy got half of a pay or some damned thing like that. [No, I think he misspoke himself. He probably meant to say "two guys held down one job." (Tr.)] But this went on… Well, I guess we were havin' problems… Really, nobody was back on their feet when you and I got married. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Still payin' bills from __________. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, you and I paid Ned's funeral bills in 1937. So you might say the Depression DID affect us, had some bearing on our lives. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any fires particularly well? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, I was on the fire department for… Well, I have a… Let's see, I was on the fire department when I married you, wasn't I, Virginia? I don't remember HOW long I had been in the fire department when Virginia and I got married, but it was at least a couple of three years. But I've had that thing for about twenty years, or MORE than twenty years. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You remember twenty years ___________. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. Well, I guess I started chasin' fires about maybe 1934. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of equipment did the department have? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, we had… (laughs) We had the old Frog(?) [phonetic spelling] which was the American LeFrance. I think I remember the City buyin' that thing. I think the City bought that American LeFrance in about 1921 sometime. Maybe '21 or '22. But it was in the Fourth of July parade, that old American LeFrance. And then while I was ON the department, we bought a fire truck from Fort Whipple in <Prescott>, which was an old White with solid rubber tires. We bought us a forty-foot extension ladder. I mean, the City bought a forty-foot extension ladder, and we needed somethin' to put that on, so we went down and bought this old fire truck from Fort Whipple in <Prescott>, and it took a day-and-a-half to drive that damned thing from <Prescott> to <Flagstaff>. And it had solid rubber tires on it - narrow. The front wheels were only about two or three inches wide. 



 



[END TAPE I, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE II, SIDE 1] 





JOHN BRITT: Well, I think the Frog, which is the American LeFrance, had solid rubber tires on it when I first saw it. But then they bought a conversion kit for it for pneumatics. And then the old White… Say, talkin' about the old White, the Switzer girls, now let’s see, that would be Mary Agnes Switzer, Chet Anderson's wife - she could tell you an awful lot. And then Mrs. Sid Griffin. Of course there's Bill. Bill Switzer is about the same age as I am - old Bill Switzer is. I mean, the one that runs the Switzer's Hardware now. What's Sid Griffin's wife's first name? [Ruth (Tr.)] Well, anyway, she's a Switzer, Mrs. Sid Griffin. 



This old White, John Conrad and Harry Evans, and of course Pat Hogan was fire chief. And they converted it to pneumatics. Mill fires were the thing - we had several of THEM, both at which would have been the Cady Lumber Company at that time, and then also the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, and then later Saginaw. I mean, the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company sold out to Saginaw. We had several fires there. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, yeah. That was the most serious fires that I can reminisce. And this was not only once, but we had several mill fires when I was on the fire department. Another one that was quite spectacular was the Babbitt Lumber - Babbitts had a retail lumber mill, and it was right there where the present Babbitt Ford Motor Company is now, and THAT thing burnt down, and it burnt down, I think the temperature was 14 degrees below zero THAT night. Boy! that was a MISERABLE fire. But it was a spectacular thing, too. 



Oh, there was a lot of fires that weren't spectacular. Not a lot, but I can reminisce goin' to fires where there was a loss of life in. I mean, like… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: South side? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, small south side deals. This is kind of comical. There was one fire - you'll laugh at this - Flops Dunnam, which is Herman Dunnam - we always called him "Flops" - he was on the fire department. And there was a fire on South San Francisco Street. We arrived there at the fire and Flops and I are out in front and we hear this wailing, "My seester, she is een dare! My seester, she is een dare!" We didn't have really all the sophisticated equipment that they have now, but we did have a canister that was supposed to filter smoke, and this place was just more smoke than there was flames. So Flops and I, we each grabbed us one of these canisters, and we put the mask on, you know, and we go in and we go through the house and we come out the back door. "My seester, she is een dare! My seester, she is in there!" And oh, God. By that time the place began to get a little hotter - you know, there was a little more fire. So Flops and I looked at each other and we go through the house again, and we found the cotton pickin' dog underneath the bed. And we come out the front door, and here is this wailing, "My seester, she is een dare! My seester, she is een dare!" And we go through again, and we come out the back door, and by that time the two of 'em had gotten together. They were both outside, the both of 'em! (laughter) Oh! we were just… I had puked in that mask, and oh! I was a mess. Oh! and Flops! Oh! we were a [mess]. We were so disgusted. I could very near [have lost] my temper that night. (laughter) After I cooled off, it was kind of comical. Those damned canisters, though - I mean, the smoke filters - they didn't do a hell of a lot, I tell ya'. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Let me see, what about flooding? We talked about the sidewalks kind of floating. 





JOHN BRITT: They don't seem to be the water that comes down River de Flag there used to be. There used to be quite a bit of water come down River de Flag. And I can remember occasions when… Well, let's see, we lived on South O'Leary Street, and the Cooneys lived on South Beaver Street. Ned and I would try and get to the Cooneys, and we couldn't get to the Cooneys from O'Leary to Beaver Street because of the water - or because Rio de Flag was so high. 



The river, the present - I mean, the River de Flag - that was all dug, and I can remember them diggin' that with teams and fresnos. I mean, with what they called a fresno, draggin' dirt. It used to go down… I remember stories of the Weatherford Hotel bein' flooded. And I think this is one of the reasons for changin' the river. Let's see now, where the heck did it go? It went down… Well, it came about where the high school is, is where they began changin' it. And it went down and it would cross… Well, now wait a minute. No, Virginia, where… I think somewhere close to the Masonic building and McMillan's there. That's where the original one was. And it would cross the highway just east of the freight depot. I mean, go across underneath the railroad track and the highway, just east of the present freight depot. The river as it is now, the course as it is now, is manmade. That's not a natural deal. Those are dikes that they built. I think if you go look at it, you can recognize it as being dikes, rather than just a natural channel for the river. I remember cuttin' that thing out with fresnos and teams. Of course some of those horses were awful big. They had feet on 'em bigger than dinner plates. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, let me see, what about some dry years where there were water shortages? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, we had that. I don't remember the years, but they would… In the thirties, early thirties. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, that's what I was sayin', the early thirties. Well, Lindbergh Springs would be one place that you'd drive to get water to drink. And then they would ship in water. The light plant - I mean the steam-generated light plant on East Phoenix Street - I think the location now, the City water department has that location there now. There was a light plant there, and they would haul water in by Santa Fe rail, you know, in tank cars. And they pumped it in at a siding that went into the light plant, into the City mains. But there really wasn't an awful lot of pressure and the water wasn't very good, so people would go out… Well, the Old Town Spring I don't think - they'd go up there when they could. Sometimes they'd sit there for an hour, tryin' to get a gallon of water. And then there was a couple of springs up Fort Valley way, that people used to go to get drinking water and make water for coffee. And all the Lindbergh Springs - I think that was the most popular one. That's south of town on the Oak Creek Road. I think there's a picnic area there, or a rest stop there. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I always wondered where that water came from, that's always sitting there. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, there's a spring there. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I didn't know that. That's interesting. I'm glad you told me about that. Now, what about big snow years? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Wow! (laughs) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You remember 'em, huh? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, I can remember as a kid walkin' in paths that Pop and men had shoveled, and I couldn't see out of 'em. I'd be just lookin' into snow banks, you know. I really don't know what years those were, but I remember that. And of course then when I was more affected by it, I guess the first time that I was affected by it was in 1949. That was the biggest snow that I really had to do anything with. I mean, I was workin' for a livin' then, I wasn't a kid anymore. In 1949, that was the biggest one. And I think that was bigger than the one in the late 1960s that was awful big. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, I remember that. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were you able to go to work and stuff? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, yeah, sure, I worked every day. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: They plowed the streets. ___________. 





JOHN BRITT: This is another ________. The kids had a cocker spaniel dog, and it was a female, and she was in heat. We had these double-hung windows. You know what a double-hung window is? I mean, it's one that slides up and down. Well, the snow was up more than half of the - up to the top half of this double-hung window, you know. And the damned male dogs were comin' in, lookin' in the house. (laughs) 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: They looked DOWN into the house. 





JOHN BRITT: (laughing) Looked down in it. That was in 1949. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: We had to shovel the roofs… only the front door… 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, we never did get out the back door. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Never DID get out the back. (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: I didn't have time to go around and shovel it out. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about any illnesses or epidemics that seemed to affect <Flagstaff>? 





JOHN BRITT: Well, of course in the flu epidemic, prior to World War I, or during World War I, Mom's sister died in the flu epidemic, Veronica. She had another sister by the name of Clara McGonigle, and they were here. Clara never did get married, and Veronica was teaching school out at Riordan, and she caught the flu and died. And I can remember the flu goin' through the family. Of course probably I was too young to realize the seriousness of it, but I mean, thinking back, I can reminisce that there was quite a bit of concern about it. 



 



How about Fronske? Have you ever talked to Doc Fronske? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, they did ___________. 





JOHN BRITT: They did. Well, why don't YOU go talk to him? He's a nice guy. He'd tell you an awful lot. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: No, he hasn't been, but he knows a lot of these old people, you know. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Having taken care of them. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. He probably delivered more babies in <Flagstaff> than anybody else. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, house calls. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Delivered babies in the middle of the night . 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were you a nurse? 





JOHN BRITT: I started working for him when I was in high school . 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I didn't ever ask you what kind of jobs YOU had. 





JOHN BRITT: Me? I'm not very much of a jumper-arounder. I'm kind of an old stick-in-the-mud. When I got out of high school, I went to work for the Babbitt brothers, and I worked for them until both… Well, I first started to work up in the office, and that was a mistake. And then I went down to the lumber department, and I worked for the Babbitt brothers for, oh, I guess maybe fifteen, sixteen years, and then I went to work for the Flagstaff Builders Supply. And then I worked for the Flagstaff Lumber Company, and that's it. That's my… 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's fine. 





JOHN BRITT: As you were sayin', I haven't been jumpin' around very much. Three people in our married life. Oh! I did, between the Babbitts and the Flagstaff Builders Supply, I worked for a contractor for a few months. I was a carpenter. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: And you had children? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh yeah, we've got a lovely family. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, why don't I get their names? 





JOHN BRITT: We have Ned… Let's see, Edward… Where the heck is that page in the Bible here, Virginia? You don't have 'em here. You have 'em in another one. Edward Joseph [Ned]. All right, here you go. Do you smoke? I'm gonna go ahead and get a cigarette. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, you go ahead. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: ’41 Dawn Patrick, August 16, of ’43 Betty Jo, Elizabeth Jo on the 16th ’46, and Martin, March 9 of ’62. Let’s see Martin and Betty Jo are here, they are living in <Flagstaff>. And Ned is… he is associated with the thermal nuclear… 





JOHN BRITT: Consultant. Yeah, nuclear consultant. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: They have two [labs?]. They've got one in <Dayton Ohio>, and one out of ________ (coughing obscures comment). 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Pat is in <Tucson>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Two of 'em are still here. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) (JB coughs continually) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, they come back Christmastime, bring their kids. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: And we have a whole bunch of grand kids. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Let me see, what about East <Flagstaff>? Was there anything much out there? 





JOHN BRITT: No. (coughs) Bean forest. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: No houses _____________? 





JOHN BRITT: (coughs) Mostly bean farms. There was a couple of bootleggers out there. The present route of Highway 66, which was the highway then, was about the same, because the railroad track kind of controlled the deal. But along the highway there was a couple of roadhouses. And it went by the old Greenlaw Sawmill. The highway was just about the same as it's always been - through that area. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it paved? 





JOHN BRITT: NO! In fact, you didn't know what the hell pavement was. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: This wasn’t paved, tell them about this… 





JOHN BRITT: No, when we bought this place… Of course this isn't the original house, we remodeled it, changed it and everything. When we bought this place…



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: We were WAY out. 





JOHN BRITT: There was only three houses beyond us. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Really?! 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: It’s grow up, even up in here. 





JOHN BRITT: There's another outfit that might be around someplace: Etter's. They had a dairy and an ice cream parlor. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: <Sedona>? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. I think one of the kids is here in town. But he's a young kid, though. He isn't very old. But I mean the old Etter family… 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Cleon? 





JOHN BRITT: Cleon, and there was another one. Clyde. Cleon and Clyde. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Clyde, or one of 'em built this originally. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, we bought… One of the Etters lived here before we did. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: No. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, I'm sure of that. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: They built it . 





JOHN BRITT: Well, anyway, the Etters had something to do with this property. Let's see, another one that might be interesting to talk to would be the Devaneys [phonetic spelling]. Damn it all, I can't… Bob… You remember, you were talking to her down the street. She was telling you that her husband was very ill or something. Bob… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Lucille Devaney, I don’t remember her married name. 





JOHN BRITT: I can't remember his name. She worked with the telephone company, Lucille Devaney did. McNabb? Was that the superintendent of the telephone company? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Mayhab [phonetic spelling]. 





JOHN BRITT: Mayhab! 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Mayhab. She could tell you… Her dad was a butcher. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ah! Were there many exchanges in <Flagstaff>? 





JOHN BRITT: No, there probably was only about thirty or forty telephones. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Two operators… 





JOHN BRITT: You'd better get ahold of Mrs. Pulliam, though. I think she could… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: You would enjoy your session with her. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yeah! 





JOHN BRITT: She probably could tell you an awful lot of stuff. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I'm sure, yeah. 





JOHN BRITT: And then it was the Normal School, and then it was the Teachers College, and then it was the State College, and then the university. Of course it grew up quite a bit. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they ever really use it as an insane asylum, as far as you know? 





JOHN BRITT: Just hearsay. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: But the buildings were constructed for that purpose? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. I would never… I don't know, for some reason or another, I think there was kind of like a summer session or something like this. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Your mother attended the normal school. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, Mom attended the Normal School, when it was what they called a normal school. As far as it bein' an insane asylum, that's just hearsay. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. Well, I think that that was its original ___________. I don't know if you know anything - tourism - I think I also… 





JOHN BRITT: You asked, you've got down here "changes in the town." You used to go down and turn the square, which was one block there, and everybody you met you could say hello to. And you could walk the same deal now, you NEVER see anybody that you'd say hello to. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. Well, how big was it, population-wise? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, well, I don't know, maybe 2,000. It probably wasn't THAT when I was a kid. Maybe it wasn't even a thousand, or even… But when I first got on the fire department, it couldn't have been much more than 2,000 or 2,500 or somethin' like that. But you knew everybody. You could go down and turn that square and that used to be kind of the evening deal. I mean, you'd go down and walk the square and stand around on the street corners and swap yarns. But now you can't do that anymore. You don't see ANYBODY you know. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, yeah. I came from a larger town, and I think I still see a lot of people I know. But it IS different, yeah. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. When do you think it really started to grow? 





JOHN BRITT: It probably started to grow… Well, it was growin' slow prior to World War II, but it grew awful fast after World War II. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Well, I mean, of course the Navajo Army Depot brought in a lot of 'em - an awful lot. But it really started, you might say, gettin' in gear after World War II. But prior to World War II, it was just a slow, constant growth. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was <Winslow> about the same size as <Flagstaff> at that time? 





JOHN BRITT: At one time, <Winslow> was BIGGER than <Flagstaff>. I mean, as far as that goes. It was the Santa Fe division point, and they changed crews and stuff like that on trains there. They serviced trains and everything like that in <Winslow>. They had the roundhouse, they changed locomotives on the trains and serviced the locomotives. So they had quite a bit goin'. <Winslow> had quite a bit more goin' for 'em than <Flagstaff> did. But then the diesels changed <Winslow>. I mean, after the diesel trains come in, diesel locomotives came in… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, lots of trains. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Steam engines. 





JOHN BRITT: [Madame queens?] Gosh, they were enormous things, some of 'em. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: There were a lot of passenger trains coming through then? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, yeah. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: What's the old… Jim Treegle [phonetic spelling] had a taxi service and a newsstand. "Stuttering Bucko." What the heck was his name? You remember him? Or DO you remember him? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: I remember bein' down at the depot one time and old Stuttering Bucko was driving taxi for Jim Treegle… 



 



[END TAPE 2, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 2] 





JOHN BRITT: You could look at the Commercial Hotel from the depot. He stuttered when he asked about where they… And I remember I was a kid, and I never… And Stuttering Bucko just turned around and walked away from him. And I said, "What the hell you do that for?!" He says, "What do you want? Do you want me to get my face (stuttering) b-b-b-b-beat in?" (laughter) He couldn't tell him where the Commercial Hotel was without stuttering himself. (laughter) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there a man named Balser Hawks still down on Front Street? 





JOHN BRITT: Oh, let's see, Balser Hawks - didn't he have the telegraph deal? I'm sure, yeah. Now, let's see… Who could tell you about Balser Hawks? Mrs. Womack [phonetic spelling]. Of course I don't know whether she's around or not. _________his wife is in Sun City. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Probably, Cliff. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, Cliff Kramer could tell you about Balser Hawks. Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, he was a fairly old man then, huh? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, I think he was a telegraph operator. And then there was another one - Dave. There was TWO of those telegraph deals. There was Western Union and then there was another one. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: There was two of 'em that was workin'. One of 'em was Western Union and the other one I don't remember now what they called it. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: There's a fellah here now, a kid - not a kid either, he's… Hey, Virginia, give me a hand here. Let's see, now there was a great big ol' guy, he had a couple of daughters, they were in high school with us, and he worked for the Santa Fe. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Grier [phonetic spelling]. 





JOHN BRITT: Grier! Yeah. Harry Grier. One of his sons is still in town. And I think if you went down to the Legion Club, you could probably find out where he's at. This kid isn't all there, though, is he? Kind of funny, or some damned thing. But anyway, he was one of the youngest ones. 



The Comptons are still around. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Mrs. Doyle. Of course.... Well, there's another. The OLD lady Compton - what's her name? 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Laura? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Laura? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. Have you talked to her? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. 





JOHN BRITT: Well, SHE could tell you an awful lot. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Knoles. 





JOHN BRITT: Well, yes, you no doubt have talked to the Knowleses, haven't you? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, they're part of the Greenlaw outfit, the Knowleses. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, the father, the older man, is still living down in <Cottonwood>, I think. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, yeah, yeah. There's Tommy Knowles, Senior, and then there's Tommy Knowles, Junior. Tommy Knowles, Senior lives in <Cottonwood>, yeah. And Tommy Knowles Senior… 





JOHN BRITT: Third and fourth. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, there was Tommy Knowles… There was a colonel here during the Fourth of July, and then there's a couple of other Knowles kids besides that. So… 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, the Knowleses married into the Greenlaws. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. Do you know an Elna Greenlaw? I think her husband was Richard, I'm not sure. 





JOHN BRITT: What's Tommy Knowles' wife's name? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Eleanor. 





JOHN BRITT: Eleanor? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. This was Elna, E L N A. 





JOHN BRITT: No, I don't remember that. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: In your bio I noticed, was it Faber, F A B E R? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, okay, I was spelling it wrong. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: It was B-A. 





JOHN BRITT: No, F-A-B-E-R. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: Is it? 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I always thought it was "V" and I noticed then. I've been spelling it wrong all this time. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah, __________. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, now, I imagine that your mother was very active in the Catholic Church. 





JOHN BRITT: Yeah. Well, Pop too. Pop was a real religious man. 



 



VIRGINIA BRITT: (inaudible) 





JOHN BRITT: Here, I'll show you a picture of Pop and Mom. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, okay. 




