SALLY VIOLA CHAPMAN INTERVIEW

[BEGIN SIDE 1] 

Maxwell: This is Carol Maxwell. [Bob Coody operates the camera.] It's January 26, 2000. We're at 616 South O'Leary, and I'm going to be interviewing Miss Sally V. Chapman. Do you want to say your name, even though I just said it? 

Chapman: (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Is it really Sally V., or is that a nickname? 

Chapman: Sally V. Chapman. 

Maxwell: What's the V. for? 

Chapman: Viola. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's nice. Where were you born? 

Chapman: In <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: Where? 

Chapman: <Carthage Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: Oh! a lot of people here came from there, didn't they? (no audible response) What year was that? 

Chapman: Nineteen twenty-two. 

Maxwell: What was it like there when you grew up? 

Chapman: I wasn't raised around there too much. I was off and in and out, after I got up and grown. 

Maxwell: Where were you raised? 

Chapman: I was raised in <Carthage>. 

Maxwell: And then where'd you go? 

Chapman: I left there and went to <Louisiana> -<Alexandria Louisiana> with my husband. 

Maxwell: Was that a pretty big city at that time? 

Chapman: <Carthage>, no that was a sawmill job. 

Maxwell: Alexandria? 

Chapman: No, Alexandria was a town. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. Was it a sawmill town? 

Chapman: No, it was big nice town. That where all the soldiers used to come, to Alexandria when they at soldiers' camp. 

Maxwell: How'd you come to go to Alexander? 

Chapman: Well, I left <Mississippi> with my husband, and then I stayed there a while 'til he sent at me to come out here. 

Maxwell: How did you meet him? 

Chapman: In <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: How'd you meet him? 

Chapman: How did I meet him? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Chapman: Oh, I was a very young lady, you know -he was my boyfriend. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Did he live in the same town? 

Chapman: No, he came from -his home was in Alexandria, and he came to <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: Was he working there? 

Chapman: Yes, he was working there. He got him a job. He's a top-loader on the train -loading logs on the train. 

Maxwell: Oh, because it was a logging town there -<Carthage> was? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: How old were you when you met him? 

Chapman: Sixteen. 

Maxwell: Just for historical purposes, can you tell me what your parents' names were? 

Chapman: My mother was named Sally Rawls [phonetic spelling], and my father was named Nughia Rawls. 

Maxwell: And where did they come from? 

Chapman: <Brandon Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: Both of 'em? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Did you have brothers and sisters? 

Chapman: Yes, I had two brothers and one sister. She lives out here in <Arizona>. You know Anna T.? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah! 

Chapman: That's my sister. That's my baby sister. 

Maxwell: Okay, I didn't know she was your sister. 

Chapman: And I had a brother, he passed away in <Tennessee>. And then I got one livin' in <Chicago>. 

Maxwell: And what were their names? 

Chapman: His name, the one in <Chicago>, is named Harry Lee Rawls. And my brother was named after my father, Nughia Rawls. 

Maxwell: How do you spell that? 

Chapman: N-U-G-H-I-A, Nughia. 

Maxwell: Huh, never heard that name. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, he was named Nughia. 

Maxwell: Old-fashioned name, I guess. 

Chapman: I guess so, I don't know. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Did you go to school there in <Carthage>? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: How much school did you go to? 

Chapman: I went 'til I got to the tenth grade. 

Maxwell: What was that like there? Was that unusual or common? 

Chapman: I went to school in <Carthage> a while then my mother moved to Cannon Mississippi, and I went to high school there in Cannon. 

Maxwell: Was that common, for folks to go to school? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: To high school and all that back then? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Why'd you stop at tenth grade? 

Chapman: Because after my father got killed I helped my mother–I worked for peoples. 

Maxwell: What kind of work did you do then? 

Chapman: I was a babysitter. 

Maxwell: Then what happened? 

Chapman: Then, at that time, I got married. Then I went to Alexandria. 

Maxwell: I'm sorry, was your father killed at work? 

Chapman: Yes, he was sawin' logs and got killed. 

Maxwell: Oh, boy. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, in 1936. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that's a dangerous job. 

Chapman: Yes 

Maxwell: So in 1936 your father was killed. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: And what year did you get married? 

Chapman: I got married in.... In 1937, I think it was. 

Maxwell: Oh, so pretty soon after that. Okay. And tell me your husband's name. 

Chapman: Lloyd Chapman. 

Maxwell: You married in 1937 and you went to Alexandria? And then what happened there? 

Chapman: I stayed there 'til he sent and got me here. 

Maxwell: Oh, he came out here? 

Chapman: No, he sent after me to come out here on the train. 

Maxwell: But he came here before you? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How did he come to <Flagstaff>? 

Chapman: Well, they sent for him to come out here and work. 

Maxwell: Who did? 

Chapman: His company. The company he worked was Saginaw. They sent for him to come out here and go to work. 

Maxwell: He was working for Saginaw in.... 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh, Saginaw was back there in <Mississippi>, too? 

Chapman: No, Saginaw Mill was here in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: But how did they know about your husband? 

Chapman: Some friends of his was stayin' out here and knowed he was a top loader and they told him-- the boss man– [who] sent back there and got him. 

Maxwell: So do you remember who that was, by any chance -who those friends were? 

Chapman: Alvin Sims and Casey Cheets [phonetic spellings]. 

Maxwell: The Sims are still here, aren't they? Aren't there some Sims around? 

Chapman: There's some Sims here, but they weren't no relation. 

Maxwell: Oh, different Sims. Okay. And so they were workin' for Saginaw? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: And what year was that, do you remember? 

Chapman: When my husband came out here? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Chapman: About the last of 1944. 

Maxwell: Wow, you're good with years! A lot of people can't remember years. (narrator chuckles) So he came out in 1944 by himself. 

Chapman: Yeah, the last part of 1944. 

Maxwell: Do you remember how he got here? 

Chapman: They drove. They come and got him....Alvin Sim had a car, and they come and got my husband. 

Maxwell: So actually drove out there. Just him, or some other guys, too? 

Chapman: Just him. 

Maxwell: Huh! they must have thought a lot of him. 

Chapman: They did 'cause he could work good. 

Maxwell: What's a top-loader do? 

Chapman: They load the logs up on some beds for the train. Haven't you seen log trains? 

Maxwell: Yeah, where the things stick up, and all the logs .... 

Chapman: Yeah, the logs on. That's what he did. 

Maxwell: Just puts it on top of those train cars? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. He worked with a whatchacallit -top-loader -something like that. 

Maxwell: Like a crane? 

Chapman: Yeah, somethin' like that, liftin' logs up and set 'em way up there on top, 'til they load 'em up, you know. 

Maxwell: So they came out and got him. How long was he here before you came? 

Chapman: Oh, he was here about ... three or four months. 

Maxwell: What did you do while he was gone? 

Chapman: I stayed there with his mother in Alexandria. 

Maxwell: I was thinking you might have had family there you could stay with. How was that? What was that like? 

Chapman: It was nice. 

Maxwell: Did you have any kids by then? 

Chapman: I had a daughter. She passed away in 1986. 

Maxwell: Was she just a baby then? 

Chapman: No, she got grown out here. She got grown. That's Ray Jean. 

Maxwell: I mean, was she a baby then when you were there? 

Chapman: Oh, yes, she was a baby. 

Maxwell: Just an arm baby? 

Chapman: No, she was a big girl. 

Maxwell: Five, six? 

Chapman: About seven or eight. 

Maxwell: So the two of you stayed with your mother-in-law? (no audible response) And then how did you come out here? 

Chapman: I came out here on the train. 

Maxwell: What’d you think of that? 

Chapman: I liked it. 

Maxwell: What'd you think about coming out here? 

Chapman: Well, when I first got out here, I said I wasn't gonna stay here, 'cause it wasn't nothin' but.... You know, all these back here (points) wasn’t there. That's all that none of this was back here, you know. 

Maxwell: None of the buildings? 

Chapman: What building? This house? 

Maxwell: None of these buildings were here? 

Chapman: No. None of these on this side. And that street, when I come here wasn't nothin' but a dirt road. 

Maxwell: You didn't like that? 

Chapman: No. But I'm still here, I stayed here. After my husband stayed out here. I told him I wasn't gonna stay here, I was goin' back home with my mama. (laughs) 

Maxwell: So what did he say? 

Chapman: He didn't say nothin'. 

Maxwell: How come you stayed? 

Chapman: 'Cause I loved my husband, and I just stayed with him. (chuckles) Stayed right here with him 'til he passed away. 

Maxwell: Well, what did you think when those guys wrote to him and told him to come out so far away? 

Chapman: I didn't think nothin'. 

Maxwell: What did you think when you knew you were gonna leave there? 

Chapman: I was glad when he sent after me, but it was all right. 

Maxwell: But when you saw it you didn't like it? 

Chapman: I first came out here, I didn't like it. It was snowin' so much. It snowed. It rained. It rained every day for a while. Then it went to snow. I said I wasn't gonna stay here in <Flagstaff> -I've been here ever since. (laughter) 

Maxwell: So what month was it, do you remember, when you came? 

Chapman: I think it was in–I don’t know-- August or October, one of ‘em. In August, I think, when I came here. 

Maxwell: Late summer like? 

Chapman: Yeah. It rained, rained, rained, every day, for a while. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I've heard people say it snowed a lot more back then too. 

Chapman: Yes, it did, it snowed a lots at that time. (to Bob) You was here? 

Bob: Uh-huh 

Maxwell: Yeah, ever since I came, it's not been that snowy. 

Chapman: It’s about the nicest weather I've seen since I've been here in <Flagstaff> now. Right? 

Bob: It's pretty amazing. 

Maxwell: Hm. 

Chapman: It should be snow out there now. 

Maxwell: Snowed at my house this morning. 

Chapman: Oh, it did?! 

Maxwell: Yeah, it got all white. Ice storm on the trees. 

Chapman: When it do snow, I think it's gonna be rough. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I think so too. Probably get warm and then too cold. But tell me what it looked like when you got off the train. 

Chapman: It just looked like a (chuckles) ol' place to me, but I got off. I got off the train right up there. They done remodeled it all now. 

Maxwell: Where they've got that visitors center now? 

Chapman: Yeah. They done remodeled it. 

Maxwell: That's where you got off the train with your daughter? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, I was on the train with my daughter and a lot of soldiers. I was on the train with soldiers going back to the camp. 

Maxwell: How did they treat you on the train? 

Chapman: They treated me real nice. 

Maxwell: Did they? 

Chapman: Real nice. 

Maxwell: What did they do? Tell me about that. 

Chapman: Just treated me nice, me and my daughter, my baby. One of 'em fell in love with my baby, so he held her all the way to <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: Were they Black and white soldiers? 

Chapman: Most all I see were Black ones on the train. 

Maxwell: Oh, really?! Huh. 

Chapman: I think they was coming from -I forget the camp out there from Alexandria. They had about a couple a camps out from Alexandria. 

Maxwell: So there was a camp there in Alexandria? 

Chapman: Two camps out from Alexandria. 

Maxwell: So they had a lot of troops on the train out here? 

Chapman: Oh, yes. 

Maxwell: So that's nice of them, that they would treat the baby good. 

Chapman: Treated me nice too. 

Maxwell: Anything you remember about that trip? 

Chapman: No, not too much. Just like now, I could listen right now, and tomorrow I be done forgot it. Things like that just pass by. 

Maxwell: Do you remember about how many other families were African American here in <Flagstaff> when you got here? 

Chapman: No. Wasn't too many, but I don't know how many it was. Wasn't too many here when I came. 

Maxwell: Do you have a sense of it being just a few, a small number of families? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I actually have gone through the census tracts. I haven't been able to find the figure for <Flagstaff> in 1940, but in 1950, after all the people had come who came in the forties, it was just 677, or 667. 

Chapman: In the cemetery right up there where the church was, right up there on the hill. Well, there used to be a big cemetery right there, and I lived in that first house. My auntie was stayin', and they was stayin' in Bellemont, and so they house was empty and they let me and my husband stay there 'til I got me a house. 

Maxwell: Who was that? Who owned the house? 

Chapman: My husband's auntie. 

Maxwell: They let him? 

Chapman: Let us stay there. They stayed in Bellemont, my uncle, workin' in Bellemont. 

Maxwell: Oh, I see. You auntie's the one who owned the house, and they were working in Bellemont. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Did they work for the military there in Bellemont? 

Chapman: I don't know what Uncle Clyde was workin' for. He was workin’ in Bellemont. They were stayin' down there too. 

Maxwell: And so you stayed in their house? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, when I first come to <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: And your daughter? 

Chapman: Yeah, my daughter and my husband. 

Maxwell: Anybody else besides you and your daughter and your husband? 

Chapman: Unt-uh, not then. 

Maxwell: Then what happened? 

Chapman: Honey, so much done happen since I been here, I can't tell you. Shoot! (laughter) So much done happened since I've been here, and I can't tell you. 

Maxwell: Well, but I mean, right then. You came and you stayed in that house for a while. How long did you stay there? 

Chapman: I don't know. I stayed there 'til I moved over here at this house (points) across the track over in them -we called it the big house, the red house, big, red house. They done tore it down now, across the track. I moved over there. 

Maxwell: Over on the north side, huh? 

Chapman: Right over there from that (inaudible). 

Maxwell: Did you stay there with your kids? 

Chapman: I stayed there a long time, long time. And then my husband moved up on 'Frisco at a place up there used to called Charlie Scoto's. 

Maxwell: That sounds familiar. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, he had a big place there. We moved up there, into one of his apartments. Tell you I been here... (pause) 

Maxwell: Did you work when you first came here? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: Right away? Or did it take a while? 

Chapman: When I first come here I was takin' in washing and ironing. A friend of mine -my husband stayed down -they stayed at Saginaw, and they come to town every weekend. And I went in they room and I thought I was gettin' his clothes, 'cause he's a small guy, you know. And I was gettin' another friend who come out here with him, gettin' his clothes too. And I did some washin' and ironin', and I washed his clothes where I thought I was washin' my husband's clothes. And so I did all that and I did his ironing, you know–I could wash and iron real good. And so he went to this filling station right down there on Santa Fe -used to be a Texaco station there a long time ago -and he went down there and this woman said, "What laundry do you put your clothes in?" He said, "I don't. A friend of mine did it." Said, "Really, can I get her to do some washing and ironing?" So he come back and he asked me, did I want to take in washing and ironing? I said yes! I wasn’t doin’ nothin’. Oh, so Mrs. ______ told me I could use her washing machine. I washed and ironed them clothes fairly long 'til I went to workin' for the Chinaman down here now. 

Maxwell: That restaurant? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, Chinaman. Used to be Al and..... Two brothers used to run it, Al and Albert. And I went to washing dishes there. From there to some other places, washing dishes over there, to maid, you know. 

Maxwell: Why'd you choose to go to the washing dishes instead of the laundry? 

Chapman: Keep dirty laundry. I didn't work in the laundry. I did it at home. 

Maxwell: Yeah, but why did you stop washing clothes and start washing dishes? 

Chapman: I went to washing with a friend of mine over here, Ollie Williams, you know her? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Chapman: She and I used to wash dishes together. So one day at her school she got me a job. And I went up to there to washing dishes. 

Maxwell: Did you like it better than the clothes? 

Chapman: Oh, yes. 

Maxwell: Why? 

Chapman: It was easier to wash dishes than to wash the clothes and iron 'em. And I just went to doin' that. 

Maxwell: Was it something you could do with other people too? 

Chapman: What? 

Maxwell: When you washed dishes, were you alone, or did you do it with other people? 

Chapman: Just Ollie and I. 

Maxwell: Is it Ollie Mae? 

Chapman: Ollie Mae Williams. 

Maxwell: And so you worked in the different restaurants, washing dishes? 

Chapman: No, we worked right there together. 

Maxwell: Oh, in the same one. 

Chapman: For the Chinamans. 

Maxwell: How long did you work for him? Do you remember when you started that? 

Chapman: No, I don't know when I started, and I don't know how long I worked there. I forgot. 

Maxwell: In the forties? 

Chapman: Might have been in the fifties. It was in the forties when I quit washing dishes. 

Maxwell: Okay, when you quit washing dishes, that was in the forties? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Okay, and then what did you do when you quit washing dishes? 

Chapman: I went to the motel doing beds, working at the motel. Then from the motel ‘til my husband got that business up here in <Flagstaff>, and I went to workin’ with my husband. 

Maxwell: Which business was that? 

Chapman: Up there at the El Rancho Grande. 

Maxwell: Oh, he got that. That was his first business? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. And he was the first Black man runnin' a business of his own in <Flagstaff> -or bought a business. 

Maxwell: Really?! 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Didn't you have a pretty special license, too? 

Chapman: Yeah, I had what you call a number six. That's where you serve everything. You can sell bottles of gold. 

Maxwell: Yeah, and they don't issue those anymore, do they? 

Chapman: I really don't know. 

Maxwell: I've been told that yours was the last one of its kind. You had it because you had had it a long time. 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: They didn't issue any more. Do you remember when he started that business? 

Chapman: Honey, I done forgot what year he went in business. It was a long time before he got his license, I know. Jack Grays [phonetic spelling], the lawyer that used to be here, Jack Grays, he helped him get the license. Or he got the license and he bought the license from another person, and it was hard for him to get it renewed over to his name. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Chapman: I really don't know. We had to go to <Phoenix> I don’t know how many times. Our lawyer would take us down there. Did you ever know Jack Grays? 

Bob: No, I never did. 

Chapman: You didn't? That was a good lawyer. Yes, he was a good lawyer. 

Maxwell: Was this a matter of prejudice, do you think? 

Chapman: Yeah, there was prejudice when I first come in <Flagstaff>, 'cause Jack Grays was takin' me to this bar up here, across from -66 Bar -used to be.... 

Bob: Joe's Place. 

Chapman: Not Joe's Place. 

Bob: The Rose Tree? 

Chapman: No, this other one where you got this here. It used to be.... 

Bob: That one they tore down? 

Chapman: No, they ain't tore it down. It used to be the Silas Bar -I think Silas Bar [phonetic spelling]. Well, at that time, they wasn’t lettin’ peoples in the bars, you know. And so Jack Grays, he says “Come on, let’s have a beer.” I liked beer-- I said, "Okay." We went there to get a beer, so one of the waitress told him, "We can serve you, but we can't serve her." He said, "Well, if you can't serve her, you can't serve me." And so we left and we come on down to El Rancho Grande, George Nackard and Joe Griego were runnin' that place then. We come on down there, that's where we got drinks. 

Maxwell: And George Nackard and Joe Griego owned it at that time? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: And they would serve you? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How come the other place wouldn't? 

Chapman: They would serve all Blacks. 

Maxwell: All people? 

Chapman: All kinds. They could go in there. 

Maxwell: Why were they different? 

Chapman: I don't know. It used to be that way a long time ago -they didn't want to serve Blacks. 

Maxwell: How could that other place get away with not serving you? 

Chapman: I don't know how they get that way. (someone enters, greetings exchanged) 

Maxwell: So it wasn't like it was a law or something -this other place just didn't.... 

Chapman: No, they just didn't want Blacks in the place at that time. 

Maxwell: And they could get away with that? 

Chapman: They did get away with it. 

Maxwell: Did anybody tried to challenge that? 

Chapman: I don't guess they did. I guess that nobody cared. 

Maxwell: So they didn't want to go there anyway? 

Chapman: They didn't go there. Well, colored didn't go there noway. 

Maxwell: Were other places like that, segregated like that? 

Chapman: I didn't go in no place, but that place with Jack Grays at that time. 

Maxwell: Like restaurants? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, at that time. But when we went to <Phoenix> to go eat and drink, they served everybody. 

Maxwell: So it wasn't a law that they couldn't serve you -it was just their own.... 

Chapman: No, I guess. I don't know. It's just the owner, I guess. 

Maxwell: But in <Phoenix> it was more open? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: But how about the restaurants? Would they serve you in the restaurants? 

Chapman: Where? 

Maxwell: Here in <Flagstaff>? 

Chapman: I never did go to none of 'em to eat. 

Maxwell: Oh, so it didn't come up. (no audible response) I've had people tell me that there was a sheriff who wouldn't allow Blacks in the restaurants, even though it was perfectly legal. Other people said they didn't think that was true. 

Chapman: I really don't know 'cause I didn't go. (discussion of background sound picking up on tape) 

Maxwell: So your husband and you and the lawyer worked hard to get that license transferred over? 

Chapman: My husband and the lawyer worked hard to get the license. 

Maxwell: You weren't particularly involved in that? 

Chapman: Well, the only time I got 'em in my name, after my husband passed. It wasn't hard then. 

Maxwell: And when did he pass? 

Chapman: (calls to other woman) In 1972. 

Maxwell: So you ran the business after that? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. And then my daughter and her husband come and helped me along after he got sick. We run it together. 

Maxwell: (inaudible)? 

Chapman: No, my daughter and her husband. My daughter and her husband. 

Maxwell: And what was your daughter's name? 

Chapman: Corrine. You know Carlton, don't ya'? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Chapman: That's his wife. (pause) Pictures up there of all of my grandchildrens. 

Maxwell: I'll be! (narrator chuckles) You've got a lot of 'em. 

Chapman: Nine grandchildren and about twenty-some great-grand, and then about two great-great-grands. 

Maxwell: Wow. Well, did he start his business in El Rancho Grande, or did it start somewhere else and move to there? 

Chapman: No, he started it right there at the El Rancho Grande. 

Maxwell: So he got it from George Nackard and Mr. Griego? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: It was pretty big then, wasn't it? 

Chapman: Yes. Great big place. I wish I had the picture -I'd show it to you. My granddaughter got a picture of it. It's a great big building, had a downstairs and upstairs. 

Maxwell: I heard it had the swinging doors, bat-wing doors. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I heard it was a really nice place to go. 

Chapman: It was all right to go. 

Maxwell: You had dancing? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: Upstairs, dancing? And then pool tables and stuff upstairs? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: And then it was a bar downstairs? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I wish we had a picture of it. 

Chapman: All they had to get their booze and come up the steps to the pool hall, we called it. 

Maxwell: It must have been quite a social center 

Chapman: It was nice. We used to have dances there in the bar. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Was it just the Black folks who came to it? Or was it everybody? 

Chapman: Everybody wanted to come. That's who come. 

Maxwell: So it was mixed? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, anybody that wanted to come. Now since I've been in business, we never did have 'em, and you can't come in. Everybody come there. 

Maxwell: What about in the beginning? What was it like when your husband was in charge? Did people give him a hard time? 

Chapman: Well, most any bar you have, you have hard times in some of ‘em. No, didn't give him a hard time. You know there’s people that goin’ act up in any bar you go in. 

Maxwell: But other businessmen? He didn't run into trouble being the first Black bar owner? 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: So the town accepted this? 

Chapman: I guess so–he got his license. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Eventually....What made him want to do that? How'd he get that idea in his head? 

Chapman: Who? 

Maxwell: Your husband. 

Chapman: I don't know. Now, you ask me something I don’t know now. When he first started out work, runnin' a pool hall upstairs for George Nackard. And when he went out of business, he turned the business over to him, you know, made him work with the business 'til he got him some license. 

Maxwell: So George went out of business? 

Chapman: Only at the Rancho. 

Maxwell: Do you know why? 

Chapman: No, I don't know why. 

Maxwell: He just get interested in something else, or was he failing? 

Chapman: I guess he got interested in something else. 

Maxwell: So it wasn't like his business was failing and he turned it over? 

Chapman: Unt-uh. (sounds of working with recording equipment) 

Maxwell: So you went from working in the restaurants, quit washing the dishes, to working with your husband? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: What did you do for your husband? 

Chapman: I tended bar, waited on customers. 

Maxwell: What was that like? 

Chapman: It was all right. 

Maxwell: How did people treat you? 

Chapman: They treat me nice. 

Maxwell: So it wasn't like you were a waitress and people were bothering you? 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: They respected you? 

Chapman: Yes, they did. 

Maxwell: Did you have more children? 

Chapman: No. 

Maxwell: Just the one daughter? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: And from her, all the grandchildren? 

Chapman: Yeah, from her all these grandchildren and great-grandchildren, I got. I just only had one child. 

Maxwell: Is it possible to take a photograph? Would you want to include that? 

Chapman: What? 

Maxwell: The photograph of the family pictures. 

Chapman: I don't care, if you want to. 

Bob: Mind if I pan across? 

Chapman: You want to see my grandchildren? 

Maxwell: Yes. 

Chapman: All them -let me see who-all up there. 

Maxwell: Can you name everybody? Start right there. 

Chapman: That's Carlton right there. And there's Corrine. And that's Dotty Anne right there. That's Cecile and Carlton, Jr., Danny, Debbie Ann, Carma. [all phonetic spellings] That's Carlton up there again. I don't know who behind that picture. You’re in the way of the light. Move that light. Switch that light over there on. 

Maxwell: Looks like Corrine. 

Chapman: That's Corrine, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Who's this one? 

Chapman: I can't see from here. 

Maxwell: It's a baby, little girl. 

Chapman: Can it come down. That's Corrine great-grandchild. That's one of Corrine's grandchildren, so that's my great-grandchild. 

Maxwell: What's her name? 

Chapman: Corrine. 

Maxwell: Oh! she's a Corrine too? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. (pause) That's the ones who I got here, but I got some ain’t up there. I got two that ain’t up there–that’s Donna Gail [phonetic spelling] and Crystal. 

Maxwell: Were there other Black folks who owned different kinds of businesses that you recall? Mr. Hickman [phonetic spelling] had a business, didn't he? 

Chapman: Yeah, he worked on (inaudible). I never did go around him. 

Maxwell: Anybody else you can think of in the community who had a business? 

Chapman: Pearl Polk [phonetic spelling], she had a fountain. 

Maxwell: A fountain, like ice cream? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Soda and all that? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh! What was the name of that, do you remember? 

Chapman: Pearl. She was named Pearl Polk. 

Maxwell: Do you remember the name of her business? (no audible response) Was it uptown here? 

Chapman: Right across the street from the Grande, over at that café. 

Maxwell: Oh, where Bonnie has the restaurant now? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. 

Chapman: Where Bonnie had a restaurant. She out of it. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's right. Boy, things have changed a lot this past year. Did you have any other businesses? 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: I thought someone said you had a restaurant at one point. 

Chapman: I used to run the restaurant over there where Bonnie stayed. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. What kind of food did you serve? 

Chapman: I sold everything. 

Maxwell: Like? 

Chapman: Soul food. 

Maxwell: Like cornbread and field peas and greens? 

Chapman: Greens, neckbones, fish. 

Maxwell: Fried fish? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. Chicken. 

Maxwell: Barbecue at all? 

Chapman: Yeah, we barbecued ribs and had barbecued ribs. 

Maxwell: How'd you fix the chicken? 

Chapman: Well, I fried the chicken. 

Maxwell: So did you have a menu, or did you cook what you felt like cooking? 

Chapman: I just cooked what I had. Yeah, I had a menu and you put ‘em out but I'd be cookin' for that day. 

Maxwell: Okay, so one day you would cook one thing, and the next day you'd cook another thing, so people could keep comin' back and they'd get different food that way. I think that's a good way to have a restaurant! 

Chapman: I cook, I had a restaurant. I had two restaurants. 

Maxwell: What was the other one? 

Chapman: I let my sister run one. We used to call it The Hole in the Wall. 

Maxwell: Where was that? 

Chapman: Right up there where they set on the bicycle, right there on the corner, over San 'Frisco. 

Maxwell: By Western Liquor? 

Chapman: You know, it used to be a little ol' place there that just had a window, you know. 

Maxwell: Yeah, you go straight back in. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: It's by that Morning Glory Restaurant? 

Chapman: It's just right up the street, right across the street. 

Maxwell: Yeah, up the street from the Grande and on the other side? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Okay, but not across the tracks. 

Chapman: We used to call it The Hole in the Wall. 

Maxwell: That's a good name for that. 

Chapman: Well, see, it was a little small place. 

Maxwell: What was that restaurant like? 

Chapman: It was all right. You could come there and eat. 

Maxwell: Same kind of food? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: And you had your sister run that one? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: So you had two restaurants and a bar that your family owned? That's quite a bit! 

Chapman: Yeah, not to have nothin’ now! Worked at that time, too. 

Maxwell: Was that a good income from those three, at that time? 

Chapman: Made a livin'. 

Maxwell: Not a fortune, but a living? 

Chapman: Not a fortune. 

Maxwell: Do you feel like you don't have anything now? 

Chapman: Like what? 

Maxwell: You said it was a lot not to have anything now. You mean not to have any businesses now? 

Chapman: No, I don't want no business now, I'm not able to work now, runnin' no business. 

Maxwell: Did you like it back then? 

Chapman: Yeah, I was young, I didn't mind working then. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: I've heard that you had a place out -I can't remember the name of it -but it was where a lot of people stayed who were sort of new, a lot of the Indians were over there that worked at the mill, over at Butler a bit, where you put people up when they first came–like a boarding house? 

Chapman: That was where I stayed. We used to call it the big house, folks called it the big house. And then I used to have people boarded there, and I cooked for them. 

Maxwell: You cooked for them too? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. Before I went in workin' for myself. I was just stayin' at home. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay, that was before you started doing the shirts and the washing over there. After that? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You stayed in the big house and you had boarders come in? 

Chapman: Sure. 

Maxwell: Were they people new to town? 

Chapman: Yeah, different people. You know, they wouldn't have no money to stay with. We had this big house had beds and things upstairs. I used to rent to.... (someone enters, side conversation) 

Bob: Tell us about the cemetery that was up here. 

Chapman: I don't know nothing about it, but it was just a cemetery. You know when the war start, they dug up them graves. I guess they took 'em from there over here. (points) 

Bob: So they moved ‘em. 

Chapman: Yeah, they moved them graves was up there. I could look out my back door and look at 'em. 

Maxwell: That'd be a strange sight. 

Chapman: Yeah, it was scary, too. (laughter) 

Maxwell: Well, I guess I.... Mr. Brooks [phonetic spelling]? Somebody was telling me that you were an important part of how people could move here because you had that boarding house, and that people were coming from out of state -maybe a husband coming ahead, like yours did -and they could come and stay in your boarding house and work at the mill. 

Chapman: I didn't have no boarding house, I just had rooms I'd rent -you know, let people stay in there, and they worked at the mill, and I used to fix they lunch for them. 

Maxwell: Maybe Miss Hickman's uncle did that too, for a while. 

Chapman: Hm? 

Maxwell: I think Miss Hickman's uncle did that, too. I don't remember his name. I think they ran a house, too, and she cooked for 'em. 

Chapman: That was Miss Hickman's godmother. That’s the house I first stayed here, when I come to <Flagstaff>. (background noise) 

Maxwell: Oh, really?! So your auntie was her godmother? 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's who you stayed before ... (inaudible) 

Chapman: Uh-huh, that's where I started washin' the clothes. (sounds of someone entering or leaving) That was her godmother who stayed there. I stayed with Miss Nancy. 

Maxwell: Nancy? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, she was named Nancy. 

Maxwell: I wonder how she .... Did her godmother come from where she used to live when she was a kid? 

Chapman: I don't know. 

Maxwell: She must have, to be her godmother. 

Chapman: I reckon she come from <Louisiana>. Most people come from <Louisiana> and <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: Yeah. Only one person I've talked to didn't come from <Louisiana> and <Mississippi>, and they came from <Oklahoma>. It was Okie. 

Chapman: Oh, Okie over there? (chuckles) 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

Chapman: Yeah, he come from <Oklahoma>. He come here since I was here. Lots of ‘em came here since I came. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I think so. 

Chapman: Lots of ‘em come here since I been here. Yeah, lots of 'em come here and lots of ‘em died since I been here. Yeah, lots of 'em passed away. All them old guys I was talkin' about they passed away. 

Maxwell: What was it like for you being a young woman in the South? 

Chapman: (chuckles) ‘Bout like you when you’s a young woman out here. (laughs heartily) What was it like for you to be a young woman? 

Maxwell: I'll tell you why.... 

Chapman: Well, in the South, all right. 

Maxwell: It was okay? 

Chapman: It was all right with me ‘cause I didn't bother nobody, didn't nobody bother me. 

Maxwell: I'll tell you why I ask. Two of the men I talked to who came from the South, both of 'em said they got along, their family didn't have any problems, but it was still frightening, because white people lynched [Black] people. (phone rings) There was really bad stuff that went on. And they said, I remember, it might have been Mack Jones. I think it was Mack Jones who said that even though his family had no problems, and they got along well, and he did well. 

Chapman: Well, I never did hear nothin' about my people having problems. 

Maxwell: But he said that he knew that if a Black person took it into their head, they could shoot 'em dead on the street and they couldn’t do anything. And there was an underlying fear that he lived with. And that when he came here, he didn't have that fear, 'cause that wasn't the way it was. And I read things, people's biographies and so on, and I know some women got really badly harassed by white men. And I didn't know if you had any of that kind of experience. 

Chapman: No, I didn't have no kind of trouble like that ‘cause I ain’t do one thing. There was a white girl I grew up with, we'd be together all the time. She'd come home, come to my mother's house. So she got married, and she wanted me to call her Miss Beatrice. And I told her no, I was older than she was, and I wasn't gonna call her no "Miss Beatrice." And I didn't. (laughter) Wanted me to call her "Miss"! (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Good for you! 

Chapman: I said, "No, I'm older than you and now you don't call me 'Miss,' I ain't callin' you no Miss." 

Maxwell: How'd she take that? 

Chapman: She didn't say nothin', and I didn't call her no Miss either. (laughter) If she "Miss"ed me, I'd put my fist upside her head! (laughter) 

Maxwell: Kind of arrogant. 

Chapman: Didn't bother me. And so I guess my parents, they got along all right. I didn't ever hear 'em sayin’ nothin’ about it. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that's the thing is it's uneven. 

Chapman: Some people got along real good, and some of 'em didn't. 

Maxwell: Yeah. I guess some people kind of had a good life, and peaceful, and for other people it was.... 

Chapman: It's just what you make out of it, you know. If you’re good or bad. 

Maxwell: Or if you're in the wrong place at the wrong time. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Get in the way of somebody who's crazy. 

Chapman: I remember, since I've been out here, I went back south, went down south, and I went out to a place called Farm Haven, and I knowed a lot of teachers out there, you know. And these guys, they'd be sittin' right under the tree, goin' in the place, gettin' a drink and havin’ to go back outside. So I know how that is, so I went and got 'em a whole case of beer–I had a little money then-- I went and bought a whole case of beer, and I bought 'em some liquor out the store to drink, out of the cafe. And so I went to the front and he said, "Oh, no, no, no, you can't go in that door. You gotta go around to the back." I didn't pay no attention, I went right on in the front, and they served me like I was a lady there, and thanked me for coming, told me "Come back again." (laughter) 

Maxwell: That's amazing. 

Chapman: They treat me nice. And then I been goin' back down there off and on, down back down there. They treat me nice since I been goin' back down. I ain't never had no trouble out of people down there. 

Maxwell: Why do you think that is? 

Chapman: I don't know. I reckon different ones have trouble, you know. 

Maxwell: Maybe they can see that you expect to be treated right. 

Chapman: I ain't never had no trouble. And I've been leavin' here, goin' down there every year, until these last two or three years. 

Maxwell: That's neat. Maybe just since you expect to be treated right, people naturally treat you right. Something like that? 

Chapman: I’ve no idea. Go down there and drive your car up to a gas station, and they'll put gas in your car now for you. 

Maxwell: Been a long time. (laughs) 

Chapman: Yeah, they put gas in there and ask you, "Come back again." 

Maxwell: So it’s good. That's nice. So you didn't have a big change. 

Chapman: I ain't never had no trouble down there. 

Maxwell: So when you came here, that was not a big deal. 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: No big change in that way. 

Chapman: No. When I first come out here, they told me, "You can do this and do that, go anyplace." Went in that place, and they didn't serve me up there. What'd they call that place? I've been trying to call that place. It's (inaudible). It was the Old 66 Bar. Yeah, that was Old 66 Bar. Then it was Old 66 Bar, then that was Joe's Place. 

Maxwell: But that's that only place you've had trouble here? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How about with banks, and running your businesses? How were you treated then? 

Chapman: Treated me nice. I didn't have no banks. When I'd go in there to get somethin' (laughing while talking) I just get it and come on out. Nobody bothered me. And then my business, whenever I got somethin', I paid for it right there. 

Maxwell: So you financed it yourself? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You didn't go through a bank. 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: How about houses? When your husband started that business, where were you staying then? 

Chapman: I think I was stayin' up here at this house. But this wasn't the house -we took that old house down and built this house. We built this house. 

Maxwell: You bought the land here? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Did it have a house on it when you bought it? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: Do you remember who you bought it from? 

Chapman: No, I can't think of his name now. He was a Mexican. 

Maxwell: So it wasn't George Nackard? 

Chapman: No. 

Maxwell: I think he sold some houses, some land, to some of the people I've interviewed. 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: It was a Mexican man? 

Chapman: Yeah. I done forgot his name–I used to know his name.... 

Maxwell: Did you have to go through a bank to buy the house? 

Chapman: Paid so much down and I paid so much -paid so much down on it. 

Maxwell: And so much to him? (

Chapman: Uh-huh) Then you just paid the rest to him? 

Chapman: To who? 

Maxwell: The Mexican man? 

Chapman: Yeah, we paid him so much, and then paid so much. 

Maxwell: Real different. A little different than today, huh? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You hardly ever see that happening nowadays. Everybody has to go through a bank. It costs so much. So that's one of the differences, when you were first here, people couldn't do that. (Background noise) 

Chapman: You see we had to work for... my husband started savin’ his money (inaudible). 

Maxwell: Did he? (Background noise) 

Chapman: Uh-huh. He got paid this (inaudible) so much down on the house, and we paid him so much a month (inaudible). 

Maxwell: That's a big difference. If people could do that now, it'd be a lot easier to buy a house. What about churches? Did you belong to a church? 

Chapman: I belonged to Springhill Church down here. 

Maxwell: When did that form, do you remember? 

Chapman: When I joined the church here? 

Maxwell: Was it here before you? 

Chapman: Oh, that church? 

Maxwell: Yeah. 

Chapman: No. That church been built since I've been here. 

Maxwell: It's been here a long time? 

Chapman: No! that church hasn't been here too long. Springhill's been here.... 

Maxwell: Oh! Springhill, right down the road. 

Chapman: Yeah, right here, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Yeah, okay. When did they form? 

Chapman: I don't know what year they built that church. Well, at that time there wasn't nothin' down there. Wasn't nothin' on this side, just woods. 

Maxwell: Really? (

Chapman: Uh-huh.) So it's been here a while. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. I been here, all out there in East Flag, there wasn't nothin' but woods. (inaudible) over there in Brannen Homes, woods. 

Maxwell: Was it pretty? 

Chapman: What? 

Maxwell: The woods. 

Chapman: Yeah, trees is just all right like the woods is before you get out from here. 

Maxwell: Oh, not the great big huge trees, but the smaller trees? 

Chapman: I didn’t pay much attention. I know there wasn’t no houses there. (laughter) We come up that road up there (points) and turn and go back that way. 

Maxwell: And that was it, huh? Really different. Was the church the most important part of bringing people together here, do you think? 

Chapman: Honey, I really don't know. I really don't know. 

Maxwell: Did the people know each other anyway, even if they didn't have a church? 

Chapman: They had a church when I come here. They had First Baptist, but it was over there on [Highway] 66, and they moved it over here. They always had a church. 

Maxwell: Did you belong to First Baptist before? 

Chapman: No, I belong to Springhill. I used to belong to First Baptist in <Mississippi>, and I joined Springhill since I've been out here. 

Maxwell: What did you and your husband do for fun? 

Chapman: For fun?! We used to go out to dances and go to the bar and have a little drink and that’s all, come back home. 

Maxwell: So the church wasn't like a big center for social activity or anything like that? I know in some communities churches are kind of where people get together. And, you know, if they're going to do something, it's a gathering in the church, and that kind of thing. 

Chapman: People go to church, people go to church. And then they have gathering there, a meeting or something like that. Just go there together. 

Maxwell: Not like picnics and all that kind of thing? 

Chapman: No, they didn't like picnics -not the church. There wasn't no church liked no picnic. (laughter) 

Maxwell: You're lookin' at me like I'm crazy! 

Chapman: You're askin' me questions like your somethin’. (laughter) 

Maxwell: I'm sorry. 

Chapman: Girl, I went and got you! (laughter) 

Bob: Glad I'm not asking questions. 

Chapman: Ain't you tired of viewin' that? (laughter) 

Maxwell: Oh, we've never run out of questions! 

Chapman: Well, I hope you have -I have. 

Maxwell: You have? You've run out of answers? I guess I'm just trying to get a feel for what it was like, what made it possible for you to make a life here. And it sounds like you had relatives who helped you with the house that you stayed in. 

Chapman: Well, since I've been here, my sister used to work here, and then my daughter used to work with me, and her husband, after I got in the bar business. 

Maxwell: Do you know how your sister came to come out here? 

Chapman: Yes, I know how my sister came out here. She came out here in a car. 

Maxwell: But was it 'cause her husband got a job, or.... 

Chapman: She didn't have no husband, she ain't got no husband. 

Maxwell: Oh, she just up and came out here on her own, huh? 

Chapman: No, she come out here to live with me. 

Maxwell: Oh, to live 'cause you were here. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. After my mother passed, she come out here. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. But your brothers never came out here? 

Chapman: Both of my brothers done been out here, but they didn't stay -my brother what died in <Tennessee>, he used to stay here, and he used to work here. He used to work at that pizza place up there on the hill by Basha's. Used to be a pizza parlor up there -pizza, where they sell pizza. (

Maxwell: Uh-huh) Well, he used to work there. Then he went back down there and he took sick and died in <Tennessee>. 

Maxwell: Oh. Why did he leave, do you know? 

Chapman: Well, he just wanted to go back down there where he was livin'. 

Maxwell: And did your other brother come here? 

Chapman: Yeah, my brother was here about two, three months ago -come to see my sister when she was in the hospital. 

Maxwell: Came to visit? 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: But he didn't move here? 

Chapman: No. 

Maxwell: So at one point, three of the four of you were living here. 

Chapman: Yes, three of us stayed here in <Flagstaff> for a while. So I've been here longer than all of 'em. Then Annie T. came, and she been here quite a while. My brother, he came, he didn't stay here long. Stayed here long enough to work and make some money and got him a car and he left. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Huh. That's it, huh? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Your parents never came? 

Chapman: My mother did. She came out here twice since I've been out here, before she passed away. 

Maxwell: Just to visit? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Of course your dad passed on first. 

Chapman: My father, he got killed in a sawmill job. 

Maxwell: What's your favorite memory of being in <Flagstaff>? 

Chapman: What you mean, my favorite memory? 

Maxwell: Do you remember anything that happened in the past that was a favorite memory, or something you remember as good or fun or anything like that -something you'd like to tell your grandkids about. 

Chapman: Well, my grandkids? (laughs) Oh, well, when I first come-- my grandkids know about most everything I know about, but I liked it when I come here. 

Maxwell: Oh, did you? (someone enters, side conversation not transcribed) 

Maxwell: So there aren't any stories you want to tell other people's grandchildren that would be interesting, that haven't got their grandmothers to listen to? 

Chapman: Huh? 

Maxwell: Somebody that hasn't got a grandma to tell 'em stories. 

Chapman: If they ask me somethin', I know what I'd tell 'em. I don’t wanta just go talkin' 'bout ‘em. 

Maxwell: Okay, all right. I was just thinking there might have been something funny that happened, or just something, some story you remember from the past. You're just not gonna talk to me anymore, right? 

Chapman: I don't know nothin' else to say. I done told you all I know. 

Maxwell: That's okay, I'll turn this off. You win. 

Chapman: Look at it snowin' out there? 

Maxwell: Oh, my gosh! And I've gotta stay here until late tonight. 

Chapman: Where you stayin' now Carol? 

Maxwell: Out in Parks. 

Chapman: Oh, out there at Parks? 

Maxwell: Yeah. Northeast of Parks .... 

Chapman: Yeah, I know where Parks is. I used to have a friend stayed out there. 

Maxwell: I'm about four miles north of it, up into the prairie country there. 

Bob: Oh, Gordon Prairie? 

Maxwell: Yeah, Gordon Prairie. 

Chapman: Lots of people stay out there now around Parks. Used to didn't be there. I know one house, it was across the tracks and that was Bill Wright's house. He passed away and his wife passed away. I used to go out there and get eggs and brung him milk. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's what I brought into town to sell. 

Chapman: Hm? 

Maxwell: I brought eggs in and sold 'em today. 

Chapman: Oh, you got a place, you got chicken lay eggs? 

Maxwell: Yeah, I got ducks and geese. 

Chapman: Just ducks and geese? 

Maxwell: Yeah, I need to get some chickens. I had chickens, but somebody's dog killed 'em all. 

Chapman: Oh, shame. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah, I was so.... 

Chapman: I believe you told me that once before. 

Maxwell: I was really upset. 

Chapman: I know. 

Maxwell: I mean, I had a fence around 'em and everything, and you think.... You're supposed to take care of these animals and some dog gets in and just tears 'em to pieces. 

Chapman: Maybe an old wolf got in there too. 

Maxwell: It could have been a coyote or something like that. There were coyotes around then. They were howling in the morning terrible. 

Chapman: That's about what got in there. 

Bob: Could be feral humans, too. (laughter) 

Maxwell: No, this was animals. He really is crazy. (laughter) I just started selling my eggs though. I need to get some more. I like it, I like selling. I like the birds. I like bringing the eggs in and selling 'em. So I'll get some more this spring. I raised 'em all from day-old, you know. They're like little pets, so I hate to see 'em get killed. Anyway.... I'll do it again. So you used to go out there and get eggs, huh? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: In Parks? 

Chapman: In Parks, right across the track there. 

Maxwell: Where you get off and then go under the freeway and go across the track? 

Chapman: Yeah. Go over a road and then you turn to the left. His house was to the right. 

Maxwell: I know where you're talking about. I live the opposite way. If you get off the freeway, you go north. You go north about four miles, come back east ‘bout a mile, go up north another three miles, and then .... 

Chapman: Do you stay right there in that lake where they go fishin' at? 

Maxwell: Unt-uh. 

Chapman: You know where it's at though? 

Maxwell: I'm more this way from that. 

Chapman: You know where it's at? 

Maxwell: Kaibab? 

Chapman: No, used to call it Cat Hole, I think. We used to go fishin' there. They out there called it the Cat Hole. 

Maxwell: Oh! Maybe I don't know about it. 

Chapman: Out there at Parks. 

Maxwell: Out in Parks? 

Chapman: Out there at Parks, you turn at Bill’s and go down the road there.... 

Maxwell: Down Spring Valley Road? 

Chapman: Down something. 

Maxwell: Where you go down where most of the houses are now? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Spring Street. 

Chapman: Spring Street. See, they used to have another house way back up in there, woods there, off to side. Great big house. They used to pass that....we’d go out and catch them cats ....now they say they got nice croppers out there. 

Maxwell: Oh! I don't even know about it! I'll have to find out where that is. 

Chapman: A lot of people goin' fishin' from here, and I used to follow them. 

Maxwell: Mostly when I go fishing, I like to sit around and read a book. Let other people fish. (laughs) 

Chapman: When I go fishin', I be tryin' to catch some fish. (laughs) 

Maxwell: I like to catch 'em if they're biting. Then I don't want to stop. But when you just sit there and nothing bites, nothing bites, I get a book. (laughter) You like to fish? 

Chapman: Oh, I love to fish. Last year I didn't get a chance to fish. I was sick, you know, mostly in the hospital, and at the hospital. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. I feel it. Just my legs bother me. (inaudible) 

Maxwell: Was it the circulation? 

Chapman: In my leg. It’s like I get up here, and I have to balance myself up. I ain’t got no strength. 

Maxwell: Is it from circulation, the heart? (no audible response) Did you go out to Lake Mary, fish a lot? 

Chapman: Yeah. I know (inaudible), I stayed out there with my sister. But then she took sick and then I taken sick. I didn't have nobody to go fishin' with, and I just give it up. 

Maxwell: Yeah, it's more fun if you've got someone. 

Chapman: I usually carry her every time I go. 

Maxwell: Mr. John L. Williams is the only one who goes out by himself, I think. 

Chapman: He goes fishin' a lots too. And Okie too. 

Maxwell: Oh, they go together? 

Chapman: No, Okie goes too a lots. 

Maxwell: Goes by himself? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So I thought Mr. John L. was the only one who was out there by himself. 

Chapman: John L. Williams? 

Maxwell: Yeah, get in that little camper of his, and he's gone! (laughs) 

Chapman: Yeah, he go fishin'. His daughter mostly brought him down to the lakes, and he goes way off. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? 

Chapman: Yeah, he got (inaudible). 

Maxwell: Arthur Lloyd's [phonetic spelling] mother? 

Chapman: Not Eloise [phonetic spelling]? 

Maxwell: Okay. She's got another daughter? 

Chapman: Yes, stay right over here. (point) Stay over here in the brown home right there. You turn. They stay about the second or third house then you go. (points) 

Maxwell: Huh. I don't know them at all. Yeah, going out, I used to like to go -James and his friends would go out fishing, I'd go with them. That is so nice. And all the fights, all the "who's better than someone," all that goes away, and everybody's just fishing, sharin' their food. 

Chapman: Yes. 

Maxwell: It's nice. I like that. 

Bob: The way it should be. 

Maxwell: Yeah, it is. That's the way it should be. 

Chapman: I love to fish. You know Zeno [phonetic spelling], my grandchild? (

Maxwell: Uh-huh.) He loves to fish. I cooks chicken, fried chicken, has soda pop. Whatever he want to eat, we have that. We'll fish a while, then we'll go eat, go back to fishin'. 

Maxwell: That sounds good. 

Chapman: I really like to go fishin' with my grandchildren -them that go with me. 

Maxwell: I can imagine Zeno will go with you anytime. James and I took him fishing one time, and he was just.... He really wanted to fish -Zeno. James and I took Zeno. Who else did we take? It must have been Crystal. 

Chapman: Might have been Crystal. 

Maxwell: I'm thinking.... 

Chapman: Probably Zeno and Crystal. 

Maxwell: Probably Zeno and Crystal. Yeah, he was busy gettin' in trouble and wanted to do everything. (narrator chuckles) She was so upset with him! I think we took Robert. 

Chapman: Might have been Robert. Zeno and Robert. 

Maxwell: Do you get to go fishing with him very much? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. He was there before he went to goin’ to school-- plain bossy, "Grandmother, when are we goin' fishin'? Grandma, when you gonna take us fishin'? Grandma...." 

Maxwell: (laughs) Well, that's a good reason to be retired, so you can go fishin' with them. 

Chapman: But I haven't been feelin' good to go fishin' with nobody last year. I think I went down to Deer Farm one time, at that Deer Farm? Fished in that little lake over there a little, over there back in Deer Farm. 

Maxwell: They have many fish there? 

Chapman: Uh-huh, one time. 

Maxwell: Did people go fishing a lot in the past? 

Chapman: Yeah, peoples go fishin' lots. 

Maxwell: That's what I figured. 

Chapman: Some people go fishin' a lots. I used to go over there to Williams to fish. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Chapman: Well, I gonna catch fish! 

Maxwell: But I mean why not to Lake Mary? 

Chapman: I'll go to Lake Mary, go different places to fish. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. You've been fishing these places a lot of years then. 

Chapman: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You must know the best holes. 

Chapman: I don't know the best holes, I'll go to where they tell me the fish is bitin'. (laughter and pause) Carlton is supposed to be coming back in today. I’m going to tell him he brought that snow back here. He been down there in <Louisiana> for a month. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? Which Carlton? 

Chapman: My son. 

Maxwell: Your son, okay. (pause) Did you ever go hunting? 

Chapman: I think I went hunting one time with my husband and another guy. You know Clanisse [phonetic spelling], don't you? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Chapman: Well, her husband, Jack Peterson [phonetic spelling]. My husband bought me a rifle, and I went huntin' with them one time, one time. I said I wasn't goin' back huntin' no more–had to go and be peepin’ up under there seein’ if a rabbit under there. (laughter) 

Maxwell: You didn't like that? 

Chapman: Just walkin', and then nobody killed nothin', and I ain't been back. 

Maxwell: Just walked around, carryin' a gun all day, huh? 

Chapman: He bought me a rifle to use, too. 

Maxwell: He must have wanted you to do that. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, I wanted to go. I wanted to go huntin'–I hadn’t ever been-- so they took me. Then nobody killed nothin'. I ain't even see nothin' to shoot at. 

Maxwell: I heard the rabbit hunting used to be really fantastic, though. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, that's what we was huntin' -rabbits. 

Maxwell: Mr. Brookfield said that sometimes people killed like fifty a day? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: I don’t know what you would do with fifty rabbits?! 

Chapman: Eat ‘em. Clean 'em and put 'em in the deep freeze. 

Maxwell: I guess you'd have to have a deep freeze. Or what else? I guess you'd have to have a deep freeze, 'cause what else with fifty in a day? How would you miss ‘em? (laughs) 

Chapman: I guess sometimes some of 'em give some of 'em away. Some of 'em, I don't know. Cecil Pope [phonetic spelling] used to go fishin'–I mean-- go huntin'. Bring me a rabbit now and then. 

Maxwell: Did people get a lot of wild meat back in the past -like elk and rabbit and deer and fish and all that? 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Squirrel? 

Chapman: Yeah. Deer. 

Maxwell: 'Cause you sure see it passed around a lot nowadays. You know, somebody'll give somebody a piece of elk or a couple of squirrels. 

Chapman: I got some squirrel up in there now, Cecil Pope killed -in my ice box. 

Maxwell: Debbie Neese [phonetic spelling] can really cook the squirrel up. 

Chapman: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Have you ever had her squirrel? 

Chapman: Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Oh, boy! It's so spicy and good. I love squirrels, I think they're so cute, and I thought I could never eat a squirrel. Well, she kept [saying], "Taste it, taste it." Boy! was it good! It was just really spicy and red-like. 

Chapman: She had it real hot, too, didn't she? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Chapman: Oh, she like her food too hot. I can’t eat it real hot.. 

Maxwell: No, I can't eat too hot either. 

Chapman: I like the seasoning, but I don't want it too hot. 

Maxwell: I don't like it to hurt. (pause) Did a lot of people kill elk back then, or was it mostly small animals? 

Chapman: Honey, I don’t know... used to be a store there, and we used to call it the...What was that store? 

Bob: Southside Market? 

Chapman: Southside Market on 'Frisco. 

Bob: Oh, Safeway? 

Chapman: Over there on Beaver. What's that big market used to be over there? Food Town! 

Bob: Food Town, right. 

Chapman: Food Town. Well, anyway, I had a friend there, he'd cut up elk for peoples, you know. He cut me a big steak and saved me a steak. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's nice. 

Chapman: He was so nice. I don’t know how come that white man fell in love with me. (laughter) He cut me some and every time he cut up some meat, he'd cut me a steak. It was so good. 

Maxwell: Just one? 

Chapman: Nice big steak, enough for me and my husband. 

Maxwell: One for you, but not one for your husband? 

Chapman: I said give enough for me and my husband. 

Maxwell: Oh, I didn't catch what you said. 

Chapman: Big, nice. 

Maxwell: Oh, that elk steak is good. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, I cook that elk steak good. That Billy, that live here on the east end here, in my deep freezer, I run across it and I cooked it. They was ate up, but they didn’t know what they was eatin’ though, I had spicy food–it was so good. 

Maxwell: Oh, it can be so good, if you know how to cook it. 

Chapman: Uh-huh, it was so good. And I heard him sayin', "I ain't gonna eat no -I don’t eat this." And he just ate it up. I ain’t told him nothin’ still. 

Maxwell: Where'd you learn how to cook? Did your ma just.... 

Chapman: I just took it up. I seed my mama, how she used to cook, and I'd watch her. 

Maxwell: She was a good cook? 

Chapman: Yes, my mama was a good cook. I can burn pretty good too, myself. I can. 

Maxwell: I'm sure you can. Else how would anybody come to your restaurants? (laughter) 

Chapman: I had some boys worked up there at the Grand Canyon when they were fixin’ it up in there, when they were workin' up there at the Grand Canyon. They'd come way down here, come down here and eat on the weekends. 

Maxwell: Really?! Wow! 

Chapman: George Jackson -you know George Jackson -he used to work up for the Grand Canyon. (someone knocks and enters) He’d come down.... 

Maxwell: And he’d come down here to eat from your restaurant? 

Chapman: They used to come down to <Flagstaff>. (side conversation not transcribed) 

Maxwell: So these guys would come down from the Grand Canyon to eat at your restaurant? 

Chapman: Yeah, they'd come on the weekend. They'd be comin' down here to <Flagstaff>, you know, and they’d eat. 

Maxwell: That's a long way to come to eat. 

Bob: Uh-huh! 

Chapman: They wouldn't be just comin' to eat. 

Maxwell: They were comin' anyway? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. That café would be full of 'em. (pause) 

Bob: This is makin' me hungry! 

Maxwell: I know. 

Bob: Elk steak. 

Maxwell: It could be fun to have a restaurant like that and cook what you chose, as opposed to whatever somebody said, "I want this, I want that." You know, make it ... 

Chapman: They look on the menu and see what they want. 

Maxwell: But a lot of work. 

Chapman: I've lived all my life, Carol, not to have nothin' now. I worked hard. 

Maxwell: Sounds like it. 

Chapman: I worked hard ever since I've been in <Flagstaff>. (pause) Well, like I say, like the old people say, I once have had it, but I ain't got it now. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Would you have changed anything? 

Chapman: What? 

Maxwell: That you did? 

Chapman: Would I change it? 

Maxwell: If you could go back, would you change things? 

Chapman: Yeah, I'd make a big change if I would go back and come back up again. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Chapman: Uh-huh. But that ain't gonna be. 

Maxwell: What would you change if you could? 

Chapman: I really don’t know what I would do. 

Maxwell: It's a hard thing to think of 'cause there's usually something good that comes out of even things that aren't good at the time. (long pause) I was just talking with my son about that yesterday. He's really good at making me feel like it was all the best. 

Chapman: How many children you have? 

Maxwell: Three boys. 

Chapman: Oh, really? You're blessed to have boys. 

Maxwell: Yeah, they're good, I like 'em. They're wonderful. I'd trade everything else for them. I would trade everything I have for them. They’re the best. Not that it's been easy, you know. 

Chapman: Ain’t nothing like work been easy. (coughs) Nothin’ like work been easy to nobody -unless you just had a sittin'-down job, just like some folks I see. 

Maxwell: I don't like that. I don't like to sit down all day. I want to move. 

Bob: Accomplish something. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I like to use my hands and do things and move around. To me a sitting-down job would be really bad. You'd have to pay me to do that! (laughter) 

Bob: That's a good way to put it. (pause) 

Maxwell: Well, we've taken up a lot of your day. 

Bob: We appreciate it, sharing your life. (long pause) 

Maxwell: Are you glad you came to <Flagstaff>? 

Chapman: You still got me on that thing? 

Maxwell: No, it's turned off. 

Bob: This one's on here. I can turn this one off, if you want. 

Chapman: I want it off. I don't want to be talkin' on that thing. 


