FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Otto Schlupp

Interview number NAU.OH.28.82





Otto Schlupp, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1962 and built and operated the Autolodge Motel, which is located on S. Milton Rd. He was active in the development of the Flagstaff Innkeepers Association and in Chamber of Commerce activities. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on August 3, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, February 2000. 



Outline of Subjects Covered In Taped Interview 

Tape 1, Side 1 

Born in <Mannheim Germany> in 1901 

Parents 

Susan Kaiser, raised family 

Henry Schlupp, businessman 

Came to <U.S.> 

Lived in <New York> 

Father manufactured narrow textiles: fringe, tassels, braid, etc. 

Worked with father from early age 

Effect of World War I on father, lost job 

Mother and children worked to help family 

Father self-employed with sons, narrow textiles on handlooms 

Brothers and sisters 

Studying at textile school in <Europe> 

World War I 

Member of National Guard 

Brother’s service 

German ancestry 

Moved to <California> in 1929 

Jobs held 

Textile firm 

Newspaper distributor for LA Times 

Depression of 1930’s 

Marriage and family 

Wife, Dorothy Maas 

No children, helped one of newspaper delivery boys 

Resigned newspaper job in 1960 

Developed interest in motel business 

Moved to <Flagstaff> 

Built motel in <Flagstaff> 

Autolodge, in 1962 

Experience as motel operator 

Started Flagstaff Inkeepers Association 

Expenses in motel business

Tape 1, Side 2 

Area around Autolodge, described 

Railroad spur over Interstate 

Chamber of Commerce 

Arizona Motel-Hotel Association 

Convention Center plans in 1960’s for McMillan Mesa 

City sales tax 

Opposition from community 

Buffalo Park 

Funding and problems 

Stagecoach rides, buffalo, antelope, deer, elk, farm animals 

Effect of bad winter of 1967 on activities 

Innkeepers Association 

Opposition to it from community 

Practices of other motel owners 

Summer tourist season 

Big motels vs. small independents 

Fringes to attract guests 

Color tv’s 

Direct dial telephone systems 

Caring about guests 

Harry Metzger, discussed briefly 

Pioneer museum 

Senior Citizens group 

Rev. Duggan, Presbyterian Church



This is an interview with Otto Schlupp, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1962. At that time he built and operated the Autolodge Motel which is located on South Milton Road. He was active in the development of the <Flagstaff> Innkeepers Association, and the Chamber of Commerce activities at that time. The interview is being conducted on August 3, 1976, at Mr. Schlupp's home, located at 430 North Circle View Drive, in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Mr. Schlupp, when and where were you born? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I was born in <Mannheim Germany>, on April 30, 1901. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: We'll just go ahead and get all of your biographical information. Who were your parents? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: My parents? Well, my father was a businessman, and my mother, of course, she was a woman. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, she took care of the family. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah, she was a family woman. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Why don't I go ahead and get their names for the record. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: My mother's name was Susan, and my father's name was Henry. My mother's name was Susan Kaiser when she was single. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. Now, did you live in <Germany> your whole life? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, no, I lived there only 'til about - I was about seven years old when I came over here. My father came a year before we did, and he sent for us, the whole family came over. We lived in <New York> City at the time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of work did your father do? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: My father was a manufacturer of narrow textiles. That is, mostly - I don't know just exactly how to explain it, because this is a word that no one knows, is pasamentary trimmings. Do you know what that is? (KP laughs) See, nobody knows. All right, what it is, you've seen braids that they have around draperies with little tassels and fringes on it. But I mean very intricately woven. Not this cheap stuff you see nowadays. They used to use it on furniture. In the olden days they had fringes on the furniture. They had braids on there that was hand woven stuff, all of it. And then also you saw dress trimmings. In the old days they had frogs made out of gimp, which you don't know what it is, but gimp is a material that they used. There's a lot of handwork, a lot of weaving narrow fabrics. And this all went out of style about the twenties, it started going out of style. They started using nails on furniture, tacks, you know, brass tacks for decorating. The best example of that kind of work I've seen was in the Huntington Library in the <Los Angeles> area, in that big mansion. The Huntington Mansion had these very high rooms with these big velour drapes and beautiful fringes and tassels, tie-backs that tied the draperies back - great big tassels. Well, we made those things and all that kind of stuff. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you work with your father then? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: And I worked with my father, yeah. I started to weave on a handloom when I was eight years old. He used to bring the work home. At that time he was foreman of a factory where they made this stuff, and he used to bring the work home. Then of course at the time of World War I, he lost his job because he was a German. When they sunk the Lusitania, they fired him. It was his fault! You see, they had discrimination in those days too. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I guess so. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: And he couldn't get a job. And so eventually the whole bunch of us, we had no way of getting help. We had to help ourselves. It wasn't like it is today, that you could go for unemployment. So the whole family, I had to leave school, and everybody worked. (aside about the wind) But anyway, we all worked. My mother crocheted buttons in the evening, and went around to the tailor shops in the daytime selling crochet buttons, which they used to use in those days on women's coats. And there used to be the old-fashioned tailor shops where they made suits, they made women's coats and things. So they bought this stuff. I went to work in a grocery store for a little while. So finally, when my father couldn't get any job, we had to do something. We had to go into business. We borrowed twenty-five dollars, got a cheap loft in <New York>. We lived in <Brooklyn> at the time. So we built handlooms out of two-by-fours with a hammer and chisel and saw and screwdriver. And we gradually worked our way up. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You did all right, I guess. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: And so after the war we bought a home in <Brooklyn>, one of these old-fashioned brownstone fronts. Did you ever see pictures of 'em? They're narrow, with a big stair, a stoop going down the front. Of course this now is the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, which is notorious for being real rough country. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. It was middle class when you were [there]? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. Well, it was even a little better than middle class. These houses were built maybe, before we got 'em, maybe about forty years before WE got there, actually. But they were hard, parquet floors, and three-and-a-half stories high. We had fourteen rooms. They were beautiful homes. The carriage trade lived there before we did. (laughs) The carriage trade. You've seen that picture Life with Father. Did you ever see that on TV? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think so. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: That was the way OUR life was at the time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How many brothers and sisters did you have? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I had one brother, two sisters. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, so you didn't have a HUGE family to have to support. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, no, we didn't have a huge family, no. But in that house we had an aunt living there with us, an old spinster aunt. There was always something doing. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, people took in more relatives. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah, we took in. Anyway, from then on I came to.... I went to <Europe> after World War I for two years and went to textile school in [Keinmetz?] and Saxony, and also worked in a factory there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Trying to make your trade a little better? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: The son of the people that owned the factory I was in, came to my father's place, and I went over there and lived in exchange. We both learned, although I knew my business. But I knew things, and we did things here, better than THEY did 'em, so I taught them that, and then I learned also a lot of things that I didn't know. That was the other way around with the other fellah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was it that you were too young to serve in the First World War? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I was too young to serve in World War I, although I became a member of the National Guard in <Brooklyn>, during World War I. We formed the National Guard Regiment that went away. My brother volunteered before we got into the war, and went into the Coast Artillery, and then of course after, when we got into the war, they federalized 'em all, and he was in the artillery. But he never did get to <France>. He was always - he was regimental sergeant major and he was training the new draftees as they came in, you know. Then he FINALLY asked them to let him stay with the regiment. He wanted to go over. So they did, but it happened to be that the day they left <Newport News>, in <Maryland> - I think <Newport News> Maryland - that was the day that the armistice was signed. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That happened to a lot of people. (laughter) 



OTTO SCHLUPP: He never did get across. The boat turned right around and went up to <New York>, and it ended up opposite the Statue of Liberty at <Fort Hamilton>, where he'd been all during the war. So I always used to kid him and say that he won the "Battle of <Fort Hamilton>." 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) Now, he didn't experience any trouble because of his German ancestry? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: No, he didn't. But maybe that had something to do with why they didn't send him over. There was never anything definite on that, but he never had any difficulty. I never had either. But we never had any difficulty with people in the street or the neighborhood. It just happened to be that when my father worked for this particular man, and he maybe had a feeling like that. That's the only thing. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: But it wasn't a widespread deal? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: We never had any difficulty - nothing to complain about. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, so when you left <New York>, where did you move to? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Well, I went to <California>, and I moved to <Glendale California>. My future wife, my fiance, left <New York>, they went to <California>. So my father passed away, and as I told you before, the style changed, they didn't use our product anymore, and our business was going down. We finally sold our business out. So I worked for a little while for other people in <New York>, and then my father - as I say, my father passed away. And my wife's father wrote me a letter once and said, "Well, why don't you come out here?" That is, my future wife. So I came out. And I worked for about a year for a firm in the same business I was brought up in, and put up equipment and machinery they had in <California> for twenty years and had nobody to put it up. So I put it up. And I wanted to be in business for myself again before I got married, so I tried to get a partnership in it, and they wouldn't do it. So I said, "Okay, I'll look around for something else." I went into the newspaper business. I got a distributorship with The Los Angeles Times, home delivery newspapers. And then I was with the Times for thirty years after that. I was <Hollywood> distributor for The Los Angeles Times for not all the thirty years, but 1945 I was down in the <Echo Park> area. That was closer to downtown. Then I sold that area and bought a larger one. And then I built that up, and I sold THAT. Then I moved to the <Hollywood> area. So I was distributor for The Los Angeles Times in <Hollywood>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, what year did you move to <California>? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: About 1929, '28. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So that was just right during the Depression. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: That was right at the beginning of the Depression. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was <California> pretty hard hit, the area you were in? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, I guess so, yeah. I never suffered. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, you always had a job. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I always had a job. In those days, if I made in the newspaper business, I probably was considered one of the higher-paid people around there, because I made around $75 a week. In those days, a fellah was lucky if he made $15 or $20. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yeah! I was gonna say, that's pretty good wages for those times. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Also, those were the days I could buy four half-inch pork chops for fifteen cents. (laughter) So that seventy-five dollars went a long way. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yes! Now, you got married right after you got here? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Well, I got married in 1930, when I went into the newspaper business. I took my wife on our honeymoon, delivering a newspaper route. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And what was your wife's name? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Her name was Dorothy Maas, M-A-A-S. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is that German also? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. Yeah, her father was born over there, but her mother was born here, and SHE was born here, too. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. Did you have any children? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: No, we never had any children of our own, but we always had, in the newspaper business, anywhere from six to twenty boys. As a matter of fact, I had one boy that practically grew up with me. He became my right-hand man, and I helped put him through college. He always wanted to be a teacher, so he's now school superintendent in <Tustin California>, out near <Anaheim> out there - high school superintendent. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yay! 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I helped him buy his home when he got married, so forth and so on. He was my right-hand man. He was just like my son. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's great. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I had a really wonderful relationship with him. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So you stayed with the newspaper business until you moved here? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I stayed in the newspaper business 'til 1960. In 1960 I resigned. The new generation got ahold of the newspaper, and they knew more about it than I did, so they came around trying to tell me all the time how to run my business. And everything they came up with, we'd already tried it. We either knew it was a success or a failure. So I got sick and tired of that. Another thing, too, it was always promotion, promotion, promotion; build up your area, build up your area. And finally you build it up, and you had maybe several hundred subscribers more, and you figured, "Well, now I can make a little bit of extra money." They came around and told you, "Now you've got several hundred subscribers more, you can afford to pay more for your papers." So they knocked you back again where you were. That routine, I've seen that happen in different businesses. I know there was a man here in <Flagstaff> that built up quite a nice Fuller Brush business, and he built it up and they said, "Well, now you've got too big a territory to handle. We've got another fellah here, we'll cut off so much from you and so much from the other man on the other side of you, and we'll put a third man in there." So it knocked him back. Well, this is what happened in the newspaper business. So they got a bunch of young college friends of Mr. Chandler's. They used to send 'em around, you know, tell me how to run my business and I throw 'em out, tell 'em to go back to him, tell him if he wants to know anything, "You wouldn't believe me anyway, if you didn't do it." So I used to say, "You come back tomorrow with a work shirt and work pants on at three o'clock in the morning and go around with the crew and see how things work, and then go back and tell Mr. Chandler. I'm not gonna tell you anything, you waste my time, because you wouldn't even believe it." So once in a while somebody would take me up on it, and I'm telling you something, at the end of a week they'd come to me and say, "Boy, I wouldn't have this job for NOTHIN'!" See? But I LOVED it. I LOVED that job. It was a challenge, I love people, like to be around 'em. Many a time - as a matter of fact, many a day I worked as much as eighteen hours a day, seven days a week. And then sometimes when the weather was real bad up in those <Hollywood> Hills and we had mudslides, I worked twenty-four hours - just laid down on a table. But I liked that, I liked the challenge, I like to get in there and battle, you know. I had wonderful relations with my people that worked for me all the time, because I never, NEVER asked anybody to do anything I wouldn't do myself. That's one thing, I always made that a policy. And when things got dangerous up in those hills with mudslides, I'd have to drive around. I wouldn't let anybody go up there, I'D go up there. So if anybody got killed, I got killed. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, those were bad at times. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: But I had a wonderful thing. Then I was retired about two years, I bought a home out in <Burbank>. While I was in the newspaper business, my wife and I'd go on little trips once in a while. John would take over, he was a schoolteacher and he'd say, "Hey, boss, we're gonna have about a week's vacation. Why don't you and Dorothy go on a little vacation for a couple of days, and I'll take over here for you." So we'd go somewhere. We used to run into what I used to call these pickle-puss motel operators. They'd take your money at the desk and hand you a key and say, "There it is, around there." If you stayed there three days, nobody looked at you, nobody cared if you were having a good time or anything. If you asked them something, they were evasive. They didn't want to be bothered. If you drive past the door and you wave at 'em, nobody would wave back. I used to always say to my wife, "You know, if I ever quit the newspaper business, I'm gonna go into the motel business. I'm gonna be different." So that's what I did! (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, why did you select <Flagstaff> for your motel business? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, I just happened to go through about 1939 when I went to <New York> to the World's Fair. And I liked the country, and I'm a mountain boy. I like the beach, I like to go fishing, and in the ocean I did quite a lot of deep sea fishing, but I always liked the mountains better - nice, clean, dry air [compared to] foggy damp air. So I remembered <Flagstaff>, and I figured, "I want to get away from that crowd out in <California>." I figured, "Well, that'd be a nice place for me to have a motel." So I built a motel down on Interstate 17. (aside) Interstate 17, you know, next to McDonald's, the Autolodge. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, you built that. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah, I built that in 1962. And so I was in the motel business from '62 'til '72. I was in the motel business here in <Flagstaff>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, what was it like, being a motel operator? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Well, it was wonderful. I tell you, if I had to do it over again, I would go right into the hotel or motel business. I LOVED to deal with people. I was different. As I said, I WOULD be, and I was. I used to get up at five o'clock in the morning in the summertime, see every one of the guests off, and ask them if there's anything I could do to help them on their trip, thanked them for being there, and if I couldn't do any more, I'd tell 'em, "God bless you and take care of you on the highway." And people would turn around and say, "Boy, there's a guy that cares!" So I made so many friends, such wonderful friendships developed: the people I did business with, the creditors, all that in <Flagstaff>. 



I was also one of the five original members of the Flagstaff Innkeepers Association. As a matter of fact, I was the one that suggested it, and five other_____, because I'm a great believer in working together with other people. And when I came here, I found out everybody was a lone wolf, you know. The fellah down the road didn't know anything about who the guy next door to him was, almost. So I thought, "How is that.... In THIS business, you can HELP one another. Why not get to KNOW one another and WORK together?" They said, "It CAN'T be done." Well, we did it, I did it. I had all the motels around my area there, around the Safeway Store, the Arizonan, the Time, the Roadway Inn, the Travelodge and all that. They used to work with me, and I worked with them. When I had a room or when it got to be around five o'clock at night and I had vacancies, I'd call them up and I'd tell them what I had, and they'd tell me what THEY had. So that when people would come in and I couldn't accommodate 'em, I knew where there was someplace I could send them. I picked up the telephone, called these people up, told 'em, "Listen, have you still got such and such an accommodation? I've got a party here, Mr. and Mrs. So-and-So are looking for that." "Yes." Okay, I tell the people, and they’d go there. Then if I had something that THEY didn't have anymore - especially singles in the summertime, a room with one double bed for two people - they were in more demand - and if I had some, they'd send 'em down to me, they'd give ME a call. "Say, you still got any singles left?" "Yeah, I got a couple left," and sent the people down. But this way, everybody benefitted by it. Before that, how would you like to go up to a hotel or a motel desk and ask the man and they say, "Well, we're full," and you say, "Well, do you know anyplace?" "No, I don't know nothin'," turned around and walked away. This is for the birds! So we got along real swell, and I loved that business. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, that's great. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I just.... 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2] 



OTTO SCHLUPP: ... tore the whole thing to pieces with bulldozers, tore all the trees out. Then there used to be an old spur of lumber, railroad, that used to go up… I think it was called the Saginaw Lumber Mill is where the Holiday Inn is now. There used to be a lumber mill up there, an old lumber mill. And there was a railroad spur where they brought the trees in from Happy Jack or something like that. The spur ran up to <Happy Jack>. And it also ran from there into Southwest Lumber Company. And you know where the Interstate 40 interchange is now.... 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, down on Milton.... 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Down on Milton Road there. There used to be a dip go down in sort of a gully like, and the railroad used to cross what they used to call 47, I think it was, the Interstate, 47. Now they call it Interstate 17. But before then it was Interstate 47. And the lumber train used to run across the road there. There was this dip that you went down, and people coming from this way couldn't see that, and when the train was in there, every once in a while somebody'd run into the side of that lumber train. And the last experience was a car, a station wagon, with four children, I think, and they ALL got killed, the whole bunch, in that. So that's a good thing that they.... I always wondered why they didn't send a flagman up on that little thing, you know, when they had the train goin' across there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, that's funny that they didn't. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: But every once in a while.... Well, of course, maybe it's the old story: everybody was goin' too fast, when they should have been goin' slow. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. But then they just took that out? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. Well, they built the interstate. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, when was that connected, or finished up in there? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, that was probably about '67, '68, somethin' like that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. They're still working on parts! (laughs) 



OTTO SCHLUPP: I also was a member of the Chamber of Commerce and was for a while on the board of directors of the Chamber of Commerce. And I was always active with the chamber tourism committee, whether I was on the board of directors or not. I was always active in that. I was also on the board of directors of the Arizona Hotel and Motel Association for several years, for about four or five years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You've been busy! 



OTTO SCHLUPP: So I saw a little bit of the activity here. We tried to get the convention center built up on McMillan Heights up here, up there opposite Buffalo Park. Yeah, we had quite a battle on that. It was really on account of that we got that first sales tax in. We got the sales tax to finance the construction of the convention center. The original plan was about 60 percent of the sales tax was to go to construction and the maintenance of the convention center, and 40 percent was to go into the general fund. Well, then we got opposition. (aside) We got opposition, so we finally ended up with about 40 percent for the convention center and 60 percent for the general fund. Then we had opposition. In the chamber we had monthly meetings of business people and all that, survey them how they felt about HAVING a convention center. And then of course the convention center also was to act as a recreation center - when it wasn't being used for conventions - for recreation. There was supposed to be an Olympic size swimming pool in there, and all that. We could have had the whole thing for about $1,300,000 because the city owned the land up there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yeah, because they have the little ski run and stuff now. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. They owned the land. And so certain people in town, probably some of the old-timers, they're opposed to it. They hated to see new people comin' in there and runnin' the show. They liked to leave everything the way it was years ago. So they had big opposition. They had an election, so finally the people in town voted it down. But it was like anything else, just like in the fluoride thing here, the people that were against it didn't come out to vote for it, so now we got it. They said, "Let George do it." So a convention center would have been really.... The main objection to it was the location up there. But they said, "Well, how are our kids going to get up there when it's being used as a recreation area?" "Well," I said, "you open a hot dog stand up there once and give away hot dogs for free, and you'll SEE how they'll get up there. They'll ALL get up there." Having been a kid myself, I KNOW how we used to get up there, if we had to WALK, you know. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Sure. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: But if there's something interesting FOR them, they'll get there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now the Cedar Hill Road was built at that time? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that in preparation for the convention center, do you think? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: No. That was there all the time, as far as I remember. Then, too, Buffalo Park, this was another project I was a little bit involved in. But a hundred business people each gave a hundred dollars to start this Buffalo Park. And we had buffaloes and everything in there. Of course that terrible winter of '67, I think it was, when we had the eighty-seven inches of snow, that finished it. The trouble with Buffalo Park was mostly because it was being run by business people that were involved in other businesses. They had no experience in running a thing like that. What they should have done was turn that over to somebody, like Old Tucson in <Tucson>, or somebody like that could have run it. They'd have made a go of it. That was an interesting thing. A lot of people came here. It kept people here one or two days more. They'd go up to Buffalo Park and ride the old stagecoach around in the park. They had the buffaloes roaming around loose, and the elk. Oh, they had deer walking around. Everything was around loose, except the barnyard animals - they had to hold onto them. It was interesting. Antelope up there, you know. Some of the unions, they donated the labor in putting the fences up and so forth. Everybody worked together on it. We had a nice thing goin', I think, there. It would have been a GOOD thing. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You said it was run by the businessmen. Were the profits or whatever.... 



OTTO SCHLUPP: The profits were there to feed the animals. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, it was just self-maintaining? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah, it was supposed to be self-maintaining. And then of course that winter came in '67. Some of the barns broke down, this and that. The fences broke and the animals strayed around. People around the neighborhood would wake up in the morning and see a buffalo eating their flowers out of the flower bed! (laughs) Or a herd of elk lying in their back yard. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That would be something to wake up to! 



OTTO SCHLUPP: See a bunch of buffaloes looking in your window! (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, when did that close down finally, do you remember? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, that closed down finally after people around experiencing things. They had to get rid of all the animals, you know. So it finally closed down around - I guess after '67 it never did gel any more after that (laughs) that snowstorm. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, that's funny. Okay, this innkeepers association, I was going to ask you a little bit more about that. Was it primarily just the innkeepers in your area over there? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: No. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: All of <Flagstaff> finally joined in? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Well, they didn't ALL join. There's still a lot of holdouts. People said they weren't going to have anybody dictating to them how much they were going to charge for a room, which we never did anyway. But we tried to implement things to help tourism in <Flagstaff>. Of course every time we did anything, it seemed to me that the reports we'd get from the community, "Damned innkeepers, there they go again! All they want to do is fill up their rooms. A bunch of crooks!" We were branded as a bunch of thieves or something like that. I said, "Well, you can see in the summertime when the innkeepers have their rooms full, look at the business you have in <Flagstaff>." So if we can promote our business to keep our rooms full all the year round, it would be the biggest boost that <Flagstaff> could ever have - in THOSE days. I don't know now what it is, but in the times I was in there, they figured that the average tourist spent about thirty-five to forty dollars a day here with the room, food, gasoline, maintenance. Even the doctors benefited by it, because when some of those people, once in a while they were sick, they had to go to a doctor. Of course the power company and everybody else benefited. So it made jobs, made a LOT of jobs, to keep the rooms full. But of course I realized there was some innkeepers that didn't run what I call a real tight, honest ship. They took advantage, like if they had a Pow Wow, they'd raise the rates. I never did that. I never. I had my rates published in the AAA magazine, and that's what I went by, whether there were special events or not. Mom and Dad's Day come along, everybody raised their rates two or three dollars. They'd have a sign outside, "Two for five," and when the kids come in and want to rent a room or reserve a room four weeks ahead of the Pow Wow, they'd tell 'em, well, they want twelve dollars. And the kids would say, "How come? You got a sign out there, "Two for five," or "two for six," or "six for two," or whatever you want it. Then the kids would come in, they'd want to rent a room for Mom and Dad's Day. They'd tell 'em "twelve dollars." Well, the kids say, "what do you…" To me, that was rotten business. I never had a price sign out. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, were you full most of the time during the summer then? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, yes, I was full from about the middle of June, you can say, 'til the fifteenth of September, and barely had a day that I had a vacancy at night. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So that was a real tourist season, right in there? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. Well, of course, we all had to, of course, raise our rates in the summertime so we would make enough money to pay our bills in the winter. The last year I was in the business, I had approximately $14,000-$15,000 in the bank over and above my expenses. I had that put aside in a separate bank account so that when the winter comes, that if I needed any money, I didn't have to borrow it from the bank. Every year at the finish of the slow season, the beginning of the busy season, that money was gone, see. So that wasn't money I was getting, it was just money in reserve to help me pay the telephone company, the gas company, the power company, and whatnot. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You just kind of broke even a lot of times. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah, just about broke even. As I said before, I never made any money in the motel business. I made a living, a nice living, and I enjoyed the work I did, I had a wonderful time. I would be willing, if I was physically able to, to go right back into it, right this minute - with ALL its problems! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Probably very similar with most of the smaller motel owners. Little America and places like that ARE money-making concerns pretty much. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Sure, they make money because so many people go around.... I had MY motel - see, I'm going by MY motel, and the average independent motel, the average smaller motel. They keep their rooms up, I kept my rooms up. I had people that came to me year after year. Year after year they came. Now, they could have gone to Little America. They wouldn't have come back to me if I'd have had rooms that weren't well-kept and nice. And I had nice rooms. As a matter of fact, when the Holiday Inn opened, I was a very good friend of the first manager there at the Holiday Inn, and he used to say to me, "I'm glad my people don't see YOUR rooms before they see mine!" Because he thought they were better than THEIR rooms. When people go and pay twenty-five dollars for a room with one double bed, what are they getting? They're getting crystal chandeliers. They can't sleep on the chandeliers, they can't eat the chandelier, they can't take it home with 'em. They get fancy marble trimmings in the bathroom: they can't take them, they're not sleeping in the sink. The main thing is, to MY estimation, what the average motel patron wants is a good clean room, good bed, good mattress, good linens, nice linens, comfortable room, and big enough so they can move around. 



Also, I was the first one in our area there to get color television. First thing you know, EVERYBODY had to have it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That must have been VERY expensive to install. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Well, you didn't buy them, you leased them for a period of ten years - no, not that long - I think six years. You pay so much a day for a television set. Then at the end of that period, they sell you the television set. Say, if you pay $500 extra you can have 'em all. (chuckles) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, so that isn't too bad a deal then. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: No. But it was an expense. Of course, they're several hundred dollars a month that you had to pay. Then I was the first one to have the direct dial telephone system. That was another expensive luxury, where you could dial your number from your room yourself without going through the switchboard. Of course that took a lot of work off of me. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I was gonna say, you could be free to do some other duties. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: And another thing, too, it took a lot of work off me, but on the other hand, when somebody made five telephone calls and they got up in the morning and got in their car and drove out and didn't pay.... (chuckles) You know? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, that was kind of bad. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: But this was accommodations. You really have to have 'em.... As I was going to say, to compete with the big motel chains, but I never.... People would ask me, "Are you competing?" I said, "I'm not going to compete with that big fellah up there. Let HIM compete with ME." See, I have something that they could never have with a big operation like that, unless they have personalized management. And that is personal consideration and love for your people that come in there. And that's something I had lots of, and they couldn't do that in a big motel like that, because they don't want to spend the money for that. They're interested in making money. I wasn't interested in making money, I was interested in making a living, and the rest of it took care of itself as it went along. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You mentioned, I believe, that Harry Metzger used to stay with you. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Harry Metzger, sure, he used to stay with me in the wintertime. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he tell you any interesting stories? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, he told me about big snow that they had, things that they had up at the ranch. He came in here on horseback in 1908 from <Kansas> or someplace, and he used to tell me ________(papers rustling, can’t hear). I understand, the man that's up at the museum now, you can get a lot of information up there. Have you been up there yet? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No, we were trying to supplement some of the information that they have. This is fairly recent. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: A fellah named Meehan, is it? M E E H A N (he spells it wrong), or something like that. He's the curator of it now - a younger fellah, NICE fellah, goes to our church. I see him once in a while up there. We had a little group in senior citizens similar to what we're doin' now. That's a bunch of people that gave their experiences, and he came up one time and brought up a lot of pictures of old <Flagstaff> and told us all about some of the things. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, senior citizens, how long has that been going? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: About three years, three or four years now. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you always meet at the Federated Church? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: No, we used to meet at Guadalupe School. Guadalupe School in the summertime one time, and then when school started there, we didn't have senior citizens for a while. Then we finally had it at the Federated Community Church. Reverend Duggan was there. Remember him? Do you know him? Do you know anything about.... 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Reverend Duggan? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Duggan. He's at <Holland> now. He's in the <Hague>, he runs the Presbyterian Church over there now. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, my goodness! That's really something. Was he here long? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Oh, yes, he was here quite a while. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I didn't know that. 



OTTO SCHLUPP: The young man they've got now, I forget his name. I know his name when I hear it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Reverend Kendall? 



OTTO SCHLUPP: Yeah. That's right, Kendall. You go to Federated? 




