FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Orval White

Interview number NAU.OH.28.84

 

Orval White, who has lived in <Arizona> since 1936. He has done a great deal of carpentry work in the northern part of the state and helped to construct the movie sets for “The Rounders”, which was filmed at Hart Prairie. His wife Bessie also participates in the interview. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on July 27, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, September 1999.

 

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

 

Tape 1, Side 1

Orval, born in 1906, <Celeste Texas>

Parents

James William White, <Arkansas>

Lucy Anne Cozby, <Texas>

Father’s occupations

Effect of his death on family

Orval began working at 9 years of age

Schooling to 6th grade

Moved to <Stamford Texas> in 1924, was cowboy

Farmed 110 acres

Married in 1927

Moved to <Arizona>, 1936

Milked cows, burned ditches, carpenter

Moved to <Flagstaff> in 1957

How met wife Bessie

Bessie Rogers, born in <Texas>

Carpentry work in northern <Arizona>

Worked on Navajo Reservation, built schools

Orval was a member of Masons

<Phoenix> area in 1930’s, discussed

Cotton, citrus orchards, desert

<Casa Grande>, 1930, discussed

Crank phones

Jobs

Installed pumps, helped build army camps in <Texas> during drought, Japanese camp at <Sacaton> during WW II

East <Flagstaff> in 1957

Helped build Greenlaw subdivisions in 1959, early 60’s

Worked as cowboy when first arrived in <Arizona>

White Mountains near <Wickenburg>

Homemade pressure cooker to cook beans

Doctored cattle, 800 head, during summers

“pear tongue”

Worked as cowboy in <Texas> during Depression of 1930’s

Worked as cowboy near <Albuquerque New Mexico>

Got lost in desert, 1933, near <Cuba New Mexico>

Navajo family guided him to <Cuba>

Constructed movie sets in northern <Arizona>

Movie, “The Rounders,” with Glen Ford and Henry Fonda

Other buildings constructed in <Flagstaff> during early 1960’s

 

Tape 1, Side 2

Crystal Theatre in <Flagstaff>

Navajo Reservation, discussed

Worked carpentry to build schools and hospitals

Navajo’s ate mutton and fry break for lunch

Navajo laborers spoke Spanish

World War I, food rationed as a child

Prohibition in <Texas>

Beer joints

Depression of 1930’s

Dust bowl area described in <Texas>, dust in air

World War II

Carpenter for military installations

Fires in <Casa Grande>

Their home burned

Fire on Main Street

Floods in <Phoenix> area, 1936

<Salt River> area

Droughts in <Casa Grande>

Wells in area

Epidemics

Flu epidemic in <Texas>, 1918

Mother put herbs around children’s necks to prevent flu

Snowstorm in <Flagstaff>, 1967, 84 inches

Description of being closed in for several days

Tourism in <Flagstaff> area

Motels on east side, discussed

Highways in <Arizona>, development over 40 years

<Phoenix> in the summer in 1930’s

 

Tape 2, Side 1

Positive feelings about police in <Flagstaff>

Positive feelings about police in <Phoenix>

<Phoenix> in summer

No coolers in homes, used fans and cold water

 

This is an interview with Mr. Orval White, who has lived in <Arizona> since 1936. He has done a great deal of carpentry work in the northern part of the state, and helped to construct the movie sets for The Rounders, which was filmed on Hart's Prairie. The interview is being conducted on July 27, 1976, in Mr. White's home, which is located at 2200 North Third Street in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace, representing the FlagstaffCity-Coconino County Public Library. [Narrator's wife, Bessie, also participates in the interview. (Tr.)]

 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Mr. White, when and where were you born?



ORVAL WHITE: I was born January 29, 1906, in a little town in <Texas> called Celeste, C E L E S T E, a little town of about 300 people. My daddy's name was James William White. [My mother's name was] Lucy Anne Cozby White. Her maiden name was Cozby. She's of Irish descent.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Cozby?



ORVAL WHITE: Cozby, C O Z B Y.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did they come from originally?



ORVAL WHITE: My daddy came from <Arkansas>, and my mother was raised at a little place called Wolf City.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: In <Texas>?



ORVAL WHITE: In <Texas>. This was all in <Texas> now.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right. That's good to get, though.



ORVAL WHITE: Daddy was a man of all trades. He was a bricklayer, carpenter, bronc rider, ranch hand, farmer - you name it, he could do it. He was just an all-around man, just like some people is today, but you find very few. If they had a broncky horse that wanted broke; my daddy would break it, or anything else to do. He was a bricklayer; he'd dig cisterns. Down in that country, they had cisterns; they'd catch rainwater to use for drinking water between rains. We had no water supply like we have THIS day and time. We depended on wells and cisterns all the time, and if your cistern went dry, you HAULED water from the creek - or most people called 'em "cricks." Down in our country, we called 'em "creek" or "river," or ponds, pools. So we lived there and he died the first day of April 1914, and I was just barely past eight years old.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh!



ORVAL WHITE: Left Mother with four little children: a little baby two-and-a-half months old, something like that. And I was just a couple of months past eight years. At nine, I went to work.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What did you do?



ORVAL WHITE: I strung pipe, telephone poles on the pipeline. I drove four mules when I was nine years old. I was standin' on a #2 washtub to harness an 800-pound mule - which you know an 800-pound mule is a very small mule or horse. And I got $1.50 a day. Sometimes we'd leave the place at five o'clock in the morning, and get in after dark. And it wasn't no set hours at that day and time. There wasn't no hourly wage. I made a livin' for Mother, two sisters, and a brother. I educated him, high school and college. And me, myself, I'd go, when there wasn't any work to be done, I'd go to school, say, somethin' like start the last week in November, the first week in December, and go until February or March, and I got to the sixth grade.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's pretty good.



ORVAL WHITE: So I'm not complainin' about my life, I've had a good life, I've worked at several different trades, I've cowboyed for many years, rode crazy horses. I went to railroadin'. My uncle was a railroader, and I hired out as engine watchman for the MKandT Railroad Company. But I'm gettin' a little ahead of my story. I come back and we came to <Stamford Texas>. Then we moved from Celeste to <Stamford Texas>, and there's where I done my cowboyin' and stuff like that.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did your mother work all this time also?



ORVAL WHITE: No, she didn't work. She was takin' care of us kids. I worked.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, you supported the family.



ORVAL WHITE: I done my best to.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm sorry, you were sayin' that you moved to <Stamford Texas>?



ORVAL WHITE: That was in the year 1924. We moved to <Stamford>, I went to work for SMS Ranch. That's the brand name, and the Swenson brothers ran it at the time. Worked there a while, and my brother and I thought we'd go to farming. We bought some of them broom-tailed ponies and a pair of little ol' mules about as big as your fist, and we farmed 110 acres. We didn't make anything to amount to anything, but that was all well and good. We lived and enjoyed life and had a good time, went to parties and dances, and stuff that a way, around over the country. Went to church. My mother was a very religious woman. She believed in church and she believed in God - which we all should do more than we do nowadays.

 

And then I met my wife and we got married the fourth of January 1927, and we lived together ever since. We came through the Depression. You young people nowadays - I call you young people, below forty - don't know nuthin' about hard times. You could work from - I'd get up in the morning, I worked [for] one old German one year, get up four o'clock, milked twenty-five cows, get on a tractor and plow all day, come in and milk twenty-five cows after dark, for ten dollars a month. Remember, that's only thirty-three and a third cents a day, but it put beans and bread on the table for my wife and child. We finally got tired of that hard scrabble livin' in <Texas>. I had a bunch of cows, I sold 'em, I GIVE 'em away. The highest priced cow was about twenty dollars. And I came to <Arizona>. I landed in <Phoenix>, first day of April 1936, with fifty cents in my pocket, and didn't know a soul. Saturday at noon, and one o'clock, went to work for Tam's [phonetic spelling] Dairy, went to milkin' cows. I'd never milked cows to amount to anything before, but I'd try anything to make an honest dollar. I'll bet this isn't interesting to you.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No! This is good! This is good. No, this is fine.



ORVAL WHITE: Anyway, I worked out there and my hands swelled and I couldn't shut 'em, couldn't even button my shirt my hands were swelled so bad, 'cause they had a bunch of Jersey cows and they was hard to milk, and little old short tips - you couldn't get ahold of 'em or nuthin'. I quit that job. Well, I HAD to quit, I couldn't milk.

 

And then I done several different things, and I said, "Well, shucks, labor don't pay nuthin'." I worked for the water users for a while for ninety dollars a month, burnin' ditches. We had trucks and burnin' the weeds off'en ditches, and things that a way. I said, "Well, I'm not gettin' anywhere this way," so I gets me a hammer and saw and started carpentering. And I rode some pretty rough horses here in <Arizona> at the time, since, during odd times. But I've carpentered most of the time since I've been here.

 

We lived in <Phoenix> five years. We moved to <Casa Grande>. (asks wife) How long did we live in <Casa Grande>?



BESSIE WHITE:  We went to <Casa Grande>… Let's see our little daughter passed away in '40, and we went to <Casa Grande> in '41.



ORVAL WHITE: And we left there in '53.



BESSIE WHITE:  Uh-huh. And we were three years in <Globe>, right? And then we've been up here since '57.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Why don't I get your wife's name on tape, too? We didn't say what your name was.



BESSIE WHITE:  My name's Bessie White.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was your maiden name?



BESSIE WHITE:  Bessie Rogers, R-O-G-E-R-S, and I'm a Texan, too, by birth, you know.



ORVAL WHITE: I'll tell you about her. When I first met her, I had a fast rope horse, and I roped her and tied her up to a tree, picked the stickers out of her feet, put a pair of shoes on her. She stood still for a week 'til she was tired.



BESSIE WHITE:  Now, that's being recorded! (laughter)



ORVAL WHITE: It is? Better not! (laughter)



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's right! (laughs) Oh, that's cute.



ORVAL WHITE: Then I went to carpentering, and came up here, and I've worked all over the reservation, several different jobs - I mean, places, in carpenter work. I haven't done nothing much [else] in the last forty years. The biggest part of it, I would say, is carpenter work. I've worked all over the reservation - just name a place anywhere from <Teec Nos Pos> to <Dennehotso>, <Kayenta>, <Tuba City>, <Rough Rock>, <Round Rock>, <Lukachukai>, <Many Farms> - just keep on - and I've been there helping build schools for the Indians. That was before the days when we had many roads out there. It was just pig trails - what we called pig trails in <Texas> - just a couple of ruts out across the boondocks and you just followed that rut, and you hoped you got there.

 

First job I went to was Black Mountain up there north and east of <Polacca>. We drove and drove and thought we'd never get there, and finally we run up on this little ol' wide place in the road, and there we was.



BESSIE WHITE:  It was ______________.



ORVAL WHITE: Life has been very interesting to me. I've tried to do the right thing with a lot of people, tried to pay my bills, and things that a way. In 1957 I joined the Masonic Lodge in <Globe Arizona>. I've been a Blue Lodge member ever since. But I still believe in God and the Church. I've had bad luck the last four years with my eyes. I've had six eye operations. But that was all for the best, I guess, to slow me down. I'm very happy.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Maybe we can talk about what the <Phoenix> area or <Casa Grande> was like in 1936.



ORVAL WHITE: <Phoenix> area, the city limits stopped at Twenty-fourth Street on the east side at the insane asylum. There was a cotton patch from there on out to Tovrea's Packin' House. It was Tovrea's Packin' House, instead of Cudahay [phonetic spelling] in those days. They had a bus service. I came through <Mesa> when I come out there, but the bus service ran from <Phoenix> to <Tempe> and <Mesa>. It went on out to <Glendale>. I don't remember whether they had a bus to <Tolleson> at the time, but <Tolleson> was quite a ways from <Phoenix>. It was all of nine miles. And <Tempe> was a small place. They had the college at the time, of course. But they had cotton patches between <Tempe> and <Mesa>. And you go on out east of <Mesa>, there wasn't nothin' but desert 'til you got all the way to Apache Junction. There was nothin' there. Oh, there was a few citrus farms out there, as far as that canal went, but outside of that - and a little cotton and alfalfa, [that you didn't like?].

<Casa Grande>, when we went there, I went down there with Arizona Pump Company. We was installin' pumps. I was puttin' in the bases for the engines and the pumps. And it was a small place, about 3,500 people. Had small towns, restaurants.



BESSIE WHITE:  Still had the telephones on the wall that you rang.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, the crank ones?



BESSIE WHITE:  Uh-huh.



ORVAL WHITE: Yes, crank telephones at some places. At some places they had the old stand telephones, where the receiver hung on a stand, you picked it up and held 'em both in your hand, or else stood at your desk and talked into a mouth piece - not the modern convenience kind. They had "number please." You go through the operator. You couldn't dial direct, like over here to Mary Jane or John Smith or whoever. And it was very interesting in there. That was mostly all desert. What year did we go down there? Thirty-nine, wasn't it?



BESSIE WHITE:  No. You mean to <Casa Grande>?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  After Euna [phonetic spelling] passed away, it was '41.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, I know, but I was workin' down there in '39.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yes, you did.



ORVAL WHITE: In '39 and '40 and '41, they had a drought, electrical shortage in <Eloy>, and we put in a lot of engines. They shut the water off along in the first of August or somewhere like that - September - and we went back to <Texas> and I helped build Camp Bowie Army Base; Camp Barkley [phonetic spelling] at <Abilene>; Camp Wood at Brownwood. [Gosh goodness?] I've done just about a little bit of everything that's honest and honorable.



BESSIE WHITE:  The Japanese camp at <Sacaton>.



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah, <Sacaton>, I worked on that Japanese concentration camp.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, uh-huh.



ORVAL WHITE: I've been here a day or two.



BESSIE WHITE:  Well, we have watched <Arizona> grow and progress in the last forty years, we really have.



ORVAL WHITE: When we came to <Flagstaff>, all this was out here was nothin'.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, in East <Flagstaff>?



ORVAL WHITE: In <Flagstaff>. It was called Sunnyside at the time. Used to be a restaurant right down here called Sunnyside Café. We'd work the reservation and we'd come in - I mean, we'd work five days on the reservation, we'd come into town on Saturday night, get us a motel room, and do our shopping. We ate there many a time at this Sunnyside Café. That's right south of the fire station there. It was nothin' out here, practically. Oh, there was a few service stations along the road, but…



BESSIE WHITE:  Museum Club and…



ORVAL WHITE: Barker Village.



BESSIE WHITE:  Barker Village was way out from town then, you know it seemed like. There wasn't - all these motels and things between here and town were not there then. We come through here in '38, goin' back to <Texas> on a trip from the valley, and we just came this way.



ORVAL WHITE: In summer, and we was gonna come cooler.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yeah, because it was cooler. We came out Old 66, and the main highway was Old 66 then, you know, what we call Old 66 now. Well, it was very interesting to see the change in this area, now and the first time we come through here, or later when we moved up here. There's been such a growth, and such a change. All of this Greenlaw has been built and everything. My husband has built a lot of that didn't you?



ORVAL WHITE: Uh-huh.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, you worked on it. Now, when was that that a lot of the Greenlaw section went in?



ORVAL WHITE: We started in '59 and early sixties.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So this was really very undeveloped until the sixties?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah, until the latter part of the fifties - I'd say '58, '9, it commenced building up out in here.



BESSIE WHITE:  We came up here in '57.



ORVAL WHITE: To jump back a little bit, go back a few years now to when I first come here. I was workin' for Quick Seed and Feed, punchin' cows out there. There was two of us guys that was workin' one'd ride the north range one day, and the other one'd go south. And we'd reverse. They sent another old boy out there to help us - summertime, bad fly times, so we was havin' a lot of trouble with the cattle, havin' to doctor a lot of cattle. We'd cook our beans in a homemade pressure cooker, a gallon syrup bucket and put the lid on tight and put about, oh, an inch of beans in there and fill it up full of water and bury that in the ground and put coals all around it. Well, you'd leave camp about five o'clock in the mornin' and come back in that evening about four or five, maybe six o'clock. Those beans would be just right to eat, and there'd be good, thick juice. You know what I mean? Just red pinto beans was all it was. We called 'em "Mexican T-bones." But that was all right. But anyway this ol' boy come in before everybody else and ate up all the bean soup and poured water in there. Well, he didn't stay very long. He had to go! He ate up the beans.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) I can imagine! That was up here in this area that you worked the cattle?



ORVAL WHITE: No, that was White Mountains, White Tanks, up near the <Wickenburg> area, south of <Wickenburg>, between <Wickenburg> and <Wittmann>, over in that area in there. That's still on the desert.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: About how many head of cattle?



ORVAL WHITE: We was runnin' about 800 head, the three of us. Of course we were just doctorin' in the summertime. See, they was already branded. We didn't brand or anything like that. All we were doctorin' for was just screwworms and cuts and stuff that a way. Just keepin' 'em sort of herded together in the area where we was supposed to be.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was that considered a small herd at that time?



ORVAL WHITE: Yes, at that time that was really considered a one-man herd. But we scattered on the desert, on account of the vegetation. We had to have two men cover so much area.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I can imagine there wasn't much, especially in the summer.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, it takes about seven acres for one cow, or more.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, uh-huh, they just ate the scrub.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, they just ate the scrub and prickly pear and stuff that a way. A lot of them old cows was gonna get them stickers in his tongue, called a "pear tongue." Well, they'd just eventually die, as far as that goes, 'cause they couldn't get the stickers off, the prickly pears out of their tongue. They starved to death, see - the tongue would swell up and they couldn't eat.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, gee! Sounds kind of…



ORVAL WHITE: Let me go back a few years, back in <Texas>. I forgot this. I guess I should have remembered it. It was during the Depression, about '33, height of the Depression. Work was very, very scarce. I worked on a ranch down in a little town called <Eastland Texas>. Pap Long was the man's name. He sold out there and went up to <Albuquerque>. Well, one day I got a letter from him, wantin' me to come up there. He was runnin' a dude ranch.

 

There wasn't nothin' doin' there in this little town of <Stamford Texas>, where we lived, so I takes off. He offered me seventy-five dollars a month, which was an unheard of gold mine in those day, $2.50 a day! And on ranches, you naturally get your room and board and they furnish your horses. All you gotta do is furnish your own bedroll and saddle. So I goes up there, and we went up in an old Model "A" truck. Well, it was a new one at the time, practically new, but nowadays they're callin' 'em old Model 'A's.' To his place, and then come back, and he says, "I want you to take up twelve head of saddle horses to open up the season." This was something like in the latter part of May. Well, I [started] off with these saddle horses, and goin' by Hamus Springs [phonetic spelling] up there, there's a lot of sulphur in the rock, and hard, and the horses drank that water, well it was hard on the horses. So we wanted to miss that, and the old bell mare, goin' down La Ventana, she'd taken a wrong trail. Well, I got lost. That was the second day on the road. It was about 110 miles from where we had to go from <Albuquerque> to <Cuba>. It was up near <Cuba> where we was at. And I rode all day that day, hungry and thirsty, and rode all day the NEXT day, hungry and thirsty. I was ready to cut a horse's throat and get me a drink of blood or somethin', or cook me a steak off a horse. Of course I grazed the horses along, but still… When I got lost, I was thirty-two miles from where I was supposed to go. But I rode in a semi-circle and the morning of the third [day] I found a bunch of sheep tracks or goat tracks. And I got down and seen which way they was headed, so I back-tracked 'em - it was early - and come up on a hogan, a Navajo Indian hogan.

 

Of course they couldn't or wouldn't talk English - they'd just stand there and grunt at me. And I was hungry and mad and out of humor. I tried to talk to 'em in Spanish, and they wouldn't talk in Spanish and wouldn't talk in English. Finally, a little girl, looked like about fourteen, stepped out with a kid in her arms and said, "What do you want, mister?" and I told her. She said, "It's twenty-eight miles, right over that mountain, to <Cuba>."

 

Well, I got them to guide me, 'cause I was already lost and twisted up in the trails. They guided me, and I gave 'em a Coke bottle full of whiskey and five dollars. In them days, you couldn't buy whiskey, only from bootleggers, and it was strictly agin' the law to give an Indian a drink. But anyway, I made it all right. This was back in '33, so you have to put this back in there.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's a good story, though.



BESSIE WHITE:  I thought of something that I think is real interesting. My husband, in his carpentering, he got to do a lot of work for movies that were being made here at <Flagstaff> out at Hart's Prairie, and then in the <Sedona> area, building sets, which was very interesting, so I thought I'd remind him.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Sure, yeah, tell me about that.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, there's nothing… One picture show I remember really in general. Why, we built all the movies sets for The Rounders. We built it down at the <Sedona> rodeo grounds. Then we moved out to Hart Prairie and built a complete ranch - barn, windmill, corral, house, and all. Of course the house was brought in, was just all pre-fabbed and just set up temporarily. We built the barn out of brand new lumber, and when they got through paintin' it, you'd have swore it was 110 years old, 'cause it looked awful bad. But it looked aged. Some kind of paint they put on it makes it look awful old - even this new material. I got some of that stuff on my hand, so I liked to never got it scraped off! Sure did stick.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was that Glen Ford that was in that?



ORVAL WHITE: Glen Ford and Henry Fonda.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! Did you get to meet them, then?



ORVAL WHITE: Oh, yeah, I got to meet them. And my wife and I went out and saw the set after we got it finished.



BESSIE WHITE:  I thought it was SO interesting.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I bet you got to watch some of it being filmed?



BESSIE WHITE:  Well…



ORVAL WHITE: They wasn't shootin' that day.



BESSIE WHITE:  They weren't shootin' the day we were out there. I didn't get to see that. But I have seen the show twice on TV. We saw it once in the movies. Oh! I enjoyed it so much, because he had built the set. Did you ever see it?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think I might have.



BESSIE WHITE:  There was a part in there where a horse kicked Glen Ford through the wall, wasn't it?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  Well that was made out of this kind of wood…



ORVAL WHITE: Balsa wood.



ORVAL WHITE: Balsa wood. It looked like, "My! kicked him right through that wall!" But my husband said that stuff broke real easy, and it wasn't anything.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  ____________. (laughter)



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was any of that taken out at the old Michelbach Ranch that you know of?



ORVAL WHITE: I don't know. I can't honestly answer that.



BESSIE WHITE:  I thought it was all made at Hart's Prairie.



ORVAL WHITE: Made ON Hart's Prairie out there. In fact, I can take you to the place, but I couldn't tell you…



BESSIE WHITE:  I don't know whether it was the Michelbach Ranch or not.



ORVAL WHITE: I think it was, though.



BESSIE WHITE:  It probably could be.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Old log cabin out in there.



ORVAL WHITE: But we built our own log cabins.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, you did the other.



ORVAL WHITE: We made the set, but we passed a log cabin and an old tank on the left, goin' out this road.



BESSIE WHITE:  That was probably…



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That may have been out there. I had heard something about it in connection with Michelbachs.



BESSIE WHITE:  Probably was in that area, their ranch. And then <Sedona>. And I thought that was most interesting, you know.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah!



BESSIE WHITE:  Especially ___________.



ORVAL WHITE: Talkin' about movies, how they cost to make 'em. They hired a bunch of us carpenters from <Flagstaff> here, and we'd been used to goin' out there and WORKING. You know, not settin' a house afire or anything, but just givin' a man a good honest day's work. Went to work this morning and we was buildin' a bunch of stalls to keep horses in. They built this little old four-by-six stalls, had a short gate to where the horse's head stuck out to make this scene. And we was workin' along, we was puttin' a little shed on there about five foot wide, me and my partner, an old man by the name of Oscar Parker - contrary old rooster! (KP laughs)

 

And so we was workin' along, and about nine o'clock, why, they come out with doughnuts and coffee and everything else and called a halt. Well, we stopped and fooled around thirty minutes, drank coffee and ate doughnuts, and we went back to work. We'd been used to workin' for contractors where you had to produce or you didn't stay. We wasn't drivin' nails fast, but we was drivin' nails. One of these movie carpenters came by and said, "Hey, you guys, come here, I wanna talk to you a minute." We got down from the top of this buildin' and the guy said, "You boys like your job?" We said, "Well, not too much, we ain't too crazy about it. It's just a day's work for us." He said, "Well, if you want to keep it, slow down. We don't work like that here. We take our good easy time." And so we slowed down to where we thought we'd get fired, but then we was still faster than the movie carpenters! (KP laughs)



BESSIE WHITE:  They aren't used to rushing.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  And my husband also helped build the Arizona Bank up in <Flagstaff>, and the new bank, the J. C. Penney.



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah, I worked on that. I worked on Babbitts' Thriftway Store down here, helped build that.



BESSIE WHITE:  J. C. Penney Store.



ORVAL WHITE: J. C. Penney Store, the telephone office.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, were those all built like in the sixties?



ORVAL WHITE: Yes.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yes, early sixties.



ORVAL WHITE: Early sixties. I think Thriftway down here was built in '59, the best I remember.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The one in East Flag?

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]



ORVAL WHITE: The old Crystal Theatre there is on San Francisco, right behind Joe’s Bar. They tore that out and put in Sweet Briar dress shop.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yeah, Sweet Briar dress shop, and I worked there, also, after it was finished, you know - Sweet Briar. And I also worked at…



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was the old Crystal Theatre?



ORVAL WHITE: Yes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was actually like a movie house?



ORVAL WHITE: A movie house, yes. When I went to the picture show, just like where the Orpheum is down there now.



BESSIE WHITE:  It was fifty years ago that it was _______. Isn't that right?



ORVAL WHITE: That's right.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I didn't know that.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yeah, it was… Oh, popcorn bags and lard buckets in the basement and everything, you know, like they used in the old days to make the popcorn. And all that junk was in the basement when he was remodeling this and making a store out of it.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Huh!



BESSIE WHITE:  Very interesting.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah! That was a theater over there. I didn't know that.



BESSIE WHITE:  Long years ago, many years ago.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Huh that’s amazing.



BESSIE WHITE:  There was a man that lived here a long time - he's passed away now - but he said it was fifty years ago that they had the movie house there. So my husband's done a lot of work in <Flagstaff>.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  Lots of work.



ORVAL WHITE: What other questions did you want to ask me there?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, well, maybe we can talk more about the reservation. We just talked a little bit about it. What was it like out there?



ORVAL WHITE: Very primitive.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Most of the Indians lived in their Hogans at that time?



ORVAL WHITE: Their hogans. And especially one day we was at <Chinle>, I noticed the Indians all had new lunch kits - a black bucket that most people carry lunches in, instead of brown bags. You carry a thermos of coffee and then have a couple or three sandwiches, a piece of pie, or whatever the wife fixed. And I got to wonderin' about them Indians, what they had in all them. They all had brand new lunch kits. One day I ate my lunch right in a hurry, right fast, and got back out there in time to see what they had. They had a chunk of mutton about two-and-a-half inches square and some of that fry bread they call it. We people in <Texas> called it hoecake, fried on top of the stove and turned over and brown it again. And they take a knife and cut off a piece of that mutton and eat bread and mutton, and that was what they had for their meal.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I imagine at the time you were out there, there was very little electricity or anything.



ORVAL WHITE: Very little. Some places we had electricity, and some we didn't. Most of the saws…, we didn't have many power saws such as Skil saws or stuff like that. But the main saws we done most of the cuttin' with was powered with a gasoline generator. It was a generator run with gasoline. It had a motor on it to generate electricity, and we could take power off'en that.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there much running water around?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah. Yeah, we usually had running water most of the time. I can't remember we lived at any place we carried water, did we, Mama?



BESSIE WHITE:  No, I think most everywhere we had our trailer, they had…



ORVAL WHITE: They'd drill a well first to find out if there was water to supply the school. Most of what we built was schools.



BESSIE WHITE:  Government work, you know.



ORVAL WHITE: Hospitals. Well, it was an individual contractor, but the contractor had contracted from the government to build it for the Indians. Nowadays, they won't let white men much come on the reservation. Indians do all their own work.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was the feeling at that time like between the Indian workers and the white workers?



ORVAL WHITE: The feeling?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right.



ORVAL WHITE: I didn't notice no animosity or anything like that. We all were very congenial - especially I got along with 'em well. I know one morning I had to set the footer for a house at <Chinle>. They pulled three carpenters off of their job, and all four of us worked on another footer the day before and got it finished, ready to put in the stem wall and stood up. They sent them over to <Kayenta> to do the punch list, and the boss told me, "Well, Whitey, you go out there and do what you can." Well, I couldn't talk Navajo. I never did even learn to try. I can say two or three words. I try to talk to 'em in English, and they wouldn't do nothin', they'd just stand and look at me just blank like a blank wall. Finally I got to cussin' in Spanish and they all understood that, and we got along real well then. We had a common language between us. I could speak Spanish and they could too, and so we understood one another and we worked fine together from then on, with no trouble.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm surprised that they could speak Spanish.



ORVAL WHITE: My nickname on the reservation for years was "Mexican Whitey." I talked Spanish to 'em. But most all of 'em speak Spanish - the biggest percentage of 'em does.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did you learn Spanish? Just picked it up in <Texas>?



ORVAL WHITE: In <Texas>. I don't speak Spanish, I speak border Spanish. It's something similar to a mountaineer talkin' to an educated college man - the difference in the language, see.



BESSIE WHITE:  You might call it Mexican slang, kind of.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. That's what most people understand, anyway.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yeah.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, this would probably be goin' back to <Texas>, but do you remember much about World War I? You were pretty young.



ORVAL WHITE: Yes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did it affect you much?



ORVAL WHITE: I remember the rice flour we ate, and bran biscuits Mother would make. They made what they called rice flour, and sugar was rationed, stuff that a way. And flour was rationed. We ate a lot of cornbread for breakfast, which is good for you. We had the money to buy some flour with, but it was rationed - wheat flour.



BESSIE WHITE:  Once in a while we'd have meatless days, sweetless days, wheatless days. And I, as a child was scared to death to eat anything sweet on a certain day - I believe it was Wednesday. And on wheatless days we'd eat cornbread. And we actually went by that religiously, trying to comply with the World War I - it was kind of a law, wasn't it?



ORVAL WHITE: Or a regulation, like.



BESSIE WHITE:  And it was kind of a regulation.



ORVAL WHITE: Just like in World War II, you know, they passed a law that you couldn't go down and buy tires - you had to have a permit to get a tire for your car. In reality you had to really NEED it, and you had to be doing essential work to get certain kind of tires.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: 'Cause they were all made out of rubber?



ORVAL WHITE: Yes, and the shortage of rubber. See, they was usin' it mostly overseas over there.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Let's see, we talked a LITTLE bit about Prohibition. Do you remember anything…?



ORVAL WHITE: Prohibition?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, much more?



ORVAL WHITE: No, I wasn't there when… I don't remember too much about it. I was too small. I remember my mother and my uncles talking about it, and things that a way. But I never did see a bar 'til I came to <Arizona>, and there in <Texas> we had what they called beer joints. They just served beer.



BESSIE WHITE:  In SOME counties - not ALL counties.



ORVAL WHITE: No. It was some counties is what you call wet counties, and then there was dry counties. But for an open bar, I never saw one 'til I came to <Arizona>. The first trip I come to <Arizona> was 1929. I came out here huntin' work. I got a job helpin' level land out there around Perryville. That's west of <Phoenix>, northeast of Buckeye, in that area.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you think the Depression was worse in the <Texas> area, as opposed to <Arizona>?



ORVAL WHITE: Yes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was much worse?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah. See, we had quite a bit of commodities in them days, but we didn't have no money. In comparison with the present day, we have plenty of money. We WERE in a high-priced depression right now.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, it was different. Now, you're closer to the Dust Bowl area than like this area. Do you remember much about people having to leave their land and everything, during that time?



ORVAL WHITE: That, I heard about it, but I didn't pay TOO much attention to it, 'cause I was too busy tryin' to make a living for my OWN family. During the Depression, why, I'd punch cows for twenty-one dollars a month.



BESSIE WHITE:  We got the dust.



ORVAL WHITE: We got a lot of dust and sandstorms.



BESSIE WHITE:  When I was a child. Of course that was before I knew my husband. I think I was twelve. We would get the dust from the Dust Bowl. See, I was born and raised in Comanche County, and he was born and raised… how far on down from where I was? A couple hundred miles?



ORVAL WHITE: About 300 miles.



BESSIE WHITE:  But I recall that this Dust Bowl thing was so awful that it covered the sun, even down there where I was raised - until the sun couldn't shine. And it would be so dark. The area where I was raised wasn't the Dust Bowl, but this was coming from up in <Colorado> and down West <Texas>, and down across <Texas>. It was terrible.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, the Dust Bowl mostly was in the Panhandle of <Texas> and Western <Oklahoma>.



BESSIE WHITE:  But it reached in the air.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just ____________.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yeah, the sky would just be terrible full of dirt. It would reach that far down into the interior of <Texas> where I was a child. I remember that, very well.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's really interesting. I’m going to ask you about World War II. You did a lot of carpentry work during World War II?



ORVAL WHITE: No, I was too small.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: World War TWO?



ORVAL WHITE: Two? Two! Oh, excuse me, I was thinkin' of One. I'm sorry. Oh yeah, that's all I done during World War II is carpenter work.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, for military installations?



ORVAL WHITE: Military installations - not much housing. Very little housing. Oh, of course we built some houses on bases and things that a way, but it was mostly barracks buildings to house the boys that was in training in the Army.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Would you say that's when <Arizona> seemed to grow in population and change the most?



ORVAL WHITE: It started in there, along in that area.



BESSIE WHITE:  World War II.



ORVAL WHITE: I remember all during World War II, we lived at <Casa Grande>. But it was me and one other man in town was the only two carpenters in town, and we were just covered up all the time. We worked twelve and sixteen hours a day. Wages then was - the government paid $1.25 an hour for carpenters. And I know well along in '43, '44, I got $2.00 an hour, and I made more money then now, than I do at $10.65 an hour. I mean, my money had more buying power, let's put it that a way.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right, yeah.



ORVAL WHITE: 'Cause a dollar was worth a dollar then, or about ninety-five cents. And now it's worth about fifteen, I think, the way it goes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. Do you remember like in the <Phoenix>-<Casa Grande> area, any big fires that did any particular damage or anything?



ORVAL WHITE: Do you?



BESSIE WHITE:  Do you mean in that area?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, anything you can remember.



BESSIE WHITE:  In <Phoenix> or <Casa Grande> - offhand I don't recall any fire except our own house.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, there was a fire down on Main Street, Jack's…



BESSIE WHITE:  Oh yes, it burned that’s right, that's right.



ORVAL WHITE: Burned a man up in there. I was tryin' to think what year that was. Was that '41?



BESSIE WHITE:  It was about '43.



ORVAL WHITE: Forty-three, Jacks Roomin' House.



BESSIE WHITE:  Old Front Street, it was the old part of the town. But then it was a small town.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was in <Casa Grande>?



BESSIE WHITE:  <Casa Grande>.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And your own house burned, too?



BESSIE WHITE:  Yes, our own house burned.



ORVAL WHITE: Burned up there.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh that’s too bad. (pause) Well, can you remember was there any flooding at all in that area?



ORVAL WHITE: Oh, yeah.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Lots of it?



ORVAL WHITE: Well, flash floods would be all. It'd run down right away.



BESSIE WHITE:  <Phoenix> was very bad to flood.



ORVAL WHITE: <Phoenix> was bad to flood 'cause the drainage system - STILL is - _____________.



BESSIE WHITE:  And it still is, of course, you know. But it was worse then, I believe. Don't you think so?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah, it was worse then than it is now.



BESSIE WHITE:  The <Salt River>, you know, oh! It would just… I don't think it runs at all now, compared to the way it did then.



ORVAL WHITE: Oh, it don't.



BESSIE WHITE:  Just overflow TERRIBLE!



ORVAL WHITE: In '36 it come an awful rain, back up the creeks, <Salt River>.



BESSIE WHITE:  It couldn't take care of the water.



ORVAL WHITE: And it flooded all over out there. That was before they had those gravel companies down in the riverbed. They got a lot of gravel companies down there - Metro and [Shallow Paces?], Dempsey's concrete outfit and everything now. There come a flood now, like it did then, it'd wash away a lot of houses down there.



BESSIE WHITE:  Seems like, though, the dams that they have now up above there, seems to take care of the water and everything better now than it did then. <Salt River> never floods that I know of, like it did in those days.



ORVAL WHITE: Well, the canal system [is] a little better too - they can let it out through the canals a lot better now than they could then. You know, open all the gates on the canals and just let it flow.



BESSIE WHITE:  Real frightening, I remember that.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, 'cause it did so much [damage], just washed through real fast.



ORVAL WHITE: I don't know which would be worse now, flood or fire. I don't want either one.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No! Well, were there any drought periods, really dry water shortage periods when you were down there?



ORVAL WHITE: Seemed like there was, but I can't remember exactly.



BESSIE WHITE:  Of course that's desert, you know, but the five years we lived in <Phoenix> I don't recall of us having very much rain there, do you? Yes, we did, because we had the floods. But in the <Casa Grande> area we saw lots of drought times, when we were living down there, you know.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it hard to get water? Did they ration it?



BESSIE WHITE:  Well, they had lots of wells on the farms. But I'm just speaking of rain, you know, being so droughty, and the desert would be SO dry. Then there would come years that it would rain a lot and it would just be BEAUTIFUL. But it varied.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, just year to year.



BESSIE WHITE:  Sometimes it would be two, three years of drought on the desert, you know, and it wouldn't be very pretty.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No.



BESSIE WHITE:  But of course the farmers all irrigated and everything. They'd have beautiful crops from the wells.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The wells never seemed to have too much trouble?



BESSIE WHITE:  No, but I think in the last few years I understand that the water table has fallen. ______________ and it has really hurt the farmers, because it's fallen real a lot. And they had _________ wells, and givin' 'em a lot of trouble in that way.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. Let's see blizzards wouldn’t affect that part of the country. Were there any epidemics? You might remember the flu that would be in <Texas>.



ORVAL WHITE: I remember the flu epidemic of 1918 very well.



BESSIE WHITE:  My mother had a remedy to keep you from having the flu, which makes me believe it was really 100 percent. She made great big lockets this big, out of [asfidity?] and put around our necks, because that flu was contagious then, you know, or supposedly. We went to <Oklahoma> on the train on a visit, and all of us kids - oh, I remember how awful that smelled.



ORVAL WHITE: You stunk so bad that the germs couldn't live around it. (laughter)



BESSIE WHITE:  And there were some soldiers on this train, that their faces were red with fever. My mother said, "They have influenza." And we were so scared, you know. And we knew we had these lockets on around our necks. But we made the trip and not a one of us had the flu in the year 1918.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Boy! That was…



BESSIE WHITE:  And lots of people did, you know.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm really surprised that they would let people on the train or on public transportation.



BESSIE WHITE:  That was the most loaded-down train - I remember that - and I was about eleven years old. And there was soldiers standing. I remember that so well.



ORVAL WHITE: Them days, the health authorities wasn't as strong as they are now. You just done whatever you wanted to. You could have, well, such cases of small pox or diphtheria, or stuff like that, they'd quarantine ya', but a flu, you just go anywhere you wanted to, or any other chicken pox disease or stuff like that. There was no quarantines - nothing but a dreadful disease, and they counted small pox or diphtheria or somethin' like that.



BESSIE WHITE:  During the period of World War II, there was a meningitis epidemic.



ORVAL WHITE: That was World War I.



BESSIE WHITE:  I mean World War I, yes, I'm sorry. World War I, there was meningitis, diphtheria, the flu, and small pox.



ORVAL WHITE: I know I lost our baby sister during that time. She had diphtheria. But none of the rest of us kids taken it.



BESSIE WHITE:  So I recall my father went to town to talk to the doctor. He said, "Well, you go buy an atomizer..." and some kind of pink medicine, a big bottle of it. And he just lined us up, and he just sprayed you and you and you, and we all had our mouths open, and he just sprayed in our nose in and in our mouth. We never one of us had it.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Huh!



BESSIE WHITE:  It's just amazing, you know, those epidemics were so bad, and there were so many deaths from 'em.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Huh!



BESSIE WHITE:  But we lived out on a farm and never went anywhere to be exposed.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right.



ORVAL WHITE: We didn't live crowded up in town like they do now. We lived out where there was more fresh air, and us kids was out in the open all the time. Nowadays, kids stay housed up, lookin' at them boob tubes.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And not so healthy?



ORVAL WHITE: Yeah, not so healthy. We had our chores to do. I had wood to chop in the evening, and I would come home from school, I'd take an axe and cut wood for - we burned wood in the cookstove and the heater. Sometimes it'd snow down there - I've seen snows there eighteen inches deep on the level, which we thought was a big snow, but since I've came to <Arizona>, I found out it's just a little ol' frost. (laughter)



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, you've been here for some of the big ones. Wasn't there a huge snow in the sixties here?



ORVAL WHITE: Well, there was a frost in '67 that was eighty-four inches deep.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Wasn't that like over a weekend or something? It wasn't a very long period that you got that much?



ORVAL WHITE: It was eight or nine days during the time it snowed. No! It was on a Monday - it was five days.



BESSIE WHITE:  There was three days that a car couldn't go ANYWHERE.



ORVAL WHITE: We were snowed-in here. We lived right here on this spot at the time. See we lived here thirteen years just one place. We have some friends that came up here. I was workin' over to the college in the Science Building - we was settin' furniture in the Science Building, and this friend was supposed to go over there and go to work with me. And he'd moved up here and he had a little camp trailer. And he couldn't get in to a park, so he pulled it right across in front of us, and four of us - it was he and his wife, and me and my wife - stayed in a thirty-five-foot trailer, and we was snowed-in for a week here.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh!



BESSIE WHITE:  You couldn't see not a dog or anything or person, for three days. I stayed up all night every night, and I'd open the door and I'd sweep the snow, and it went WAY UP. And I'd sweep it to where I could see the top step. My husband said, "I don't know what you're doin' all that for - you're not goin' anywhere." And I said, "Well, at least I can open the door and look straight at it."



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah! (laughs) It was just that. Did you have to get it off the roof of the trailer?



BESSIE WHITE:  Oh yes! It was about (



ORVAL WHITE: Shovel it off.) four feet deep on our roof, wasn't it?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Whew!



BESSIE WHITE:  Yeah, it stacked up so bad.



ORVAL WHITE: During the storm, the weather bureau gave it as eighty-four inches, which is seven-foot.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah.



ORVAL WHITE: It wasn't all on the ground at the time - don't misunderstand me. It wasn't that deep on the ground.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, yeah, but it was four to five feet, probably.



ORVAL WHITE: It was four foot out there. That road, you'd have to get up like this to get on the street out there, 'cause we ran this [Alan Harris?]. We'd shovel out around our pickups.



BESSIE WHITE:  They didn't have equipment in this area - the city didn't - to take care of us - or good equipment, you know. And so one morning - it was about the third morning - we heard the noise, and I said, "Oh, that is the snowplow!" So he came down Third, you know, and the snow was blowin' so high that when a car went down, all you saw was just the top of the car. And so then he came down OUR street, and we were rejoicing, we were so happy. (laughter)



ORVAL WHITE: Just an extra-wide space. You could drive, but you couldn't pass anyone.



BESSIE WHITE:  Oh, the feelin', I tell ya'!



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I bet! Do you think that since you've been here, that tourism has picked up?



ORVAL WHITE: Definitely.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just since you've been here?



ORVAL WHITE: Yes, just since we've been here.



BESSIE WHITE:  An AWFUL lot. I don't know how much to say, but you can note all these nice motels were not here when we first came.



ORVAL WHITE: I helped build Holiday Inn over on the west side. There wasn't nothin' over there at the time. Several motels that's been built. Well, motel accommodations when we first came here was very poor, according to the standards that they have now.



BESSIE WHITE:  They built fast. You see the dam goin' in up here at <Page> helped <Flagstaff> a lot, as well as the tourists. But of course tourists are the ones that use the motels. Of course lots of people moved here because there was no living accommodations at Page FOR them. So they moved their families here to Flag. Well, that started the progress of Flag's growth, you see, too. This definitely is a tourist center.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. Well, especially, I think, East <Flagstaff> was built up with a lot of the motels.



BESSIE WHITE:  Yes.



ORVAL WHITE: It's sort of like that <Las Vegas> Strip now - motels along here, you know, comin' down Old 66, Santa Fe.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, it is.



ORVAL WHITE: Only we don't have the casinos, we just have the motels.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I can't think of anything else specifically to ask you. Can you think of anything that you remember real well?



ORVAL WHITE: Cut that off. (tape turned off and on)



BESSIE WHITE:  Highways in <Arizona> were very primitive and narrow forty years ago. Like when we came in, we came by <Globe>, came over the Coolidge Dam, and it was a very narrow road, just two-way road, you know, highway. Just narrow, very narrow. And now you come through <Globe> comin' to <Phoenix>, it's a beautiful drive, freeways all over the state. It's just so wonderful to see how <Arizona> has grown all over the state - even goin' to the <Tucson> area, where our relatives live. He has a brother in <Marana>, and I have a brother in Oracle, which is in the <Tucson> area now. And so of course we frequent the freeway and everything. And we very often talk about how <Arizona> has progressed so beautifully in forty years. Of course, that's a pretty long time, forty years, period.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  It really has, in every area - <Phoenix>, you know. And <Phoenix> was not a very large town when we came here in 1936. What was the population?



ORVAL WHITE: Forty thousand.



BESSIE WHITE:  Forty thousand.



ORVAL WHITE: Not much bigger than <Flagstaff> is now.



BESSIE WHITE:  My husband had a little job. You know you just took anything during the Depression that you could get to do. And he was workin' at a little [Nifty Nuke?] restaurant drive-in - first one I'd ever seen in my life. Our little daughter and I would wait 'til it got cool - it was terribly hot, not much refrigeration in those days like they have now.



ORVAL WHITE: Wasn't ANY!



BESSIE WHITE:  And in the evenings, everyone had blankets on the lawn, and they were on the porches and out, like 'til midnight. So she and I would go up to this little place to be with him and to get us a cold drink, you know. We'd stay 'til twelve o'clock and we'd go home, because people were all out in their yards, we weren't afraid. But now, you wouldn't dare do that, it would be dangerous. (



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right.) And THAT way, <Phoenix> has changed.



ORVAL WHITE: How much you got left on that [tape]?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's okay…

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]



ORVAL WHITE: One thing I say for <Flagstaff>, we've got the best police department, always responsive, of any police department in the state.



BESSIE WHITE:  WONDERFUL police department. And we TELL 'em that. We had to call 'em one night last week out here. We had a prowler. And so they came, and of course whoever it was, was gone. But anyway, we told 'em. And every opportunity that we have, we tell 'em. I think we should, don't you?



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah.



BESSIE WHITE:  When they are responsive that way and come to your call.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's good. When you first came into <Phoenix>, was there much of a police department at all?



ORVAL WHITE: There was some, but you could go down the street and still see drunks layin' on the sidewalk, what we call winos. In them days they were all over the courthouse lawn. People would just go out there and lay down in the evenings.



BESSIE WHITE:  _______________.



ORVAL WHITE: Afternoon, you know, they'd hunt a shade and lay out there and take a nap - siesta, the Mexicans call it.



BESSIE WHITE:  It was a wonderful place.



ORVAL WHITE: I can see a lot of changes in <Phoenix>, [from] the days when we first come there. <Phoenix>, when I first came there, was a nice little town? It had anything you wanted in there, from roller bearings to any other piece of equipment. Of course you had your bars and your night entertainment, your nightclubs and stuff that a way, which we didn't go to much. We never did go to one, as far as that goes. I'm not a religious fanatic, don't misunderstand me, but we just didn't go with that crowd of people.

 

It was a nice town. It was a big town, 'cause the town we left was about 8,000 people, [to] come out here. We left a small town, got out here and about 40,000-45,000, why, we was in a big town. Of course we'd been to <Dallas> and <Fort Worth> and places like that, but still it was a larger town than <Phoenix> at the time.



BESSIE WHITE:  We saw <Phoenix> grow into a REAL city.



ORVAL WHITE: Metropolis.



BESSIE WHITE:  Metropolis now. And we like <Flagstaff>. If we have to go to <Phoenix>, we can't wait to get home, because we love it here. And we feel protected and we feel safer here and everything. Well, we've been here so long now, it seems more like home than anywhere else.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yeah. Oh, you mentioned in <Phoenix> there wasn't much refrigeration or anything. How did people make it around the heat?



ORVAL WHITE: You just sweated. You just sweated. They had quite a few electric fans.



BESSIE WHITE:  Now, the stores were all refrigerated, but I mean in the homes.



ORVAL WHITE: You were talkin' about the individual homes, like now we have a cooler there, and you probably have refrigeration in your home or your apartment where you live, and come in and it's warm, you turn it on and cool it off a little bit. But in them days, you just sweat.

I know when we first came out here, I was workin' at night, and my wife went down and bought a big dish pan, she set a fan behind it and let it blow across that water on me. And I'd wake up about three o'clock and be just bone dry. She'd fix up a big glass of ice water, I drank that, and in three minutes I'd be just wet with sweat all over, even the back of my hands - it'd just pop out on me.



BESSIE WHITE:   I don't know how we stood it, when I look back over it.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, it's SO hot.



BESSIE WHITE:  They didn't have… Everybody's homes down there now are cooled some way or other - refrigeration or water coolers or something. But this house we lived in, we didn't have it.



ORVAL WHITE: They had more windows in places.



BESSIE WHITE:  We just knew it was hot weather and we just lived with it.



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I guess.



