JEWEL, LEONA, AND LAVOY McGEE INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.13

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's March 11, 1998. We're in the home of Jewel and Leona McGee in <Farmington New Mexico>. Also present in the room are Lavoy McGee, and Lew Steiger running the sound and camera. We're here working on the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project, and we're pleased to have two generations of Indian traders in the room with us, and we're going to ask them some questions about their experiences. [Since there are three McGees present, they are identified by their first names (Tr.)] 

Cole: First off, I'm going to ask Leona when and where were you born? 

Leona: I was born in <Sanford Colorado>, on July 22, 1918. 

Cole: And when did you become involved in Indian trading? 

Leona: (laughs) Well, I didn't get involved in it until I met my husband, and was married, and went out there to live. 

Cole: And when was that? 

Leona: That was, well, let's see.... 

Cole: When were you married? 

Leona: That was September 19, 1937. 

Cole: Did you ever imagine growing up as a young child, that you'd end up working on a Navajo Reservation? 

Leona: No! (laughs) Didn't enter my head. 

Cole: Do you have some fond memories of that? 

Leona: Oh yes, we loved it out there. You know, the place we lived in and all, this old trading post that was.... What was it, 'dobies? 

Jewel: Mud. 

Leona: Built adobes, mud. 

Jewel: Wooden forms, like cement. 

Leona: And the roof with poles and then dirt on top of that. And of course that was real exciting in the house, with all this dirt up there. We'd be just fine until it rained, and then here would come little mud puddles down the walls. Oh, it wasn't a real elaborate, fancy place, but it was very comfortable, and we had a big living room and a post in the middle of the room to hold the roof up, and a fireplace. When we first went out there, we didn't have a bathroom, any convenience like that. It was going you-know-where. (laughs) 

Jewel: The outhouse. 

Leona: But anyway, why, afterwards we added on a little bit and had a new kitchen and all, and then made the old kitchen into a spare bedroom. And then we had a bathroom then, too. Of course when I first went out there, it looked kinda--here's these men been batchin' there, you know, and things weren't too (laughs) nice, but when I went in the bedroom, the bed had all four legs sitting in a tin can. And I believe it was kerosene inside. 

Jewel: Kerosene, yeah. 

Leona: Kerosene in the bottom of the can. And I said, "Jewel, what in the world is that?!" Well, he said he did that to keep the bugs from crawlin' into bed with him. And one night he could feel something and kicked the covers off, and there was a great big centipede crawlin' on his leg. And of course you know what that did to me. Then, too, of course we took care of that and got that taken care of and fought the bugs-- even to bed bugs. Does anybody else tell you that? (laughter) Oh! I think Jill Chimberto [phonetic spelling] had a lot of that. My sister-in-law was out there. She said that was awful. And the birds would carry them into those pole things there, you know, and make nests. And we had to doctor those. Oh dear, it was quite a problem, but we managed and got rid of it.

Then every time I prepared a meal and we'd sit down to eat, Jewel, before he ate, he'd always do this (makes gesture) on the top of the table. I said, "Why are you doing that?!" "Oh," he said, "that's habit. I had to rake off the sand." I nearly had a fit. But anyway, I finally got him to quit doin' that. (laughs)

But we enjoyed it, and our children enjoyed it out there. Lavoy, when he was a baby, and I had him in the bedroom in a crib, I went in to check on him, he was asleep, and what should I find in there but along the baseboard was the biggest bull snake you ever laid eyes on. What was it, four or five feet long? 

Jewel: Yeah, a big one. 

Leona: Oh, I just nearly died! So we had our fun times. (laughs) I ran in the store, I told Jewel, "Come quick!" But they would come in the house, hunting birds. They'd get through, if there was a little hole, why, here they'd come on down in the house.

Anyway, for the most part, we enjoyed it. We didn't have a TV, but the evenings were wonderful. You could, oh, before it got dark, you could hear an Indian singing away, riding on a horse, going somewhere, and just singing to the top of his voice. You could hear the coyotes, and it was really quite nice. We enjoyed the peace and tranquility that was there. 

Cole: Did you work in the store some? 

Leona: Oh, once in a while. I didn't do a whole lot, but I helped some. I should have done more, I guess. What I should have done was learn to speak Navajo, and I didn't make a real effort. I know a few things, but not like I should have. 

Jewel: I kept her busy runnin' back and forth. I'd have to have her come stay in the store if I had to go outside and do somethin'. 

Cole: Did you have a nickname? 

Leona: No, not that I know of! (laughter) They never did tell me. I didn't have one from home. 

Cole: When did you move to <Farmington>? 

Leona: Oh, let's see, when Lavoy was six years old. 

Jewel: No, we didn't. Your folks sent him one year or so to school. 

Leona: Not the first year, did they? 

Jewel: Yes, they did. 

Leona: Well, I guess they did. 

Jewel: They lived in our house there in <Kirtland> and sent Lavoy. 

Leona: Well, yes they did, I'm all mixed up there. My parents come and lived in our home there at <Kirtland>. 

Jewel: Just one year, wasn't it? 

Lavoy: I don't remember. 

Leona: And Lavoy went to school and they took care of him. They had quite a time with Lavoy--he'd try to surprise 'em and milk the cow. (laughs) And do a few little things. But anyway, they took good care of him. And of course, we had to.... Let's see, I'm tryin' to think if Patsy was born--were we out there? Well, anyway, [it was] two years later before we had another one. But I didn't think they were there for two years, were they? Didn't seem like it. 

Jewel: I don't know, but Patsy was born out there, and then Janene [phonetic spelling] was born over at <Fort Wingate> when we was over there on that store. So Patsy would have had to been when we was still at <Red Rock>. 

Cole: Lavoy, when and where were you born? 

Lavoy: I was born in <Farmington>, so I guess I'm pretty native to this area. Born and raised here, in the Reservation. 

Cole: It sounds like at least for your first six years you lived at the trading post? Do you remember anything about that? 

Lavoy: We were at <Red Rock>, and of course I was pretty young then, but you reminisce a little bit and remember some things. It was always fun exploring and being in the store and being around the Indians. A lot of adventure out there for a youngster. Those were good years. 

Jewel: Well even after they got moved to school, why, they'd come out on the weekends. They always liked to go out there and play and wander over the country. (chuckles) 

Lavoy: Oh yeah, we had our friends that we'd do things with, so it was good years. 

Leona: Lavoy played with the little boy that lived on the hill right close to the store there. They played together a lot. 

Cole: Did you have a horse, ride a horse at all? 

Lavoy: Don't ever remember havin' a horse out there. I don't think we had horses. 

Cole: You'd mentioned that you had playmates, et cetera. Did you also work in the store, too? Did they have chores and stuff for you to do? 

Lavoy: Oh, yeah, sweep floors and clean warerooms and take care of the stock. And of course [we] did more and more as we got older. So a lot of my early years were in the store. 

Cole: Did you at some point think that that was what you were going to do when you grew up, was be a trader also? 

Lavoy: I don't remember ever thinkin' about it much. I don't think kids think very far ahead, and I don't think I did that either. I don't think I ever thought about ownin' a store later on. 

Cole: When did you actually begin to become more fully employed in the trading business? 

Lavoy: Well, during my high school years I'd work out there summers. Dad and his partners would employ me, so I was summer help. Then I went to college and I'd come back periodically to earn a little money and worked out there during some college years. 

Cole: Where did you go to college? 

Lavoy: Went to college at Brigham Young University. Then I graduated in the agricultural sciences. When I come out of college, I went to work for the Forest Service in <Cortez>. And I was there a short time, and here come dad and Uncle Roscoe, and they needed some help out at <Red Mesa> and were willing to sell me an interest to come out and run the place. So we left the Forest Service and went out to <Red Mesa> in the fall of 1965. 

Cole: How did you buy that interest? Did you pay cash for that? Or did you work into it? 

Lavoy: We just signed a note, and made payments. 

Cole: How much of an interest did you have? 

Lavoy: I think we started out with a quarter, 25 percent. 

Cole: Was it <Red Mesa> at that time? 

Lavoy: It was <Red Mesa>. 

Cole: What was that trading post like in 1965? 

Lavoy: That country used to be quite remote country. You'd leave <Shiprock> and head out towards Northern <Arizona>, towards <Kayenta>, and you're out in the boonies. But just recently, a highway had been built out through that country. And just a few years prior to us buying an interest out there, they had moved the old trading post up onto the highway. So by the time I got there, it was a fairly modern building, and it was a self-service store, so it wasn't like the old-type stores. And the Indians still were old-type Indians: the highway was just there, and they were new to the highway and all that, too. There were still a lot of "long hairs" and a lot of people that couldn't speak much English. 

Cole: What kind of transportation were they using mainly? 

Lavoy: A lot of 'em had pickups and still a lot of 'em used wagons and horses, but there were a few pickups around then. Everybody didn't have a pickup, but it seemed like every family seemed to have access to one and got around pretty good. 

Cole: Did you live at <Red Mesa> then? 

Lavoy: Oh, yes, lived there and started our family and lived there quite a few years, until my kids got up till thirteen, fourteen years of age. 

Cole: Where did they go to school? 

Lavoy: They went down to <Teec Nos Pos>, went down to the school down there. That was about fifteen miles away from us, and they went there for the first few years. And then eventually a school was built right at <Red Mesa>, and then they went there, until we moved to town. 

Cole: Were those BIA schools, or tribal schools? 

Lavoy: No, the one at <Teec Nos Pos> was a BIA school. When they built <Red Mesa>, it was a public school. 

Cole: How big of an operation was <Red Mesa>? 

Lavoy: It was a pretty good little store. I think we had about four employees, besides myself, so we were an up and goin' place, and kept pretty busy. 

Cole: Now, did you eventually own more than that 25 percent interest? 

Lavoy: I ended up ownin' it all. But it was first off a quarter percent, then a half, and then all of it. 

Cole: What types of market did you have there? Did you still do a lot of business with livestock? 

Lavoy: Our market there was for the Indians. We were there to serve Indian needs. Even though the highway was there, and the tourists were starting to use the highway a lot, and it was a popular tourist road, still, we were an Indian trading post, and we supplied all their general needs, from groceries and mutton, to dry goods, hardware, feed, gasoline-- whatever. So we were a full-service trading post. It was a good area for livestock, we bought lots of wool, mohair and a lot of cattle out in that area, and they raised pretty good cattle out there. 

Cole: How did you get the animals to market? 

Lavoy: The closest sale barn was in <Cortez>, and sometimes we would transport 'em there ourselves. Sometimes the sale barn would send a big truck, and make a little route and stop and buy our stuff. So both those ways. 

Cole: Now, were you involved in any stock improvement projects yourself? 

Lavoy: Well, like dad mentioned, in his interview, we supplied a lot of billy goats and a lot of rams for the sheep, and we also sold bulls over the years. So mostly with sires. <Red Mesa> was an area that had a lot of goats, probably more goats than lots of areas, and there was a lot of demand for that mohair out from that country, because out in this country, people only sheared once a year, so when they did their shearin', it was a good long staple. Lots of the other areas, like <Texas> and so on, they'd shear twice a year, so it wasn't near the nice staple that our mohair was. And they had good quality of goats, so a good market for mohair. (aside about tape) 

Cole: Where did you sell your mohair? 

Lavoy: We'd have buyers who would contact us and bid on our mohair. We had several people that were interested, so people would contact us, or we'd know of buyers, and check for the best price. 

Cole: What were the living conditions like for your family at that time period? 

Lavoy: We had a little cinder block store with an attached cinder block dwelling that was quite comfortable. We had nice facilities. At that point in time we had inside toilets and inside running water, so it was pretty nice. 

Cole: Did you have electricity? 

Lavoy: We had electricity, and of course back in those days we didn't have commercial electricity out there, we had to generate our own. We had two old Whittee [generators] out there that just made a lot of racket and run all the time, and were quite somethin' to keep goin'. 

Cole: And what did they run on? 

Lavoy: They run on (Jewel: Diesel.) diesel. Yeah, diesel fuel. 

Cole: So did you have diesel delivery out there by then, or did you have to.... 

Lavoy: Yeah, we had large tanks that they'd come and keep full. 

Cole: And what would you say the living conditions in the mid-1960's were like for your Navajo customers? 

Lavoy: Oh, they had very simple conditions. Most of 'em lived in the hogans that they'd built. A lot of 'em, by that time, were makin' little frame homes and what-not--simple, but comfortable. 

Cole: Do you speak Navajo? 

Lavoy: I didn't learn Navajo like my dad and some of the older ones. It seemed like there was too many people at that time that were speakin' English (laughter), so I had too many people talkin' English to me now. I did pretty good in the store and with tradin' Navajo items, and those kind of things, but you get me out of the store, and in somebody's home, and they could lose me pretty quick. And if I went to church where religious things were bein' taught, I didn't know a thing. So I did pretty good in the store, and that kind of Navajo, but that was about it. 

Cole: Did you have a nickname? 

Lavoy: I knew you was gonna ask that question. I've been tryin' to think. I've been called a couple of things, but mostly they called me by my name. Even a lot of the old-time people that couldn't speak any English, they'd murder my first name Lavoy--they'd say that lots of ways. Some of 'em called me Naalzheehí biye’. That was because years and years ago, Dad was out at <Red Mesa>, and he was known for huntin'. 

Jewel: I trapped coyotes all the time. 

Lavoy: Yeah. The name for "hunter" is naalzheehí. And biye’ is for "his boy [son]." So I was Naalzheehí biye’. But mostly they called me by my name. 

Jewel: I was Naalzheehí sání, and he was Naalzheehí yázhí--the "old trapper" and the "young." 

Cole: I've gotta switch and ask Jewel a question about trapping coyotes. How many would you trap in a year? Maybe just tell something about how that worked. 

Jewel: Oh, I didn't catch very many--they're hard to catch! (laughs) I'd catch, oh, probably two or three a week when I was out trappin' all the time in the winter. 

Cole: Was there a pretty good market for their pelts? 

Jewel: It don't seem like much, but the $2.50 was quite a bit at that time, $3.00, for a pelt. 

Cole: What other kinds of things would you hunt? 

Jewel: Oh, there's bobcats--I used to catch a few bobcats. Skunks--but I never did like the skunk deal. (laughter) 

Cole: Was there any bigger game out there that you'd hunt? 

Jewel: No. That was all--coyotes was about the biggest. 

Cole: Well, Lavoy, how would you describe the Navajo-Anglo trade relationship to someone unfamiliar with the enterprise? 

Lavoy: You mean my relationship with my Navajo customers? 

Cole: Right, how you traded. Was it still.... 

Lavoy: You know, we had a very close relationship with the Indian people. They were our friends. I enjoyed and liked them, and most of them enjoyed and liked me. All of 'em respected me. We treated them very well, and very honestly. I've said before that maybe not everybody liked me, but everybody respected me. We really enjoyed our customers. (phone rings, and continues ringing for a full minute) Sometimes it was hard to do things for good business reasons, because you were caught up in the emotions of dealing with your friends and responding to needs that they had. But we had very close personal relationships with our Indian people. 

Cole: Were you still mainly a credit business in the 1960's? 

Lavoy: Yes, we did lots of credit--still did lots of credit. When we first started out, out there, of course we still did a lot of livestock credit--some on cattle, mostly on lambs and wool and mohair. By that time there were some incentive payments from the government that come for lambs and wool, and those checks meant quite a lot, so we still did a lot of credit at that time. And of course at that time, Social Security checks were startin' to come to 'em, and welfare was startin' to show up more and more, and most people credited on those things. So, yes, we did lots of credit. 

Cole: And still quite a bit with pawn, too, then? 

Lavoy: We did a lot of pawn, too. We had a large vault that was just chuck full of turquoise and Indian artifacts and things. Did a lot of pawn. (someone finally answers phone) 

Cole: So you would have started in the trading business when you started to see a lot more of the government programs come in. How did that change trade or change the whole Navajo social condition? Did you see changes with that? 

Lavoy: It put a lot more cash in the economy, for one thing, with the Social Security checks and the welfare checks, and of course there'd been some railroad work, and just a lot more money in it, and it put more money in the people's hands. You know, they were able to buy more things and enjoy more things than they used to. I think they enjoyed it, and it helped their lifestyles a lot. 

Cole: Could you describe how the pawn business worked? 

Lavoy: Well, if people were desiring some credit, and they couldn't get credit otherwise on an open account, they'd bring a piece of their property and give it to us as security for their credit. So the pawn was just a security that they would discharge their financial obligation. So we'd take a piece of jewelry or a belt, or whatever, and advance 'em the credit or the cash loan that they needed. I think the tribal regulations at that time, we had to hold it for six months, but it was really meaningless, because it was seldom redeemed in six months. There was continuing payments and continuing credit on those pieces. So it was just security so they could have some credit. 

Cole: And then would you have other credit, also-- just straight credit? 

Lavoy: Sometimes we'd just have open credit, just on open account. And most of those open account credits [were granted] when we knew that something was coming down the line so they could pay us back--like a monthly check, or wool in the spring, or lambs in the fall. So they were given advance credit on those things. Sometimes if they'd get up to their credit limit, then they'd give us some security in pawn, you know, for a little extra credit. 

Cole: Did you deal in any feed at all for animals? 

Lavoy: Oh yeah, we had a large hay barn. We kept our hay barn full most of the time, and sold hay mostly, but in the store we kept grain and corn and that kind of stuff, too. 

Cole: Where did the hay come from? 

Lavoy: Mostly here in the valley, and <Kirtland>, <Waterflow>, and this part of the country down in San Juan Valley. 

Cole: I'm sure you had a lease on the trading post. 

Lavoy: We had twenty-five-year leases at that time, and it seemed like twenty-five years was a long time when you started out. It seemed like those years kinda went by the way. So we had long-term leases. 

Cole: Were you able to achieve another lease, then, when your twenty-five-year lease.... 

Lavoy: We did. 

Jewel: We didn't have much trouble after that, gettin' our leases. 

Lavoy: No, we never had any trouble at our place. You know, we had a good relationship with the people and [we were] well liked, and the local council knew pretty well, pushed our leases through, and we didn't have any trouble renewing. 

Cole: How would one go about getting a lease or a lease renewal? 

Lavoy: Well, in these later years, the procedure got a little bit more difficult. They put more of the responsibility on the local chapters. So if you didn't have a good relationship with your local people, it was hard to go to <Window Rock> and get anything done there. So they kinda brought all of those decisions right home to us, to the local chapter. So usually that's where you'd have to start, and get some signatures and recommendations, then just walk it through the tribal government. 

Cole: If you were to characterize the Navajo economic system, how would you do that? as opposed to the white man's economic system? 

Lavoy: Well, of course, now it's about the same as ours because it's mostly a cash economy everywhere, everything revolves around the dollar. Back in the early times, it was mostly a barter system. You know, people had something of value--whether it was livestock, rugs, jewelry, or whatever--and they converted those things into cash or goods. 

Cole: Would you say that there are any characteristics that traders have in common? 

Lavoy: Well, I think the traders, as a fraternity, were a pretty diverse bunch, really. (Jewel: Uh-huh.) But I think most of the good traders were people that cared for their people, cared for the customers. And that'd probably be the main characteristic, that would just be people that cared for 'em, they were willing to get involved with 'em and work with 'em and see that their needs were met while ours were being met, too. 

Cole: When you were trading in the 1960's--can you maybe talk about some of the more popular items in the store. And also, maybe, if you could think back to when you worked for your dad as a younger man, was there any change in what people wanted the most? 

Lavoy: Well, it seemed like back in the early days, of course, as you can guess, it was the basics that were the most important. You know, flours, lards, sugars, salts, coffees, and that. Those are the staple things--you just had to have those things. And of course as they had more money, and as we were able to get better supplies, then we went into a more diverse range of things. When we left there, of course, we were butchering a lot of meat, selling a lot of mutton, and a lot of dairy products, and ice cream cases and just like uptown. So it went from the basics and about all they could afford, to some of the things like you see in our modern-day supermarkets. 

Jewel: ______________ dry goods changed, used to sell cloth for the dresses, ____________ once they got to buyin' the other stuff. 

Lavoy: Yeah, we used to sell a lot of cloth, a lot of goods for the women. It seems like everything the women wore, they made their things--you know, their velveteen blouses, the calicos for their skirts and things. Sold a lot of that, a lot of that--big item for us. And in recent years we weren't sellin' so much of that anymore--they were buyin' ready-made clothes and goin' to town. Dry goods used to be a huge part of our business until people got more vehicles and more cash in their hands, and the big mass merchandisers were in town, and that sure cut into our being able to sell those things to 'em anymore. 

Cole: About what time did you start to get the ability to have cold food cases, like you mentioned ice cream? 

Lavoy: Well, one of the limiting factors was we had to generate our own electricity. Then you started gettin' the big walk-in boxes and the big freezers, and those pull a lot of electricity. We had so much trouble with our Woody light plants, because every time you'd add a new box, it's harder to generate enough electricity to keep up with everything. It seems like here at the end, if all our boxes come on at the same time, we'd have to run around and pull somethin' off until the generators could catch up. Then we'd go pull things back on. It was kind of a juggling thing. So once we got commercial electricity, we were pretty well able to do about anything we wanted to, because of power needs. 

Cole: And when did that come in, do you remember? 

Lavoy: Oh, let's see, must have been in the early 1970's sometime, that we got electricity out there. So it's pretty limiting if you don't have the power to run some of that refrigeration. 

Cole: And were there any things that your family would do for entertainment in the evenings? 

Lavoy: Oh, evenings were fun. There's always hiking to do, playing around out in the corrals, out in the barns, picnics. We were out at <Red Rock> a lot. <Red Rock> was just a few miles from the mountain, and we used to go up the mountain a lot. We just had a good time, enjoyed each other. It was a great place to raise a family. It was just us and we just interacted off each other. 

Cole: In your younger days at <Red Rock> when you were a kid, did you ever do any sheep herding? 

Lavoy: Well, I don't think I herded sheep like an occupation, but I was always with people that were herding sheep, you know. I followed people around, or with my friends or something like that. And of course in our own corrals, we always had livestock in our own corrals that we'd boughten and things, so we had always plenty of stock around. 

Cole: You mentioned butchering. Did you actually do the butchering yourself at the store? 

Lavoy: I didn't do it personally. Seemed like there was always some Navajos around that enjoyed taking a knife and doing the butchering for you, because when they did that, you know, they got (Jewel: The insides.). They got all the insides and stuff, and we got the carcass for the store. So they were happy to do that for the insides and the organs. 

Cole: Were you able to then keep the meat refrigerated? (

Lavoy: Oh, yeah.) 

Cole: Or did it sell fast enough? 

Lavoy: No, we had walk-in boxes at that time. Just bring it inside and put it in the walk-in box and cool it down. Before that, you know, we'd just butcher enough that would sell as we butchered it. 

Cole: How would that work when you were at the trading post, Jewel?, before refrigeration, when you butchered animals. 

Jewel: We had diesel plants. 

Cole: Oh, you did, too, then? 

Jewel: Yeah. We had refrigeration, but of course, like Lavoy said, not near as good as commercial. 

Cole: Can you think of any humorous things that happened in your trading post career? 

Lavoy: You know, we enjoyed our trading post days, and we had a lot of fun. The Indians are a fun people, they're a laughing people, and it seemed like we were always kidding each other and just having a good time. One thing that I've always remembered: Years and years ago out at <Red Rock>, our front door of the store. We'd just closed off one half of a double door and put screen in it. And we hadn't got through puttin' all the trim in, and the little cross bars, so people could see it was screen. And one of Dad's good customers was in the store, and he got through with his business and went bee-linin' out the door, and walked right through the screen. I remember that vividly to this day, and how funny that was (chuckles), to have him walk into that with his nose and brim of his hat. We still laugh about that when we think about it. Good times. Indian people are happy people. 

Jewel: I remember humorous things. When the squaws started first buyin' brassieres, they'd come in and ask me what size they wanted. (laughter) That was kind of comical--you didn't know what to do. (laughter) 

Cole: Well, Jewel, the last interview we had, we were talkin' about the medicine man, Molian. You told us about the incident with the weights, and wondered if you had any other experiences with that person. 

Jewel: Tell 'em about the little kid that got lost. 

Leona: You tell 'em. 

Jewel: Some little girl in <Aztec> got lost--or kidnapped. 

Leona: No, a little boy. 

Jewel: And they called Bill Evans and got me to tell the old man out there, Molian, if he could find her. And he sent back, he sent word, yeah, if you'd just get him a piece of her clothing, why, he could do it. 

Leona: It was a little two-year-old boy. 

Jewel: And he did. And he said, "He's down where the Mexicans are--big hats." He didn't know just where, but he said, "He's all right, he'll be back." Sure enough, he was. That's where he was at. They'd picked him up and took him. 

Steiger: How'd they get him back? 

Jewel: Well, they were hunting him, I guess. Somebody must have told about it. Authorities went and got him, of course. 

Leona: Well, he doesn't tell it quite all. (chuckles) This little boy was playing in <Aztec> there, along by the road, and this couple went by. He was working there in the oil business or shops--mechanic or whatever. Anyway, they'd see this little child out there, and they had just lost a little child, and they were so grieved over it. Well, they were leaving, and they went by this day--they got friendly with the little boy, and he went willingly with them, and they took him. And then when Molian.... They decided to, they'd heard--the officers and all--had heard that he could solve problems, you know, and help you find things, like he did for us. So they thought, well, they'd just ask him. And of course when they gave him the little shirt--they brought a shirt in, of the child's--Molian asked for that--and he held it and would close his eyes and bow his head and do sort of a little chant. He said that the child was down where the big hats are, but he was all right, he was still alive, he was well. So the authorities then.... Well, they had a neighbor that had become a little suspicious of them, because they knew they had lost this baby--or I don't know how big the child was--and then all of a sudden here was this child. And they had read in the paper or heard about this one missing in <Aztec>. So they turned it in to the authorities, and they found him and returned him, and all was well. And the people who he was stole from, they apologized to them and all, and the people didn't press charges or anything, just let it go, because they were so thankful to get their little boy back, and he was well and strong and everything. 

Steiger: Well, this guy, Molian--are there contemporary guys who have that same ability? Or was he just kind of special, like a psychic or something? 

Jewel: He's the only one I know of, out in that country. You ever have anybody like that down in <Red Mesa>? 

Lavoy: No. 

Leona: Sometimes you run into people that are sort of psychic, I think. He was. 

Cole: Was he a regular customer, Jewel? 

Jewel: Yes, oh yes, he was raised there. The Indians all knew he could do those things, and he was used quite a bit. 

Cole: Do you have any idea about how old he was at that time? 

Jewel: Well, he was old when I went out there. He was probably in his seventies when I knew him first. 

Cole: Lavoy, when did you join the United Indian Traders Association? 

Lavoy: Well, it seemed like the store was already a member when I went out at <Red Mesa>, and we just continued bein' a member. So it wasn't a matter of joining initially, we just was a member when we went there. 

Cole: Did you ever hold office in the organization? 

Lavoy: I served on the board of directors a number of times for a number of years, and still am on the board. And I was president in 1977. 

Cole: Do you remember some of the bigger issues the Association dealt with when you were a member? 

Lavoy: Well, the Association was formed originally to really help with the arts and crafts end of the business, to make sure that people could continue making arts and crafts, and to ensure that arts and crafts were authentically Indian. And as the years went by, the Association developed into a little bit more than that. It become an association that looked after our business interests and made sure things went smoothly for us--leases and regulations and whatever other litigations we might have. So it become really our legal arm, for our association. Of course they fought a tax issue at one time in <Arizona>, a sales tax issue, and we won--there's no sales tax on the Reservation at this time. Of course there was always lease negotiations and regulation changes. And then during the DNA [Dinébe’iiná Náhiilna’Bee Agha’diit’aahí] years and the FTC [Federal Trade Commission] years, the Association had quite a hand in battling some things and puttin' in some input. 

Cole: When you say the DNA years, what is the DNA, and what time period? 

Lavoy: Well, the DNA was a bunch of lawyers. I don't think they were part of the tribe, I think they were just a bunch of lawyers that were out to change things and to see that so-called wrongs were made right, and to make things different. They were just out there stirrin' up problems and lookin' for causes, and they caused a lot of problems. 

Cole: Do you remember when that organization first came on to the tribe? 

Lavoy: I don't remember the years, it must have been in the mid-seventies sometime. 

Cole: And then were you involved in the Association when the FTC hearings took place? 

Lavoy: Yeah, I think I was probably on the board at that time. We was involved in negotiations with them, and discussions and input. I don't think we did ourselves much good with those people. 

Cole: Do you remember any part of the case dealing with endangered species bird feathers? 

Lavoy: Oh, about all I know is what I read in the paper. Seemed like in our stores--I like to call our stores "the meat and potatoes" stores. We weren't into the arts and crafts so much, but there were some problems with people killing eagles and gettin' eagle feathers. And I remember the Feds were out to put a stop to that, and I think probably rightfully so. 

Cole: To sort of digress for a second: At <Red Mesa> did you do much of an arts and crafts business at all? Or was that sort of an aside? 

Lavoy: Well, we had our jewelry department inside. We had tourists that stopped, so we had our jewelry case and sold quite a bit of it. And of course we bought things from the Indians. We bought rugs, we'd had a pretty good [market?] in rugs--a lot of good weavers out there. And we sold a lot of our rugs right there at the store, and then we had lots of dealers who would come by and pick up rugs from us, too. So we were into arts and crafts, but that was a small part of our business. 

Cole: Did you have a pretty good tourism business? 

Lavoy: Lots of that. Every year that highway got a little busier out that way, and quite a few people stopped in. So the tourists were a pretty good business. 

Cole: Do you remember any specific weavers or artisans that stand out at <Red Mesa>? 

Jewel: Oh, yes, we had some good weavers out there, some families that put out real good rugs. The fact is, there's one behind me on the wall that was made by the Katy [phonetic spelling] family, and they're famous for the Red Mesa rugs that were made with the natural colors. You [can] see the natural vegetable colors in that rug behind me. So they put out that kind of distinctive rug. Had some others that put out the reds and oranges that we call "the Red Mesas." Had another family that learned how to do the Two Grey Hills design--put out some real good Two Grey Hills. So we had some real quality weavers out there. 

Cole: Was there one particular kind of rug that <Red Mesa> was known for then? 

Jewel: Red Mesa Outline. 

Lavoy: The Red Mesa Outline, that rug was named after us. 

Jewel: This one, like this one. 

Lavoy: It's kinda like the one over here to my left. 

Steiger: Boy, that's beautiful. 

Leona: I like the outline, it's pretty. 

Cole: To switch back a little bit here: How would you describe the workings of the Traders Association? 

Lavoy: We felt like that when we banded together, that we were an important voice for our needs. And if we'd been just fighting some of these things, just one single voice, we wouldn't have accomplished very much. But united, we were able to come up with some funds and fight some things and help our causes in lots of ways. So it was a good organization. 

Jewel: What is it they say? "United we stand"? (

Lavoy: Uh-huh.) 

Jewel: "Divided we fall." That's just kinda true. 

Lavoy: We've always felt that we had a real good relationship with the Navajo tribe. Individual traders and the Association, we got along with the tribe real well. Seemed like we had more trouble with the federal government, the BIA and what-not. Seemed like they were the ones that we were fightin'. But those guys were most of the Easterners that would come out here and fill these staff positions. We called 'em "Washington do-gooders." But our relationship with the tribe was good, and we could work things out, and we always had the attitude, "Well, the trader's always gonna be here, and the tribe's always gonna be here, and things will be all right. These other guys will come and go." And that's pretty much what happened until this FTC thing come, and the DNA. Then when you get legal minds and lawyers doin' things, they can stir up things that have lasting effects, and not always good. 

Steiger: What have been some of the effects of all of that, that went on? 

Lavoy: Well, one thing was, we did a thriving business on the Reservation with pawn. And after they got through with us, almost all the traders on the Reservation quit taking pawn. So what that did is, it drove that business off of the Reservation. And now you can go around the perimeter of the Reservation now, and in towns, and just see a whole proliferation of pawn shops. And the bad thing is, people couldn't take care of their business there, and the people in here were probably much quicker to sell their article if it was not redeemed on time. We never wanted to sell their stuff. If people had a nice silver belt, for instance, it wasn't in our interest to call it dead pawn and sell it. We'd rather have it in their hands, where it's business back and forth, all the time, you know, year after year. They just took that business away from us, and it took that option away from the people, and the people weren't happy with it. But they changed the regs [regulations] so bad that it was not possible for us to do it anymore and be profitable, so we quit doin' it and it went off the Rez [Reservation]. 

Cole: Do you remember at all, were some of your regular customers surprised when this happened? Or did they understand what was going on? 

Lavoy: We tried to tell 'em, but I don't know if they really understood what was goin' on. About all most of 'em knew was that we wouldn't do it anymore. 

Cole: How about the Association, as far as a social organization? Did it fill a role in that regard? 

Lavoy: Well, every year, at least once a year, we'd have an annual meeting. That annual meeting would rotate between <Flagstaff>, <Farmington>, or <Gallup>, and we always had a big dinner and social at that time. It was quite a yearly highlight. It was a fun time to look forward to and to go to. 

Cole: Did the Association ever work for selling commodities, as a buying and selling arm, for the different traders? 

Lavoy: To my knowledge, no. I think in the beginning that they’d probably obtained some silver and stuff, and would provide it for the traders to buy for their Indians, but that was in the early days, and to what extent that happened, I'm not sure. Do you [know], Dad? 

Jewel: Yeah, they used to--the Traders Association handled the silver squares, and sold that to the trader for silver. That was about all the things that they ever did. 

Cole: Where would they buy the silver at, do you know? 

Jewel: Oh, from the government, I guess. They used to get a lot of Mexican dollars and sell, too. They were about as cheap as the squares we used to buy. 

Cole: And the Association sold the Mexican dollars? 

Jewel: Yeah, they got some, they'd handle it, supply 'em to traders. 

Cole: Did you handle that? 

Jewel: Yeah. 

Cole: Did you have many jewelers? 

Jewel: No, not very many, just a few that made bracelets and a few things like that. We didn't have a big demand for 'em, but we had it. 

Cole: How about your store, Lavoy? Did you see much? 

Lavoy: There weren't many around there back in the early days, that were jewelers. I don't know where the people lived--probably in the <Shiprock> area a lot, that made jewelry. 

Jewel: <Gallup>, mostly. 

Lavoy: Mostly <Gallup>. 

Jewel: All the surrounding area over there, over to <Gallup>, was a big jewelry town. 

Lavoy: But now, in recent years, shortly before we left <Red Mesa> and back then, jewelry was really in vogue, and everybody was startin' to make it a little bit. So everybody was gettin' into it, and it devaluated the jewelry somewhat--it really did cheapen it when everybody was puttin' out bracelets and rings and things. 

Cole: Was there a change in the quality? 

Lavoy: There most definitely was. One reason our pawn business was so good is that there was so much good jewelry out there, and it was really valued by the people. You know, if they pledged something with you, they weren't going to let it go dead, or they were going to do something to redeem it. And there at the end, it got to be so much there, that people were almost pawning it with you to sell it, you know, just to get rid of it, and they were never interested in pickin' it back up. So it did devaluate it and take some of the market out of it, I think. 

Cole: How were the bigger trader companies perceived by smaller traders? 

Lavoy: Well, I don't know if there were any real big ones. Maybe in some of the places like <Shiprock> or <Gallup> there might have been some bigger, higher-volume stores. But most of us, I think, were pretty small- scale operations. The Babbitts, I think, out of <Flagstaff>, they owned a lot of different stores, but I think individually all their stores were small, remote little posts. 

Cole: Do you see much difference between the trading posts on the Reservation, versus the ones in the border towns? 

Lavoy: Oh, yeah! You know, on the Reservation, like I said, we called our place a "meat and potatoes" store. We sold the basics. When they'd get off the Reservation.... Well, there were some of those kind off the Reservation, too. But a lot of the places that were called "trading posts" per se, they become little curio shops and tourist places and novelties, as opposed to regular meat and potatoes stores like ours. 

Cole: And when did you finally sell out at <Red Mesa>? 

Lavoy: Sold out in 1984. And by that time my family was pretty big, and the wife was livin' in town, and the kids were growin' up, and we just felt like it was time for our family and things to make the move. And tradin' wasn't the same as it used to be. Things were changin' drastically out there. People weren't as loyal to you, and as reliable, and things were just changin' so fast that it wasn't like the good ol' days used to be. And we weren't able to make the changes--I don't know. With the highways and cars and more of a cash economy, and the superstores in town-- maybe our need was just fadin' away a little bit. 

Cole: By the time you sold out, had you seen changes in the livestock industry also? 

Lavoy: Oh, yes. We used to buy a lot of livestock out there. In the recent years, we'd hardly buy any. We used to run lambs out of there by the semi[truck]- load. I think the year I left, we couldn't even buy enough lambs to fill one semi[truck]-load. And one reason was is that people just weren't tendin' sheep anymore. You know, the kids were goin' to school and not herdin' sheep, and the parents were gettin' older and not wantin' to, or they were wantin' to qualify for a welfare check, so they had to get rid of resources so they'd qualify. And there's just not the livestock there anymore. A lot of people go into cattle, and it's harder to credit cattle than it was sheep and wool. 

Cole: Why is that? 

Lavoy: Well, I think cattle is somethin' they could sell any time of the year, and every time they needed a few dollars, they'd go sell a cow--or had to make a pickup payment, they'd go sell a cow. So a cow got to be something you couldn't rely on for credit, whereas wool and lambs, that's pretty much a seasonal thing, and when it was time to sell them, you sold a whole bunch at one time, and they could satisfy their debts and things. 

Cole: Do you think the potential is still there for rejuvenation of the sheep business on the Reservation? 

Lavoy: Well, it looks to me like that there's been so much overgrazing for so many years, that there's just not the carrying capacity out there that there must have been at one time. So I think there's just not the range for it, forage for it. 

Cole: Why did you stay in the business? 

Jewel: Didn't know anything else, did you? 

Lavoy: Well, we enjoyed it and had a vested interest in it. Sometimes you can't walk off and leave things. But we didn't want to, either. You know, it was fun, we enjoyed it, it was makin' us a livin', and it was ours, and we enjoyed what we were doin'. 

Cole: What do you do now? 

Lavoy: I have a little pet supply store here in <Farmington>--probably one of the bigger places in town, or the biggest place. We sell a lot of dog food and cat food, all the supplies that go with that industry. There's a lot of money spent on pets in our society anymore, and we're quite enjoying it, and we have lots of Indian customers. A lot of Indian customers come there. A lot of my old customers from out to the store come by and say hello--I get hugs every week. 

Cole: (facetiously) Do you run any credit or pawn at your store? 

Lavoy: No credit! (laughter) You know, as I look back, I don't see how we made any money out there on the Reservation. We did so many things, and did so many things that probably weren't sound business-wise. Now we're in a store, and it's a cash business, if we haven't sold it, it's on the shelf. If we have sold it, the money's in the drawer, and it's just a lot simpler. The trading post business was a complicated business, with all the things that we did. 

Cole: What would you say you were most proud of as a trader? 

Lavoy: I think probably havin' my family out there, and raisin' a good strong, solid, close family; and for the friendships I developed out there. We still have, as I mentioned, families that come see us and say hello to us. And we were active out there in our church, and we've conducted funerals for people, and gave people blessings, and had people call on us for those kind of things. Those are just satisfying things to be honored with. 

Cole: Did your church have a ward house out there when you first moved there? 

Lavoy: We had a branch at <Teec Nos Pos>, yes. And shortly before we left, they'd built a nice little chapel there, so they had a nice little facility. When I was involved out there, we met Sundays in the chapter house. 

Cole: How about you, Jewel, when you were at <Red Rock>, was there church out there? or did you have to come to town? 

Jewel: We always come to town, yeah. They had missionaries who were around out there among 'em. But I wasn't a good preacher like Lavoy is. (laughter) 

Cole: Would you come in regularly, or just on occasion, for a church service every week? 

Jewel: Oh, I tried to, yeah. I tried to come in, we generally kept a hired man, you know, out to the store. Of course there was weeks that we'd have to let him off a weekend, and I'd stay. Otherwise, I was in town weekends. 

Cole: Lavoy, in your opinion, what should Anglos understand about the Navajo? 

Lavoy: I think they should understand that they're good people. You know, they're a fun people, they're a loyal people. They're the salt of the earth. It seems like so many people in town, all they see are the problems that come to town. But when you're out there where they live, and with the families, and the larger families, they're just a good, honest, hard-workin' people that want to be happy, just like the rest of us. 

Jewel: They’re just like the rest of us. Like I always said, the bad ones come to town, the good ones stay out there--and that's true. They didn't need to come down, get drunk, you know--others do. 

Cole: Did you see a lot of problem with alcohol back when you first started up the trading post? 

Jewel: Oh, yeah. They used to make their own-- seemed like a lot of 'em. 

Cole: What would they make it out of? 

Jewel: Sugar, a lot of it. 

Leona: (whispers) Sugar? 

Jewel: I'm not an alcohol maker, I don't know. (

Cole: I wouldn't know, either.) But I know they did. Let it ferment. I guess it had a kick to it. 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's March 11, 1998. We're at the home of Jewel and Leona McGee, in <Farmington New Mexico>. Also present in the room are Lavoy McGee and Lew Steiger. This is an interview sponsored by the United Indian Traders Association.

I was just asking Lavoy, what did the trader contribute to the Navajo people or native community? 

Lavoy: Well, of course, we provided goods and services that weren't out there. You know, they had no place to make any purchases at all until the traders went out there and provided these stores. So they made goods and services available. And I emphasize services, too, because we were really the Indians' link with the rest of the country. You know, they were mostly illiterate, and they couldn't read or write and understand a lot of things, and they'd come to us with about all their needs: letter writin', and form fillin' out, and whatever. So we provided kind of a link [for] them to our society. 

Cole: Did you have a post office at <Red Mesa>, Jewel? 

Lavoy: We had a post office, everybody got their mail at our place, and we had the little cubby holes that we put all their mail in, and they'd come in and ask for it, and we'd give 'em their mail. 

Cole: We were speaking with Leona a minute ago about how the Navajo actually lived--maybe the more traditional ones, or in older times. What did they do for water and things like that? 

Lavoy: Most of 'em hauled water. Very few of 'em had water right at their sites. Of course in recent years they'd haul water in their pickup--still do. And before they'd haul it in their wagons or something like that. So they just had to haul the water they had. 

Cole: What do you remember about that, Leona? 

Leona: Well, I remember 'em coming there to <Red Rock>. We had a, oh, what would you call it?, down there, Jewel? (

Jewel: Spring.) (

Lavoy: Well?) 

Leona: A well (

Jewel: Spring!) 

Leona: toward the wash there. They'd come in their wagons. 

Jewel: Had a cement trough and the spring kept it full all the time. 

Leona: And they'd have to come and fill their big barrels with water, and then go back home with their team and wagon...

What else was it I wanted to tell you? The old squaws, they would wear skirts on top of skirts. I often wondered why did they do that? ...(laughs) They would never take 'em off.

Then, too, I enjoyed going out to the squaw dances once in a while, and Jewel wouldn't hardly get out of the pickup, because you know the women would come and grab him and make him go dance with 'em, and then they wouldn't turn loose of him until he paid 'em. He'd have to give 'em money to get out of it. (chuckles) Have you ever seen one? 

Cole: No. 

Leona: To be out there in the dirt. Let's see, did they have little tom-toms? They did, didn't they?, they pounded on. 

Jewel: Drums. 

Leona: Drums. And they would dance, partners holding each other's hands, here, side-by-side. And they would go down a ways, and then they'd come back, down a ways and come back. And they'd do that and do that and do that. But it was interesting to watch them....

But it was nice. And then one time we went to a fire dance, and that was really worth seeing. I wish we could have gotten closer, but they must have been piling wood there for a long time, because it was a huge fire. Then they would dance in their costumes, you know, and chant and everything. And I don't really know what those were for. Were they for the sick? 

Jewel: They were always for the sick. 

Leona: Always for the sick, I guess. But it was very extravagant, but it was beautiful. I thought, "Well, how wonderful that they could believe in that so strongly." And it must have helped. I guess the Lord was lookin' after 'em. 

Jewel: Medicine man, he had two little kids. Boy, could they dance! They'd all come out in costume. What was they, four or five years old? 

Leona: Oh there were some little ones, and then there was big ones, too. 

Jewel: Those two, though, that were so good. 

Leona: I don't know how old they were--probably five or six, somewhere along in there. But dance? Oh! And it's wonderful how they learn to do those things, and what a tradition it is with the Indians. But your heart kind of goes out to them (Jewel: _____’s boys-- You remember ‘em, don’t you?) At that time, when we were first out there, because they sure didn't have much to work with--and how they would get along. And I could never bear to eat any of their mutton stew. (laughs) They cooked it in tubs--that was okay--but I just couldn't. I never liked mutton from that day on. I just couldn't stomach it. Of course that's their living, they want it all the time. They still do. They'll choose it over beef or chicken or anything else. But it was hard to get used to. But they were good people, and you couldn't help but love them and appreciate them.

Jewel, did you tell everything? Probably. 

Cole: Lavoy, did you or Jewel ever take a sweat bath? 

Lavoy: Never did. Never did. 

Cole: What do you think you learned from the Navajo? 

Lavoy: I don't think I learned anything from 'em, I just learned to respect 'em and enjoy 'em for the human beings that they are, and the good people that they are. 

Cole: Do you think they learned anything from you? 

Lavoy: I hope that they learned to be honest and upright and forthright, and gained a good opinion of white men from me. 

Leona: Be a man of your word. 

Cole: When you look back now, what are some of your favorite memories, being a trader? 

Lavoy: I just think the lifestyle was fun. You know, it was kinda laid back and unhurried, and back in the early days, when people would come to the store, it was an all-day occasion. They weren't in a hurry, and you weren't in a hurry. And it seemed like the more years went by, things started hurryin' up, and they got in a hurry too. We just enjoyed doin' it, and enjoyed the friendships. That's about it. 

Jewel: We used to be out there at the store, and the ol’ bull pen would be full, and all at once we'd get a horseshoe game started out in the front yard. Everybody was out there sittin' in the shade, watchin' that game. (chuckles) 

Cole: Did the Navajo gamble on games at all like that? 

Jewel: They did, yeah, sure. Shoe game is about all I ever heard of that--I guess put somethin' in a shoe and then guess who got it or something. 

Leona: Oh, when they won? 

Jewel: Yeah, when they won, they found it. 

Cole: Did you ever have any incidents where somebody tried to rob you or anything like that? 

Leona: Oh, Jewel, you didn't tell the story of Hosteen Nez [phonetic spelling]. 

Jewel: Well, you tell it, I can't hardly talk. 

Leona: Well, Hosteen Nez was our.... Oh, I'll tell you a little incident. Just before we were married, a short time, and Jewel was working out to the store. Well, you know, we had Indian trader friends living around. There was <Beclabito> and <Teec Nos Pos> and several of 'em. We were sort of young couples, and we decided we'd go up on the Lukachukai for a picnic and get-together. So we decided this Sunday we'd do that. So Jewel was at the store, but he left the store the night before, I guess, and left this Navajo, Hosteen Nez, to watch the store, to guard it. And in the meantime, before he come to the store there, he'd had a falling-out with his nephew who had left his wife and children, was taking up with another woman, and old Hosteen Nez was scolding him and getting after him about it, and he said, "You've got to stop that and go back home." And anyway, they had some words. So that night, when he was watching the store, this nephew--and he always slept up on top of the store--it was a flat roof, you know--he'd just get up there, and he could see all around. Even though it was night, he could kinda keep watch better that way. Well, so when he was asleep, this nephew climbed up there and shot him. And he had two little grandkids there, sleeping by him, and of course when they woke up the next morning, why, here their grandpa was dead. And I don't remember how they first discovered it, but Geralynn [phonetic spelling] and we others, all the traders.... Anyway, we started out there to meet everyone at the store. So on the way, we met a fellow that worked for the government at the Cove Trading Post just west of us, and he had found out that [Hosteen Nez] had been killed. So he told us. So anyway, we had to go on out there, and our friends, we told 'em just to go on up on the mountain. As soon as the government would come out and release the body, then get things settled, why, we'd join them. But when this fellow did this, he robbed the store, took jewelry and what money was in the cash register, got guns and bullets and what-have-you, and went. So they got the word out and did catch him at.... Where was it, Jewel? 

Jewel: I don't know. Somewhere down between.... 

Leona: <Holbrook>! <Holbrook> is where they caught up with him. And he admitted what he did, but it was kind of a sad situation. But that was the only time we had with robbery. But it was kind of sad. He was such a good man, Hosteen Nez. But these things happen. He [the nephew] was in prison for life. 

Jewel: I don't think he ever has got out yet. 

Leona: No. 

Cole: Well, Lavoy, thinking back on your life as a trader, is there anything you'd change, if you could do it over again? 

Lavoy: I don't think so. You know, I didn't bring much off the Reservation with me in the way of artifacts and jewelry and rugs. I maybe should have had a little better collection with me when I left. I didn't bring those with me, and I regret that some. Otherwise, I don't have any regrets. 

Jewel: That's our only regrets, that we didn't save more when we had chances to. Wasn't interested in 'em, I guess. 

Leona: Oh, well, we were interested, but we just took enough just to use, and not go into a lot of artifacts and stuff. 

Lavoy: You know, it was a good life. When my kids get together now, they still talk about those "good ol' days out at the tradin' post." They did things and had experiences that nobody will ever have again. People would bring their mohair and their wool in, and we'd store it in the barn and we'd have our big racks that suspended the big bags that we'd bag it in, and get in there and stomp that, and the kids were out there in the middle of it. And when we'd have a rain, it used to come in and fill the corrals with rain water. Then we had some old wooden feeding troughs out there. Those little troughs would float. The kids would get out there in those old troughs and paddle 'em around like rowboats, up and down the roads in their bare feet, and the old slimy, red mud. They just did some things that nobody will do before. Out at <Red Mesa>, we did have some horses out there. We had some nice little horses, and the kids would ride and have lots of fun, and gotta break a few of 'em, so they had some unique experiences out there. And they still have their little Indian friends that will still call on 'em and check on 'em and see how they're doin'. My one little daughter is named Shelly--they call her "Shelly Yellow Hair." There were some people by that name out there, so they had some neat, fun experiences. They went to school out there for a few years, as I mentioned, and it was unique, bein' some white kids in an Indian school. They had a few struggles, but made a lot of friends, too. Good years. 

Leona: Jewel didn't tell you about one thing he helped the Indians with. Your shearing, Jewel. You told 'em about getting the bucks and having better wool, but you didn't tell 'em about that. Can you do that? 

Jewel: Oh, we just bought a shearing machine and paid a white man to go out and teach some of the Indian boys how to shear with a machine, you know, like they do. 

Leona: Yeah, but why do you want 'em to shear it? 

Jewel: To keep it clean. 

Leona: Well, but tell 'em the incidents that happened that didn't keep it clean. (chuckles) 

Jewel: Well, when they sheared, why, they wanted to waller it around in the sand all they could, then put it in the sack. (chuckles) When they got doin' the machine, why, we taught 'em that wool was worth more if they kept it clean. So they'd stay on the tarp. 

Steiger: Why would they put it in the sand? Leona and

Jewel: Weighs [more]. (Leona chuckles) 

Jewel: You could take them old sacks and shake that wool, and the sand would come out of it. 

Leona: Terrible. 

Cole: Were there any other things, kind of games like that, that would happen in trading? Or with selling livestock or anything? 

Leona: Did they ever put rocks in the piñon nuts? 

Jewel: Yeah, they did, once. I found several times. I put the man's name on it and hung it up in the store. Boy, he didn't like that! (laughter) He said, "I didn't do it! The kids must have done it!" (laughter) 

Leona: We used to buy piñon nuts. How many did you buy one year, Jewel? 

Jewel: I don't know. 

Leona: Oh, all up and down the counter there, we had great big gunny sacks full of piñon nuts. 

Jewel: That was just every day. Then we'd sew sacks up all night, prit near. 

Cole: Well, Jewel, would you eat mutton stew? Or did you eat it? 

Jewel: If I made it, yeah, I would. (laughter) Not that they made, I didn't care much about it. 

Leona: Well, the reason it took me--I don't know if they put these insides in their stew after they take the guts and they strip 'em. That just nearly floored me, when I saw 'em doing this. "Surely, what are they going to do with those?!" (laughter) "Did they put it in the stew?!" Anyway, they butchered a sheep out there, and here they'd go, strippin' these.... 

Lavoy: Guts. 

Jewel: It was nothin' but the feed that was in him. 

Leona: So I don't know how they ate it, but they ate it. Did that go in mutton stew? (laughs) Oh, dear. 

Cole: Well, Lavoy, is there anything you'd like to add? 

Lavoy: I think that about sums it up. 

Cole: How about Leona or Jewel? 

Leona: I don't know what Jewel's got. I don't think we can tell you any more. You got any more on that list I wrote down?

They're good people, and they've had to learn things the hard way. How happy and good it's been for them to have a cleaner way of living. And they're doin' real well by it. (chuckles) 

Cole: Well, thank you. 

Lavoy: Thank you. 

Leona: I should say. 



