MAMIE FLEMING INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-36



[BEGIN SIDE A]



This is the evening of March 7, 1953. We have Mamie McMillan Fleming with us tonight. She's the daughter of Thomas McMillan, who is the first settler in <Flagstaff>. We have my brother, Bert Babbitt, too. [Eunice (Babbitt Veazey) also present.] Mamie's pretty well-versed in the early history of <Flagstaff>, and we're lucky to have her with us tonight. She's brought a picture of her father, who's certainly a famous character in the early days and history of Northern <Arizona>. He's a handsome old gentleman, and we hope that we'll get a reproduction of it through Mamie's kindness. 



G. Babbitt: Mamie, do you remember when your dad first came to <Flagstaff>? 



Fleming: He came in 1876, and was the first settler to stay in <Flagstaff>. Other men had been here, but didn't stay. So he was the first permanent settler. 



G. Babbitt: And your father, I understand, came out with the sheep? 



Fleming: He did. He'd been to <Australia>, and the way I've heard it, he brought sheep from <Australia> to <Flagstaff>. But I don't know, that's what I've been told. He was one of the first wool growers in Northern <Arizona>. 



G. Babbitt: I understand that he was the first wool grower in Northern <Arizona>. 



Fleming: I think we'd better say one of the first, because we don't know for sure. (laughs) I think he was just about the first. He was one of the first. 



G. Babbitt: And he settled on the old McMillan ranch near the reservoir, out by the museum now, about two miles north of <Flagstaff>, didn't he? 



Fleming: Yes. He homesteaded 320 acres of land and built the first, or one of the first, residences in <Flagstaff>. 



G. Babbitt: That's that beautiful old home there they call The Old Homestead, don't they? 



Fleming: Yes, they call it The Old Homestead, and it's built of logs. I believe that the logs were trees that were cut right on the place and prepared for building. Then later the boards were put on. 



G. Babbitt: Your father, you say, came here from <Australia>. Was he of foreign birth, or was he an American? 



Fleming: Oh, no, no, he was born at <Mount Pleasant Tennessee>, near <Nashville>. He was the only child. His mother and father were stricken of yellow fever and died. He was reared in the home of his uncle in <Nashville>. He was unhappy, adventuresome, so he left home and came to <California> and panned for gold in the Tuolumne River. And that was where he met my mother. 



G. Babbitt: I wonder what year that was, Mame? 



Fleming: Oh, George, that must have been about 18.... Oh, I don't know, George, that was 1886, I guess. 



G. Babbitt: When he was in <California>, or when he came to <Arizona>? 



Fleming: When he came to <California>. Then he.... Oh, gee, I've got it all mixed up, George. 



G. Babbitt: He came to <Flagstaff>, I think you said, in 1876. 



Fleming: [Yes], 1876. 



G. Babbitt: That's what I thought. 



Fleming: He came to <Flagstaff> in 1876. And before that, he'd been to <Australia>. 



G. Babbitt: And also to <California>? 



Fleming: And to <California>. And then later he went back there and married my mother in 1888, and brought her to <Flagstaff>. That was not long after the railroad came through here. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember what year your father was born in? 



Fleming: No, I don't know, George. I can find it. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember how old he was when he died? 



Fleming: I believe it was seventy-six. 



G. Babbitt: And what year did he die? 



Fleming: In 1906. 



G. Babbitt: He died in 1906, and he was seventy-six years old. We can work it out then, as to his [birth date]. 



Fleming: Yes, we can work it out. 



B. Babbitt: He was thirty. 



G. Babbitt: He was thirty years old? 



B. Babbitt: Thirty years old. 



G. Babbitt: Or 1830? 



Fleming: Yes, that's right, Bert. 



G. Babbitt: That's right, Bert's a good mathematician. 



Fleming: I should have been his granddaughter! (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: When your dad came, he brought these sheep with him that he bought in <Australia>? 



Fleming: Well, this is the way I heard it, that he had been in <Arizona> and <California>. And from <California>, he went to <Australia>, and he intended to go into the sheep business in <Australia>, but instead of that, he brought sheep to <Arizona>. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) for a while, didn't he? 



Fleming: Yes, he came back to <California>, and then on to <Arizona>. 



G. Babbitt: He drove the sheep in here, didn't he? 



Fleming: I guess he did. 



G. Babbitt: Must have. 



Fleming: Must have. 



G. Babbitt: Do you have any idea how many he might have brought in? 



Fleming: No, I've never heard. I don't think too many, I don't suppose. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember when you were a little girl-we're not going to ask you at the moment when you were born, unless you want to tell us. (laughter) 



Fleming: I think you know! (laughs) 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember back when you were a young lady, any of the stories that your dad used to tell about the old settlers that he knew, or things that happened? 



Fleming: Oh, he used to tell us about Peg Leg. Peg Leg used to come to the ranch on a horse. 



G. Babbitt: That's the old bandit here? 



Fleming: Yes. Bert, do you remember Peg Leg? 



B. Babbitt: Yeah, (unclear) 



Fleming: Yeah, that was a whole lot later. 



G. Babbitt: (unclear) about the earlier settlers? 



Fleming: The earlier settlers, my father's friend, Frank Hart, came from <Oakland California>, and his wife was a friend of my mother's. So they came here and went into the sheep business with my father. Frank Hart wasn't here long. They engaged in the sheep business for a few years, his wife was with him, and two children were born, but Frank Hart took pneumonia and died. So then his family went back to <California>. 



G. Babbitt: Was that Les and Lute Hart's father? 



Fleming: No, that was another family of Harts. 



G. Babbitt: Did they spell it H-A-R-T? 



Fleming: They spelled it H-A-R-T, but they were <Oakland California>, people, and they were friends of my mother's when she was a child. 



G. Babbitt: Are any of the Hart boys still here now? Or did they pack up and leave too? 



Fleming: Frank Hart had a daughter and a son, but they all left and we've lost track of them. We don't know much about them anymore. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember any other settlers that were mentioned by your father? 



Fleming: Oh, Ashurst. 



G. Babbitt: That's Senator Ashurst's father? 



Fleming: Senator Ashurst's father. And I believe they had a place on Mt. Elden, at the foot of Mt. Elden. Bert, is that right? 



G. Babbitt: Didn't they have a dairy there? 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) had a place there at Mt. Elden. 



Fleming: Did he? 



B. Babbitt: One of 'em. There may have been another ranch there, too. 



G. Babbitt: Didn't Ashurst have a place out there too? 



B. Babbitt: I don't know. He had a place on Anderson Mesa. 



G. Babbitt: I'll tell you what old Henry told me one time, that they had a ranch way back in the early days out here near what's known as the old Switzer Ranch, right out about a mile or so east of <Flagstaff>. 



Fleming: That's it. 



G. Babbitt: That must be the one. 



Fleming: Yes. And then the Hochderffers and the Clarks. 



G. Babbitt: That's old John and Asa Clark? 



Fleming: Yes. And the Beals were all early settlers here. And Beasley. 



G. Babbitt: That's old Al Beasley. 



Fleming: Al Beasley. And I think he had a brother. And then a little later, Hank Lockett--Henry Lockett. And the Campbells, Colin, Hugh, and Bill Campbell, three brothers. And Thomas Polick [phonetic] was the banker. 



G. Babbitt: Was Ed Whipple in the early days? 



Fleming: And Ed Whipple. Ed Whipple was one of the early settlers, one of the early [comers?]. He was. I believe he used to build. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



Fleming: And Sandy Donahue owned the Commercial Hotel, (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: And I think a saloon or two, too. 



Fleming: And a saloon, yes. And the Toffries [phonetic] were people that were here in the early days, that left. And Colter. 



G. Babbitt: Colter, I think, was one of the first postmasters. 



Fleming: Yes, that's right. Oh, and the Duttons were here in the early days. 



G. Babbitt: He was with the lumber mill, wasn't he, the old Arizona and Lumber and Timber Company. 



Fleming: Yes. And he was a supervisor the same year that my dad was a supervisor, and I've forgotten who the third one was. And Mr. George Babbitt was the treasurer. 



G. Babbitt: I understand your father was one of the first supervisors--my father was the first county treasurer. Isn't that true? 



Fleming: Yes, that's true. 



G. Babbitt: In the early days they had, I suppose, a lot of friendly relationships. I wonder what they did, these old-timers. Did you ever hear your dad talk about their goings on? 



Fleming: Yes, in the Gay Nineties they had a big time. And the Camerons were early settlers, too. 



G. Babbitt: Oh, yeah, that's Ralph Cameron, who just died not long ago. 



Fleming: And Bert. And they'd have hay rides and sleigh rides. They'd go to the McMillan Ranch and have a big time. They had a dance hall, and they danced, and they played cards. And on Sunday there were churches. They went to church on Sunday. They did just about what we do. 



G. Babbitt: It sounds like it. 



Fleming: What did you say, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: That's better than most of 'em do now. (laughs) 



G. Babbitt: Go to church on Sundays? 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember your dad ever saying anything about the origin of the name of <Flagstaff>? I understand he was appointed the first postmaster and wouldn't accept it. 



Fleming: He was, that's official. That's really official. He couldn't accept it, because he was living out of town, and he was engaged in the sheep business that kept him out of town. So he could not conveniently serve. 



G. Babbitt: I understand he was offered the positions, and a fellah by the name of Phil Brannen, I believe.... 



Fleming: So then Mr. Phil Brannen had a store, and a place for the post office. And my father served only until the appointment could be transferred from McMillan to Brannen. 



G. Babbitt: So your father was then the first postmaster? 



Fleming: Well, he really didn't serve long enough. 



G. Babbitt: Well, if he served a day, he was still the first postmaster. 



Fleming: I think he served about three or four days. 



G. Babbitt: Brannen had a store down on Santa Fe Avenue near San Francisco Street? 



Fleming: Yes, that's right. And Mr. and Mrs. P. J. Brannen--by the way, they're my godparents--when I was christened, they were my godparents. 



G. Babbitt: You never did tell us how long ago that was. 



Fleming: Oh, George! That was in 1894. 



G. Babbitt: You're still a young one, yet. (laughter) But you should know some of the stories of the early days. Do you remember your dad talking about how they named the town? 



Fleming: I don't remember my dad telling that, but I heard my mother tell what she heard. 



G. Babbitt: That'd be the same thing. 



Fleming: Yes. And it seemed like a party of soldiers or scouts from <Boston> were coming through, and they stopped on the Fourth of July, 1876, and they camped at the spring, and stayed here several days, resting and seeing the country. Because it was the Fourth of July and the Centennial of the Declaration of Independence, they hung the American flag on a tall pine. The settlers got the word that the troops were here, and so they all met at this pine, under this flag, and they celebrated the Fourth of July, 1876--the settlers and the Boston party. And when the Boston party were leaving, the flag was theirs, so they took their flag, but they left the staff on the tree, so they named the town <Flagstaff>. That's the way I heard it as a child. 



G. Babbitt: Well, that's probably right. That's somewhat parallel to other stories I've heard. Did you ever hear as to the location of the staff? 



Fleming: This has been disputed. People say it's not right. But it was back of where the high school is now. And at that time, T. S. McMillan was homesteading that place, and he had his sheep and nice water, a spring there, and that's where the troops came. In those days, the trail in through <Flagstaff> was farther north than [Highway] 66. It was up farther north. It wasn't where it is now. And they came down and camped on this place for, I think several weeks maybe. 



G. Babbitt: These troops? 



Fleming: This Boston party. 



G. Babbitt: Were they army men, or were they just '49'ers going on through to the <California> gold fields? 



Fleming: Well, they had been sent out by the government, I think, to tour the country. 



G. Babbitt: That was a survey party, I've heard. 



Fleming: Yes, that's right. 



G. Babbitt: I've heard of that. Charlie Clark substantiates the story you said. He tells the same thing, that the flag staff was not near the Old Town Spring. The Old Town Spring is further south. There was a spring up north, where your father was homesteading. 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: Was that toward the old Clark place, where the city park is now? 



Fleming: That was later. My father never did finishing homesteading it, never really did claim it. He got the place north, the McMillan Ranch. He homesteaded it instead. But at that time, he was where the Flagstaff High School is now--the property that belongs to the City. And there is a spring there. I haven't seen it for years. 



G. Babbitt: Do you know where that spring is, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: No, I sure don't. It must be in that canyon right above there. That's where old (unclear) used to have his garden. 



G. Babbitt: That old Chinese garden? 



B. Babbitt: Yeah. 



G. Babbitt: Now where was the Chinese garden, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: Well, it was right in the canyon above <Flagstaff> there. 



G. Babbitt: Is that where the City dam is now? 



B. Babbitt: Right below the City dam, yeah. 



G. Babbitt: Who is it, old Al Em? [phonetic] 



B. Babbitt: Al Em was the Chinaman's name, yeah. Used to have a stick and have two big baskets on each end of it, and he'd fill 'em up two, three times a day and come to town with vegetables. They could raise anything they wanted. 



G. Babbitt: You weren't one of those bad kids who used to throw rocks at him, were you? 



B. Babbitt: No, that was another Chinaman. That was (unclear). 



Fleming: (unclear) (laughter) 



B. Babbitt: What'd you say (unclear), (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: Slop Ching, they called him. 



Fleming: George, I don't want this to go on that. 



G. Babbitt: Oh, this is all right, this is history. This is the best part of these recordings. We can always cut it off anyway. 



Fleming: There was a Chinaman, we used to call him "Sloppy." There was an old shack, an old shed, on the lot next to the Bank Hotel. And old Sloppy used to live in there. My friends and I, Clare Campbell and Margie McCullough, Marlene Francis. 



G. Babbitt: Margie Babbitt McCullough, my sister. 



Fleming: Margie McCullough. Clare Campbell, and Marvine Rodabaugh [phonetic]. Marvine Francis Rodabaugh, and all the rest of us used to see Sloppy comin' with his big pan, and we'd throw rocks into the pan, and it would slop, you know. And he didn't like us at all, he just hated us. (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: I heard the kids used to tease (unclear). 



Fleming: Oh, we did! (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: Let's see, when you were a little girl, you were raised on the ranch, out north of town? 



Fleming: I was born on the ranch, and we lived out there until I was about six years old, and my mother moved to town. My father still had the ranch, and my mother moved to town because the Bank Hotel property was empty, was not.... And the insurance company.... And it was running down and everything, and my father sent her to town to take care of the property in town. 



G. Babbitt: Your dad built that building? 



Fleming: My dad built that building, the Bank Hotel, and in the early days it was a regular hotel with a bar room, sample room, and hotel, dining room. And the stage to the canyon left from the Bank Hotel, to go to the <Grand Canyon>. 



G. Babbitt: It got its name, the Bank Hotel, I suppose, from the bank that was in it? 



Fleming: When my father was building it, the banker needed a location, so my father put a vault in the corner for the banker, and it was named the Bank Hotel. 



G. Babbitt: That was old Mr. Hoskins, I think. 



Fleming: And that was Mr. Hoskins. 



G. Babbitt: I know his son, he lives in <St. Louis>. He comes in here once in a while. Arthur Hoskins. 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: Grand Canyon Stage, was that a six-team affair? What was it, do you remember? 



Fleming: I believe that was a six-team affair. They were beautiful horses, and the stage was really something. It was nice. I don't remember it, but I've seen pictures of it, and I've heard about it. 



G. Babbitt: I wonder how many people it could hold. 



Fleming: And I think there were about three: the front, the center, and the back, about six or eight people, I believe. 



G. Babbitt: I think easily maybe more. 



Fleming: Maybe more than that. Bert, what do you think about that? 



B. Babbitt: I think it'd hold more than that, about a dozen. 



Fleming: About a dozen people. 



G. Babbitt: Didn't they change horses two or three times going between here and the canyon? 



B. Babbitt: Three times. 



G. Babbitt: Where was that? 



B. Babbitt: Oh, they changed up here on the mountain there at Hart Prairie, the old Dilman [phonetic] Ranch. And the next time they changed at Cedar Ranch, and then at--oh, I don't think there's anything there now, but it was an old tank about thirty miles this side of Grandview. That was Red Horse Tank, I think. 



Fleming: I forgot to say that this settlement here, those days was called Antelope Springs. 



G. Babbitt: You mean instead of <Flagstaff>? 



Fleming: Instead of <Flagstaff>. And people have asked me who Hart Prairie is named for. Some people, in some of the histories, say for Frank Hart, but I think it was Hart Prairie before that. 



G. Babbitt: Was Frank Hart your father's friend? 



Fleming: Yes. 



B. Babbitt: Did he have a ranch up there? 



Fleming: (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: I heard Old Man Butler tellin' about somebody shootin' back and forth across there from the Dilman place to the Hart place. But that was a Butler that had it then. 



G. Babbitt: What were they shootin' about? 



B. Babbitt: Oh, just target practice, I guess. (laughs) 



G. Babbitt: Were they fightin' over the range or something? 



B. Babbitt: I don't know what it was all about, but they used to shoot back and forth there once in a while. (laughter) But there's two ranches: one of 'em's the Hart place, and the other one's the Butler. I think it was an old sheepman that homesteaded that Hart place. It might have been Frank, it might have been somebody before him. 



Fleming: (unclear) the Hart Prairie long before [Frank] Hart came, but we don't know. 



G. Babbitt: Well, listen, if Hart came with your father in 1876.... 



Fleming: He didn't. He came after my mother came in 1888. 



G. Babbitt: Oh, I see, your father was here a number of years before he brought your mother out. 



Fleming: Yes, my father was here a long time, twelve years, before my mother. And Hart didn't come until after my father and mother were married, and that was in 1888. And my brother, Don McMillan, says that Hart Prairie was Hart Prairie long before the time of Frank Hart, (unclear) This is Antelope Springs, and (unclear) Hart Prairie--H-A-R-T--Hart Prairie--(unclear). 



G. Babbitt: They called Hart Prairie "Deer"? 



Fleming: No, Antelope Springs was Antelope Springs. 



G. Babbitt: That was <Flagstaff>? 



Fleming: That was <Flagstaff>. And Hart Prairie was Deer, H-A-R-T, kind of the poetic. 



G. Babbitt: They call it D-E-A-R, Dear? 



Fleming: No, D-E-E-R. No, they called it Hart, but Hart means "deer." 



G. Babbitt: Oh, I see what.... 



Fleming: I didn't want that to go on [i.e., the recorder (Tr.)]. 



G. Babbitt: Well, that's all right. That's interesting, nothing wrong with that. 



Fleming: I really think that's.... 



G. Babbitt: In other words, a "hart" is a "stag." That's a Scotch name. 



Fleming: Uh-huh. 



G. Babbitt: What nationality was your father? Maybe he named it. 



Fleming: He was partly Scotch. 



G. Babbitt: Well, that's it. If you remember Walter Scott, a hart and a stag and so on and so forth, in his poetry. Remember? 



Fleming: Yes. Well, Dr. Colton says the history says it was named after Frank Hart, but I really believe that this other is true, is right, that it was Antelope Springs and Hart Prairie. 



G. Babbitt: (unclear) Antelope Springs and Hart Prairie. 



Fleming: Yes, and that was Hart Prairie. Instead of calling it Deer Prairie, Hart was a little bit more romantic or something. 



B. Babbitt: That's a good theory. 



G. Babbitt: I think that's a good story. I don't know why you don't want that on the recorder. 



Fleming: I thought maybe it was good, but I wasn't sure. 



G. Babbitt: Why, sure it is! 



Fleming: I think that's the truth. 



G. Babbitt: Probably straighten out something that's been under misapprehension about for a long time. 



Fleming: I don't think it was named Hart Prairie, because I think my mother would have told me, because she and the Harts were great friends, you know. 



G. Babbitt: Talking about ranches, there was an awful lot of grass in those days, I suppose, wasn't there? 



Fleming: I suppose. 



G. Babbitt: You never heard your dad talk about the range, huh? 



Fleming: Oh, I think that he had a lot of range, sheep range. He ran sheep where the Santa Fe Railroad is now, right down here. 



G. Babbitt: Right in the town. 



Fleming: Right in the town. And when the Santa Fe Railroad came in, he had to give up his range to the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad. The first trip I ever took on a train was my mother and my two brothers and I went to <California> to visit my mother's people. We rode on a pass. That was the way the Santa Fe paid my father for giving his grazing land to the railroad. 



G. Babbitt: They gave him passes on the railroad, huh? 



Fleming: They gave him passes on the railroad. 



G. Babbitt: Is that all he got?! That wasn't a very good compensation. 



Fleming: That's all he got, and that was the only trip any of us ever took! (laughter) 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



Fleming: Does that sound sensible, or am I just tellin' all kinds of foolish.... 



G. Babbitt: No! 



Fleming: I think that's true. 



G. Babbitt: Well, sure. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



G. Babbitt: (unclear) I know it must be true. Did you ever hear your dad talk about how he got this range? Did he just come in and say, "This is my ranch," or did he buy it from somebody? 



Fleming: I think that those days he was kind of the boss (laughs) of the country. He kinda took it. And then later the Forest Service got busy and they made him divvy up. He didn't have it all. 



G. Babbitt: Your dad must have been a pretty forceful character. Do you remember anything about that, Bert? How'd he get it, do you know? 



B. Babbitt: Well, I think they just kind of squatted those days--probably took up a homestead. 



G. Babbitt: I think there's been some argument, though, as to which range was whose and one thing and another, but your dad was boss, he just took it, huh? 



Fleming: My father was the boss those days. Unidentified man (far from microphone): That's all there was to it. You just had to put your stock there, and you had it. 



Fleming: Uh-huh. I think if you homesteaded so many acres of land, then you were entitled to many, many more acres of land for grazing. So that's what he had. 



G. Babbitt: Well, when he'd raise his sheep, what would he do with 'em? What would he do with the wool? There's no railroad here, was there? 



Fleming: They took them to <Prescott> and shipped them out from <Prescott>. 



G. Babbitt: There was no railroad at <Prescott>, was there? 



Fleming: Bert, what about that? 



B. Babbitt: Well, they had that freightin' outfit, the [Ernberg?] then. Veazey, far from microphone: (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: That's where they went, they went to the big Colorado River. The freight outfits run across there all the time. 



G. Babbitt: Would they send 'em out alive? 



B. Babbitt: No, I don't think so. If they sent 'em out alive, they drove 'em. 



G. Babbitt: They couldn't keep 'em (unclear), they'd be weeks gettin' 'em out by stage. 



B. Babbitt: Well, about all they run 'em for was wool those days. Just like cattle over in <California>-run them for the hides. 



Fleming: In 1894, the year I was born, they called me the "hard times baby," because we had a terrible drought, and a national depression during Cleveland's administration, and the sheepmen and the other men in business had a terrible time. They had no sale for wool, and they hadn't any rain, their sheep died, and they just had awful times. And my father really lost an awful lot of sheep. 



G. Babbitt: But didn't your father loan a lot of money, too, that he lost, to different individuals? I heard that he had. 



Fleming: I couldn't say. I've heard that, but I couldn't say. 



G. Babbitt: Didn't they just used to loan him money without a note or anything? 



Fleming: It seemed like the banker loaned money to different men that needed it. And my dad signed his name to them. 



G. Babbitt: Endorsed the notes? 



Fleming: Endorsed the notes. Though I don't want that to go.... 



G. Babbitt: That's all right, you're not mentioning any names. 



Fleming: No. Might not be--I don't know, all that stuff, you know. 



G. Babbitt: I heard a good story about your father playing poker with old Hank Lockett and winning a bunch of sheep from him one time. 



Fleming: No, that wasn't right, George. My father told Hank Lockett and his other friends that he was going to be married. And he was a confirmed bachelor-- so they thought. And so Hank Lockett and these other men said, "Oh, yes, we see you get married!" And Tom McMillan said, "Well, all right, I'll show you, I'll bring my bride home." And they bet him a band of sheep that he would come back single. So when my father came back married, he went into Lockett's pasture, and started to drive the sheep out of Lockett's pasture into his own range or pasture, and Lockett said, "Hey, Mac! What are you doin'?! Where you takin' my sheep?!" And McMillan said, "Your sheep?! They're my sheep. A bet's a bet! I pay my bets, and you do too!" (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: He took 'em then, huh? 



Fleming: He took 'em. 



G. Babbitt: It was quite a number of sheep, too, wasn't it? 



Fleming: I think they were very good sheep, awfully good sheep. 



G. Babbitt: I mean, it was a number of them, too, wasn't it? 



Fleming: Well, it was a band. I don't know how many are in a band. 



G. Babbitt: How many would have been in a band, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: Two thousand animals. 



Fleming: Oh, no! Not that many. No, it was just a few sheep in the pasture. I don't think it was that many, George. I don't know. But they told that story. Unidentified man (far from mic): Yeah, I've heard that too. 



Fleming: Uh-huh, I've heard that story, but I don't know how many it was. I don't think....



[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 



G. Babbitt: Well, if he made a bet, he probably would have stayed by it. That was old Hank, wasn't it? 



Fleming: That was Hank Lockett, uh-huh. He probably got them back or something, I don't know. (laughs) 



B. Babbitt: Well, what ever become of Billy Moats? [phonetic] 



Fleming: And Old Bill Moats was an old man that was kind of a flunky out on the ranch. He was there for years. He died. He drank himself to death. 19 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) horses, didn't he? 



Fleming: And he gave me a pony when I was a little girl. He gave me a little black colt, and we called it Nig. And afterwards, Lee Dial [phonetic] bought Nig and Nig was in the movies. That's true, too. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) horses to your daddy. 



Fleming: (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: Yeah, the I.T.  brand horses, they had quite a bunch of them. 



G. Babbitt: How many horses did they have, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: I imagine they had 200-300 head. 



Fleming: (unclear) 



G. Babbitt: Who was this fellah Nicknose? 



Fleming: I don't remember him. 



B. Babbitt: I don't remember him. You remember (unclear)? 



G. Babbitt: Who's Nicknose? Where'd he get his name? 



B. Babbitt: Well, his nose was nicked right in the middle, prit near even with his cheeks. But he was just a saloon bum, but he was a good potato cleaner. He'd clean weeds out of the potatoes. And Bourney LeGuide [phonetic], they called Bourney the guide or Bourney the geezer. He'd help out there with the potatoes too. 



G. Babbitt: Where did Barney Geezer ever get that name? 



B. Babbitt: I don't know where he got that name. (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: Sounds like you had some great names. How about some other old names? 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) know that, too. 



Fleming: Yes, he'd know lots more. And then there were two other men. There was a man named Jim Goodwin that was here, and he was with McMillan awhile, and he was with Lockett awhile. And then there were two other men. Their names were Al and John Grady, and they were with McMillan and Lockett, and later with Campbell and Francis for years and years and years. 



G. Babbitt: I guess you never heard your dad say what he got for his sheep, huh? Do you remember anything about that? 



Fleming: No, I don't. I don't remember anything about it. 



G. Babbitt: Well, he was quite successful, I understand. 



Fleming: Yes, he was. 



G. Babbitt: He was sort of the kingfish around here, though, wasn't he? 



Fleming: He was. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



Fleming: No. 



B. Babbitt: Don't remember that, huh? 



G. Babbitt: Who's Old Jack? 



B. Babbitt: He was a dog there. He always smelled like skunk. 



G. Babbitt: Jack was a dog? 



Fleming: I remember that. (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: The two of 'em, between 'em, they'd eat up a whole platter of sour milk. 



Fleming: They would?! 



B. Babbitt: They sure would. 



G. Babbitt: What did your father look like? He was a handsome fellah, judging by his picture. Was he a big man? 



Fleming: He wasn't.... I don't know how tall he was. 



G. Babbitt: Was he average height? 



Fleming: He was average height, I believe. Some people say he was short, like my brother Tom, but I believe he was taller. I'm pretty sure he was. Bert, wasn't he? 



B. Babbitt: Yeah, he was taller than Tom. 



Fleming: He was taller than Tom. He was about five-nine, I think, or ten, wasn't he, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: Yeah, I think so. 



Fleming: I think so. 



G. Babbitt: What color eyes did he have? 



Fleming: He had blue eyes and peaches and cream complexion. 



G. Babbitt: Just like you, huh? 



Fleming: Although he was out in the weather. That's what Mrs. Cameron, old lady Cameron, told me. She said, "Your dad had the loveliest skin." 



G. Babbitt: What color hair did he have, red hair? 



Fleming: I don't believe he had red hair. Do you, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: It was sandy, I think. 



Fleming: Rather sandy. Sandy hair. 



G. Babbitt: He had a wonderful, flourishing moustache there, and a beard. 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: Did you ever hear him say how he came out? Did he ride horseback with several other men, or did he come out on one of those wagon trains? How'd he work that? 



Fleming: Seems to me like they had some kind of transportation to <Pueblo Colorado>. He came to <Pueblo> on a stage, I guess. And then from Pueblo, some other way--on horses, or I don't know. 



G. Babbitt: That's undoubtedly the way they came. I thought he came out with some other folks. 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: Did he ever say that he came out purposely to come to <Flagstaff>, or was he just looking around for a place to settle? 



Fleming: No, he didn't come purposely to <Flagstaff>, but he wanted to engage in the sheep business, and decided that this was the place to come. 



G. Babbitt: It was a wonderful place. 



Fleming: Uh-huh. 



G. Babbitt: I wonder what he did with his sheep in the winter. 



Fleming: They didn't take them south, they stayed here. 



G. Babbitt: Up on the mountainside here? 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



Fleming: Dropped off the mountain road. 



B. Babbitt: Yeah. 



G. Babbitt: Or down toward <Canyon Diablo>? 



B. Babbitt: They might have gone that way. He went off about where Kellum [phonetic] is now, I think. 



G. Babbitt: Oh, down in the center country, down toward the Indian reservation. 



B. Babbitt: Yeah. That's as far as I know. There's a place down there they call McMillan Crack. There's a big hole in the ground, and you can get water out of it. That's on Canyon Padre, pretty close to Canyon Padre, way down. 



G. Babbitt: Yeah, I've heard of McMillan Crack, and that's named after Mamie's dad, huh? 



B. Babbitt: Uh-huh, that's where they used to winter. 



Fleming: That's where his sheep were in the winter. 



G. Babbitt: Did you ever hear him talk about any other sheepmen that he associated with? 



Fleming: I think that Mr. Ralph Cameron was in with him for a while. They had quite a career together. 



G. Babbitt: Did he ever say anything about the troubles that they had with the cattlemen? 



Fleming: They had trouble with the New Mexico Mexicans--had an awful lot of trouble with those New Mexico Mexicans, or those Mexicans, I mean. 



G. Babbitt: You mean the Mexicans would try to come in and take their range away from them? 



Fleming: No, they'd come in and get the sheep, run the sheep out. 



G. Babbitt: Oh! steal the sheep off of 'em. 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: I heard they had some shootings over there. 



Fleming: Yeah, they did. 



G. Babbitt: Forays, that the Mexicans came in on. Did you ever hear the story--I believe old Hochderffer tells it, that your father organized sort of a group of vigilantes here at one time, and they hanged some robbers and thieves around town here that had been preying upon the drunken cowboys around, they'd been doing it for a long time. Did you ever hear about that? 



Fleming: No, I haven't. 



G. Babbitt: Did you, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: No, I never heard that. 



G. Babbitt: Hochderffer said something about they hanged six or nine of 'em one day from a tree up here. 



Fleming: I've never heard about that. I don't believe they did. 



G. Babbitt: It was in the newspaper. There's some dope on that. 



Fleming: I should have named the Hochderffers as early settlers. (door opens and closes) Oh, hello, Weezer! 



G. Babbitt: You say the Hochderffers were here? 



Fleming: Yeah, they were early settlers. 



G. Babbitt: Your dad was here before they were. 



Fleming: Yes, he was. 



G. Babbitt: Did your dad ever say who some of the other folks were who were here when he came, or who came with him? 



Fleming: I don't know who came with him. I think among the early settlers were the Beals and the Clarks and the Marshalls. 



G. Babbitt: Oh, yeah, Marshalls-Eva Marshall. 



Fleming: Eva Marshall's husband. 



G. Babbitt: Your dad was apparently the first one. 



Fleming: I think that the Lockwoods were very early settlers--Switzers. They all came pretty early. 



G. Babbitt: Yeah, probably Lockwood Tanks is named after--Lockwood Springs, aren't they, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: [Yes.] 



Fleming: Yeah. 



G. Babbitt: All those places are named after 'em, I guess. 



Fleming: Yes. (says hello to Eunice) 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



G. Babbitt: Say, Mame, coming back to this business of the location of the original <Flagstaff>: you know, your story coincides perfectly with the one that Charlie Clark told me, that it was not at the Old Town Spring, but it was further up the north, maybe a half-mile. You say that the army officers were there on July 4, 1876, and that some of the old-timers heard about it. Your dad was there for awhile? 



Fleming: My dad was there. I really don't know who the other old-timers were, but there were several old-timers there, and they had a celebration because it was the Fourth of July and the Centennial of the Declaration of Independence. And they hung the flag, the soldiers hung their American flag on a tall pine. When they left, the flag was their flag, so they took their flag, but they left the staff. 



G. Babbitt: The pine tree was still there. 



Fleming: Yes, the pine tree was still there, and probably the staff that they put the flag on. 



G. Babbitt: They had a staff nailed to the pine tree, is that it? 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: And that's where the town got its name. 



Fleming: That's why we have <Flagstaff>. That's why it was called <Flagstaff>. 



G. Babbitt: And as I understand--I'd like to have this reiterated--you said the road came into the north of where it comes in now, north of the railroad. It came in possibly a half-mile or three-quarters of a mile north of Old Town Springs, didn't it? 



Fleming: Not Old Town Springs. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) pine trees there (unclear). 



G. Babbitt: Well, you know my father always used to say it came in north of what's known as the big George Babbitt house on the northeast hill. And I remember seeing that road myself when I was a youngster. 



Fleming: That's where it came down, and they went directly to the springs right over here. 



G. Babbitt: What's called Chinese Canyon, over by the (unclear). 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: Which would be about a half a mile north of what's now known as the Old Town Springs down by the railroad. Yeah, that's right. 



Fleming: Yes, uh-huh. 



B. Babbitt: There must have been a spring there then. There's no spring there now, is there? 



Fleming: Yes, Bert, I think so. (unclear) I've seen that spring when I was a child. 



G. Babbitt: In the canyon? 



Fleming: Yes, in the canyon. Herbie has, too, Herb Babbitt. When we used to go to see the Colin Campbell family, we went to that canyon, and we saw that spring, and drank water from it. 



G. Babbitt: That would seem logical to have a camp there, rather than on the side of the hill where the Old Town Spring is now known. It's level ground, they could pull their wagons in there, and they have room for their horses. 



Fleming: Yes, they did. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) Observatory Hill from there, too, didn't they? There's no road up there. 



Fleming: (unclear) 



G. Babbitt: Didn't you say, Bert, that you had an old Mexican that worked for you that was there at the time of the (unclear). 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) known as Bonancio [phonetic], but I don't know what his last name was. But he said he was with 'em when he was a packer for the outfit. 



G. Babbitt: For the army officers that were in? 



B. Babbitt: Yeah. 



Fleming: (unclear) 



G. Babbitt: How long ago was that, you had him? 



B. Babbitt: It was about thirty years ago. 



G. Babbitt: You don't know what his last name was, nobody knows anything about Bonancio? 



B. Babbitt: Well, there's a few of 'em there, but none of 'em know his last name. 



G. Babbitt: He'd be dead now, anyway, wouldn't he? 



B. Babbitt: Oh, yeah. He was about a hundred years old when he worked for me. 



G. Babbitt: Mamie, didn't you say that there were some people whose names you knew? Cleveland (unclear)? 



Fleming: One man's name was Cleland, C-L-E-L-A-N-D. And his family, he went to <Pasadena>, and some of his family are still there, and they're florists. 



G. Babbitt: He was through here several years ago? 



Fleming: Yes, he was through here several years ago. And Clara McGonigle bought flowers through him for her flower shop here. And that's how we happened to know that his father was one of the men that came through with the Boston party--or his grandfather, I don't know which it was. 



G. Babbitt: And that was July 4, 1876? 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: And your father was a settler here at that time? 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: He'd just come in, earlier in the year? 



Fleming: Yes, he'd just come in, started to homestead. 



G. Babbitt: I'm writing a book, and I'm trying to find out what the old-timers carried with them on their treks across the country. Did you ever hear your father say? Food particularly. I was wondering what sort of utensils they had to eat with. Did you ever hear him say, do you know anything about that? 



Fleming: I think they had Dutch ovens and iron kettles. 



G. Babbitt: Did they have tin plates? 



Fleming: And tin plates, yes. 



G. Babbitt: Tin cups, I guess. 



Fleming: Tin cups-large ones. 



G. Babbitt: Knives and forks? 



Fleming: Knives and forks, tin ones, (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: What kind of food did they carry, or did they shoot fresh game? 



Fleming: Oh, I think they carried plenty of bacon and beans, and made biscuits in their Dutch ovens. 



G. Babbitt: Must have carried flour then too. 



Fleming: And flour, yes. 



G. Babbitt: Shortening? 



Fleming: Shortening. Lard, it would be, in those days. Men that bached those days on these ranches, they had fifty-pound sacks of flour, you know. And when they'd go to make the biscuits, instead of getting a pan out, and mixing the dough like we do, they'd make a little hole right in the big fifty-pound sack, and put their baking powder and their salt and their water and get the whole thing out and knead it. They'd do it that way, didn't they, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: Didn't use any pan. 



Fleming: No, they didn't use any pans. 



G. Babbitt: They didn't measure it out--they just started working on the top of the sack of flour? 



Fleming: Yes, they did, they worked it right in on the flour. 



G. Babbitt: They used a pan, of course, to bake the bread in, or biscuits, or whatever. 



Fleming: Yes, they did, didn't they? 



B. Babbitt: I've seen 'em bake 'em on the coals. I won't tell you what they called it. (chuckles) 



G. Babbitt: You won't? Why not? (laughter) Can you spell it? (laughter) 



Fleming: Oh, let's see, that's about all I can think of. 



G. Babbitt: What did your father have to say about the wild animals? 



Fleming: Oh, I think there were coyotes that came after his sheep. 



G. Babbitt: Mountain lion, must have been. 



Fleming: And mountain lions. Mountain lions he trapped, didn't he, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: He did. 



Fleming: Uh-huh, I think he trapped mountain lions. 



G. Babbitt: Did he have any trouble with bear? 



Fleming: No, I've never heard anything about bear. 



G. Babbitt: I imagine there were lots of wild turkey and deer. 



Fleming: Wild turkey and deer, yes. 



G. Babbitt: But they had mostly trouble with coyotes killing the sheep? 



Fleming: Coyotes, uh-huh. 



G. Babbitt: Lots of them. 



Fleming: Lots of them. 



B. Babbitt: And dogs, wild dogs. He had more trouble with them. 



Fleming: (unclear) dogs. 



G. Babbitt: Did he ever say anything about Indians coming in, stealing sheep? 



Fleming: Oh, no, I don't think the Indians stole his sheep. But the Indians used to come around, and they used to come to the house for bread--they wanted bread. They'd feed them. I don't think they ever came in the houses. 



G. Babbitt: Those were Navajo, I guess? 



Fleming: They'd come in and go like this, and scare the women nearly to death. 



G. Babbitt: Look through the window panes, you mean? 



Fleming: Look through the window panes. 



G. Babbitt: With their hands up against their cheeks? 



Fleming: Up against their faces. I think the women would be so frightened. And then they'd go out and ask them what they wanted, and they'd say, "Bread, bread." 



G. Babbitt: Did they say that? 



Fleming: So they'd bring them some bread, and off they'd go. You've heard that story, haven't you, Eunice? 



Veazey: (unclear, too far from microphone) 



G. Babbitt: Mame, I see we can't hear that going on over there. We'll get that in a few minutes. You never heard them say anything about the living conditions? All I heard Mother say is that they used to bring water in barrels. You recall anything about the early-day pioneering troubles? 



Fleming: They did have to haul water in barrels from the Old Town Spring. And they did that for years, I'm sure. 



G. Babbitt: I know I heard Henry Ashurst say a fellah named Squint-eyed Charlie used to sell water. You remember him? 



Fleming: I don't. 



G. Babbitt: It was a dollar a barrel they paid for it. Unidentified man, far from mic: Two dollars a barrel. 



G. Babbitt: Two dollars a barrel?! Gee! No wonder they didn't take baths in the early days, huh? 



Fleming: No. And nobody had any lawns or flowers, because there was no water. And I've always heard that Mrs. Charlie Schulz was the first one to raise flowers in <Flagstaff>. She started them, and watered them the best she could. And after that, other housewives, other matrons, raised flowers and lawns. 



G. Babbitt: Well, they didn't have any piped water, of course--they just got it out of the barrel. 



Fleming: That's right. Saved it, I guess, every way they could. 



G. Babbitt: Did you ever hear your father say anything about where they used to play poker? I know they used to have some big gambling games here. 



Fleming: I don't know. 



G. Babbitt: You didn't know anything about that? 



Fleming: I didn't. 



G. Babbitt: I know they didn't have any paper money. 



Fleming: They had silver money. 



G. Babbitt: Silver and gold. 



Fleming: Silver and gold, uh-huh. 



G. Babbitt: You remember something about that, don't you, Bert? 



B. Babbitt: No, I don't remember. I remember big bills, about twice as big as they are now. 



G. Babbitt: I'm talking about twenty-dollar gold pieces and fifty-dollar gold pieces, ten-dollar gold pieces. 



Fleming: I've never seen them. 



G. Babbitt: I guess you were too young to pay much attention to what your father did then. 



Fleming: Uh-huh. 



G. Babbitt: Did you ever hear him say anything about the school or anything that transpired in the way of education? 



Fleming: There was the school, and John Weatherford's sister was one of the first teachers, and her name was Flora Weatherford-later married a man named Finney--Flora Finney of Beaver Creek. 



G. Babbitt: She's still alive now? 



Fleming: Yes. Well, she was one of the first teachers. And Eva Marshall. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember where the school was? 



Fleming: The school was over near the college. 



G. Babbitt: Way over there, huh? 



Fleming: Uh-huh. 



G. Babbitt: I thought it'd be down around town somewhere there. 



Fleming: No, it was over where the light plant used to be. You remember where the light plant was? 



G. Babbitt: Uh-huh. When you were a little girl, you lived at the Bank Hotel. There weren't any buildings around you then, were there? What do you remember about the downtown business section of <Flagstaff>? 



Fleming: We were the only building on our block on Santa Fe Avenue, except the Grand Army Hall was on the next corner. You remember that old hall, Bert? 



G. Babbitt: Yeah, it was a little brick building there. 



Fleming: Little brick building. And across the street was the Aubineau property. 



G. Babbitt: In other words, the TIA was west of you, and the Aubineau property was due east of you. 



Fleming: Across the street, uh-huh, yes. Then I think Commercial Hotel. 



G. Babbitt: I guess there were a few saloons up and down. 



Fleming: And there were saloons. 



G. Babbitt: And dirty streets, muddy streets. 



Fleming: Muddy streets. I used to wade in the water after a rain. 



G. Babbitt: You remember Sandy Donahue? 



Fleming: Yes. 



G. Babbitt: What kind of a fellah was he? He was quite a character. 



Fleming: He was quite a character, but he really was quite a man. If he had left whiskey alone, I believe he'd have been fine. He was quite a bright man, fairly well-educated, interested in civic betterment, and in politics, but lost out. 



G. Babbitt: I understand he was the biggest property owner in the early business district history of <Flagstaff>. 



Fleming: Yes, I think he was. 



G. Babbitt: He liked to fight, too, I heard. I guess you wouldn't know about that. 



Fleming: No, don't remember that. 



G. Babbitt: Bet Bert knows something about that. 



B. Babbitt: I never heard anything about that. There wasn't very many people wanted to fight him, I know that, (chuckles) 



G. Babbitt: Who are some of the other characters you've heard about? 



B. Babbitt: Old Ed Whipple was one. 



Fleming: (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: Govenu [phonetic] was a tough lawyer, the banker. 



Fleming: (unclear) 



B. Babbitt: (chuckles) But he didn't. 



G. Babbitt: Yeah, Ed Whipple. He was the first undertaker, wasn't he? 



Fleming: Seems to me like when he first came, that I believe he helped build houses--Ed Whipple. 



B. Babbitt: I think he did. He was a carpenter. 



Fleming: He was a carpenter. 



G. Babbitt: Then I believe he was the sheriff. 



Fleming: Then he may have been a sheriff, and then after that, an undertaker. I really think that he helped build some of these early houses. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember any stories about feuds, like the Graham- Tewksbury War, or any shootings going on? 



Fleming: No, I don't. 



G. Babbitt: That's something you probably didn't run across. I know when they cut down the pole on the corner of Blank and Borrow [phonetic] they said they almost had to get a blow torch and weld it down, because it was so full of lead slugs from fellahs shootin' at each other by that corner there. 



Fleming: No! (laughs) No, that was before we ever moved to town then. Things like that didn't happen that I can remember of. 



G. Babbitt: Where did you go to school, Mame? 



Fleming: I went to St. Anthony's School and to the Normal School--Flagstaff Normal School. 



G. Babbitt: Do you remember the names of some of your teachers at St. Anthony's? 



Fleming: Sister Mary Leo, Sister Genevieve, Sister Fabiowah [phonetic]. They're the ones that I can remember. 



G. Babbitt: How about up at the Normal School? 



Fleming: Up at the Normal School, Dr. Blome, Edward Hahn, and a Professor Adams, and Miss Botts, Miss Boyer [all phonetic spellings]. 



G. Babbitt: What year was that you went to school up there? 



Fleming: I went to school up there about 1911 to 1915,1 think it was. 



G. Babbitt: You were showing us here a little while ago the pictures of the christening of the ship <Flagstaff>? 



Fleming: The christening of the S.S. Flagstaff, Steam Ship Flagstaff. 



G. Babbitt: When was that? 



Fleming: That was December 23, 1944. I'll have to get my stuff out and read about that, so I can tell about it. 



G. Babbitt: It was during the war? 



Fleming: It was during the war, and it was during the Battle of the Bulge, the very thickest of the war. I was selected, really, because I had four sons in the service. How it happened, the City of <Flagstaff>, the mayor, Mr. Arnold Bledsoe, received a letter from the ship-building company--Henry Kaiser was a member, was one of--saying that <Flagstaff> had been selected as a city to sponsor a ship. And the reason why, because of its cultural background, and of its war effort. And this letter said all the City of <Flagstaff> has to do is to select the right lady to send to <Wilmington California>, to christen the ship on December 23, 1944. So Mr. Arnold Bledsoe read the letter to the council, and they decided that they would turn it over to the service clubs of <Flagstaff>. So they let the service clubs of <Flagstaff> know about it, and each service club was given the privilege to select two women from their club. And at that time, I was not a member of any service club, but the Siroptomist Club of Flagstaff recommended, or they gave my name to the committee. The meeting was held, then in these service clubs they appointed two members to select the right one. And they had the meeting out at Dr. Colton's house, I believe--I'm not sure. But anyway, I was selected, and Dr. Colton's secretary phoned me to tell me that I had been selected. 



G. Babbitt: Well, it's a beautiful ship. 



Fleming: It was a beautiful ship. 



G. Babbitt: From what I saw, the picture you showed me, it must have been quite an affair. A lot of people there? 



Fleming: Oh, yes, lots of people were there. Mr. T. A. Riordan was there, his daughter, Mrs. Chambers, and her daughters, and Mr. Bob Chambers, Mr. Hochderffer. The Dolans, Mr. Dolan and Mrs. Dolan's sisters. And I was very proud and very pleased, and felt like a queen. (laughter) 



G. Babbitt: Did you give a speech, Mame? 



Fleming: And I gave a speech. 



G. Babbitt: What did you tell 'em about? 



Fleming: I told 'em why I was sent, and that <Flagstaff> was selected because of its Lowell Observatory and its Northern <Arizona> Museum, and its teachers' college, and of its other cultural background, and because of its war effort. 



G. Babbitt: <Flagstaff> bought an awful lot of bonds, I know, per capita. They were one of the leaders in the state. 



Fleming: That was the reason. 



G. Babbitt: That's the first ship, undoubtedly, that's ever been named after <Flagstaff>. 



Fleming: That was it. 



G. Babbitt: Quite an honor. 



B. Babbitt: (unclear) 



G. Babbitt: That's quite an honor that you were chosen, Mame. I thought maybe one reason was because you were the daughter of the first settler, but that didn't enter into it, did it? 



Fleming: It may have entered. Yes, I think it did. I think it did enter into it when they were selecting. I believe that did. 



G. Babbitt: Of course the fact that you had four sons in the service.... 



Fleming: Four sons in the service is really why the Siroptomist Club chose me as their delegate. 



G. Babbitt: I don't believe there was any other <Flagstaff> woman who had that many sons in the service. 



Fleming: Well, I guess there were. 



G. Babbitt: And they all came back safe and sound and healthy, didn't they? 



Fleming: Yes, they did. 



G. Babbitt: Little Arthur, your fifth son.... 



Fleming: My fifth son, Arthur, was a boy, seventeen, wanting to get into the navy. All his brothers had gone, and he wanted to go. His father and I wanted him to stay and finish high school. We didn't want him to go, but we did finally yield and let him go to the navy, and he went to Guam, and was gone about fourteen or sixteen months--perhaps longer--and he came back and finished high school. He promised us that he would come home and finish high school, and he did. 



G. Babbitt: We're talking about the present-day Fleming family. There's one thing we didn't cover, and due to the fact that you're the child of the first settler, what are the names of your brothers and sisters, and how many were there in your family? 



Fleming: There were just three of us, three McMillans: Don, Mary, and Tom. I'm Mary. 



G. Babbitt: You're Mary?! 



Fleming: Uh-huh, I'm Mary--Mamie. Only the three of us. My mother had a son--she'd been married before, she was a widow, and she had a son seven years old, named Arthur Anderson. 



G. Babbitt: Yeah, I remember Arthur. I remember your mother as a cute little woman, little bitty woman. 



Fleming: She was, she was very dressy--much more dressy than her daughter! 



G. Babbitt: I know she was a great friend of my mother's. They used to spend an awful lot of time together. 



Fleming: Yes, they did. They had lots of fun together. 



G. Babbitt: Who were some of the women? We're always talking about the men. Do you remember any of the early-day women? 



Fleming: Well, I forgot to mention the Ackers. They were early settlers. And Mrs. Kennedy was a fairly early settler. She was a teacher. And the Riordans were early settlers. 



G. Babbitt: And some of the Babbitt women, I guess. Oh! the Greenlaws. 



Fleming: The Babbitts, the Riordans, the Greenlaws, the Francis, Bayless, Dole-Judge Dole's wife. 



G. Babbitt: What did the women do, play cards? 



Fleming: They played cards. They just did about as they pleased. (laughed) They really did, didn't they, Eunice? 



G. Babbitt: Did they have what they called "society" in <Flagstaff> in those days? 



Fleming: Oh, yes. They were snooty as all get-out, (laughs) They were snooty as all get-out. 



G. Babbitt: You mean they had a closed circle? 



Fleming: I don't want you to say I said that, George! For goodness sake! 



G. Babbitt: Well, there's nothing wrong about that, or immoral--it's just a statement of fact. I guess there was another class of women that were not accepted in their circle. 



Fleming: That's right. 



Veazey: (unclear) 



Fleming: Oh, they were very kind, very charitable. 





