FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Dr. Martin Fronske

Interview number NAU.OH.28.18

Dr. Martin G. Fronske, early <Flagstaff> medical doctor. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on November 19, 1975. Transcribed on February 2, 1994. Transcriber: Nancy Warden.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Side 1

    Born December 9, 1883 

    Education in <St. Louis Missouri> 

    Went west in 1912; <Flagstaff> in 1914 

    Short biography by him 

    Description of early <Flagstaff>, 1914 

    Sawmills, Babbitts, cattle and sheep 

    Early medical practice 

    Mercy Hospital 

    Treated sawmill patients 

    Short family history 

    Rotary Club, Boy Scouts, mentioned 

    Houses lived in 

    Business district of town, banks 

    Dr. Raymond, Dr. Sechrist (other early medical doctors) 

    Milton (Mercy Hospital) 

    Sawmill 

    More on business area 

    Racing track 

    Fourth of July, mentioned 

    More on business area 

    Water system (trains bringing water from <Winslow>) 

    Pow Wow, mentioned

Side 2

    Weather (snow) 

    First day in <Flagstaff> 

    Orpheum collapsing under weight of snow 

    Going to <Phoenix> by train 

    Doctors visits to ranches, shanties 

    Flu epidemics (1918, 1920), other diseases (Pneumonia) 

    Early medical practice 

    Early medical doctors, listed 

    Payments for medical service 

    Pete Michelbach 

    Lumbering, mentioned 

    More early doctors named, Cornish, Palmer 

    Train to <Grand Canyon> 

    Prohibition (Front Street saloons)

TAPE 1, SIDE 1

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Dr. Martin G. Fronske who-

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Have they started this play-?

SUSAN ROGERS: Huh?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Have they started the machine?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, I started it. See it's going. This is an interview with Dr. Martin G. Fronske who is a retired medical doctor of <Flagstaff>. This interview is being conducted on November 19, 1975 at 923 N. San Francisco, the Fronskes' house. The interviewer is Susan Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City -Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Dr. Fronske, when and where were you born?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I was born in <St. Louis Missouri>, December 9, 1883. I, (coughs) pardon me. I went to school in <St. Louis>, graduated from the grade school, graduated from the high school. Took my medical education at Washington University and graduated with an M.D. in 1907. I practiced in <St. Louis> for a number of years until my health broke down, and, ah, I was advised by my treating physicians to, ah, go west. I went to <Albuquerque> in 1912 to, ah, see whether I would get any benefit. It helped me. In 1913 I went back to <St. Louis>, worked there awhile and became ill again. I was, I was in bed for about two or three months. Moved out to <Albuquerque> again, lived there until 1914; in the early part of 1914. Through the advice of some friends, I was, I had an opportunity to, ah, go to, ah, <Flagstaff> and see how I would like practice there. Dr. Raymond, who was a- who was practicing here, in association with Dr. Schermann, asked me to come, and, ah affiliate myself with him. Accordingly I went to ah, I decided to move to <Flagstaff> permanently and, ah, start practicing in <Flagstaff>. I arrived March the first, 1914, and from that time on, I've practiced in <Flagstaff>, until my retirement in about 1962 or 63. Since that time I've been living with my, with my family, my son and his family, and, ah, I'm just a retired physician.

When I came to <Flagstaff> in 1914, <Flagstaff> was a community of- some people said 3,000, some said 5,000. Ah, the main industry here was the- were the three mills. There were three sawmills. The, ah, Flagstaff Lumber Company, the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, and the Greenlaw Lumber Mill. Dr. Raymond was, ah, in charge of the medical care of all three of these, of these mills. And it was part of my function to treat accidents and the mill workers as well as their families.

At that time, Babbitts' store had been- Babbitts' store was the main mercantile, this, ah, company. It was operated by the Babbitt Brothers. There was Charles, there was George, there was Bill, there was- that's all I can think of right now, but I think there was another brother. They had their particular interests in the Babbitt Company, which involved cattle, sheep and land. All of these men passed away since my living here. They became, they became rather elderly men. They all had fairly large families, and the family is still in business, in mercantile business, and the automobile business, and in the- I think still some cattle and sheep interests. The other interest here besides the mills were the cattle and sheep men. The cattlemen were- I don't remember exactly who was particularly interested in cattle, but the sheep men were the Campbells, Hugh Cronin, Campbell, and, ah, they had, they had big sheep herds in this area. Dr. Raymond was also interested in, ah, sheep especially, and some cattle.

My own family here- my wife came with me from <St. Louis>. And my family consisted of, ah- we had two sons in <Flagstaff>. Bob who is now a professional photographer in <Flagstaff> and Jack, who became associated with the soil conservation, the <United States> Department of Agriculture. Bob has lived here all his life. He had a family of nine children, five boys and four girls. At the present time I have at least nine children as grandchildren. Any- my son Jack had a son and a daughter, which makes it eleven grandchildren for me. In the past few years I added to this family, this family group, one, two, three granddaughters and two grandsons. Most of my time now is taken up, ah, doing nothing but reading. My vision has been so impaired that I cannot read, but fortunately <Flagstaff> has, ah, a, ah, a library, a talking library, a library of talking books, ah, which I am making full use of. And my own particular interests in <Flagstaff> were the Federated Church, of which I am- I've been a member since I've been here. I was a member of Rotary. The Rotary Club was organized in <Flagstaff> in 1921. Boy Scouts, in which I was interested, was, ah, started about 1921 or 22; I don't remember exactly. And, ah, the, ah- these have been my main interests.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want me to ask you something?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I can't think of anything anymore.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. Let me ask you something.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: O.K.

SUSAN ROGERS: When you first moved here, what houses did you live in and can you describe your neighborhood?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, when we first came, my wife and I rented a little house on N. Beaver St. It was the house, it was the house of a cattle, or rancher rather, who had it- her ranch about in the area where 89 turns off from 66, right now. Ah, we lived in that house, which was a very simple place, for about five or six months. And then, as happened right along, the ranchers were living out on the ranch, came into town and took their home (?) and left the ranch out there. The cattle people and the sheep people had to move their stock to a lower altitude because it became cold. So sometime the end of 1914, we bought a house that was vacated, on 401 W. Aspen, across the street from the Federated Church. We lived there until my wife died in 1955. After which I moved to the home of my son and his family.

I might mention some of the people who were prominent, aside from the Babbitts and- There were two banks at that time, the Flagstaff Bank and the, no it was the Arizona Bank, and yes, the Flagstaff Citizens' Bank, I think it was called. The president of the (coughs) Arizona Bank was Mr. Tom Pollock. The president of the other bank was Mr. Milt Powers. The superintendents, or the superintendents of the two mills were- The Arizona Lumber and Timber Co. was managed by I.B. Koch, and was owned by Mike and his brother Riordan, R E A R D O N (his spelling). Ah, they- the Flagstaff Lumber Co was owned and operated by Joe C. Dolan. Mr. Dolan and the two Riordans since that time have passed away. Any other questions?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh, can you describe Dr. Raymond to us? Like, when you first came?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, Dr. Raymond graduated in <St. Louis> several years before I did. He came out to this country on account of his health. And he located in Williams, and then moved over to <Flagstaff> I guess about 1910. He was here, maybe three or four, or five years before I came. Ah, he was- he came on account of his health and was interested in practice. We had at that time what was called Milton Hospital. The building is still, the building is still in existence.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where is that?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: It is closed up. It was used for quite a number of years until Dr. Sechrist, who came- I don't remember in what year, came with his family and he located. And then after a few years of practice, he took over- he built the <Flagstaff> hospital. It was a small hospital at that time, in the same location where the present Flagstaff Community hospital is.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where was this Milton Hospital located?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, the Milton Hospital was located- I told you about Mrs. Dolan's residence.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I told you about the Holiday Inn?

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Across the street from the- across the road on 66 from the Holiday Inn is the old office of the Arizona Lumber and Timber Co., and right down from that, before you get to Mrs. Dolan's home, is what was called the Milton Hospital. The building is, I'm sure is still there. It burnt years ago, but I think it is still there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that the same as the Mercy Hospital?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Yes. We called it the Mercy Hospital, but I don't remember if it was called Mercy or Milton Hospital.

SUSAN ROGERS: Either, huh. Can you describe what it was like inside, how you had set it up as a hospital?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh.

SUSAN ROGERS: How many patients were there?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, there were there were about eight beds in the ward, and I think there were two private rooms, and there was an operating room, and sort of a reception room. The hospital was converted from a large home that had been built up in that area, for some of the people who were interested in the mill. It was close to the mill so men could come in for emergency help and for other illness. I'm trying to think-

SUSAN ROGERS: You mainly treated sawmill injuries then?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Beg pardon?

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you mainly treat accidents from the sawmill or did you treat the whole community, too?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh, well. We treated the community.

SUSAN ROGERS: You did?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Besides the mill. The mill then paid so much a month for the care of their family and themselves. The Greenlaw Mill was owned by Mr. Greenlaw. The Greenlaw Mill was torn down, discontinued operation. I don't know exactly what years, but it was sometime after 1918- but by 1920 when that mill stopped operating. Flagstaff Lumber Co. still is operating under the term of Flagstaff Forest, I don't really know.

SUSAN ROGERS: I don't know either. (laughs)

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: There's a new- there's a title to it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: They, they still log, they still season wood, I'm sure, and then they've added other products that they are producing out of lumber. There was at one time, a mill here to make shredded wood for, I don't know- what do they call that material that- you know that's in shreds? Anyway-

SUSAN ROGERS: Plywood, you mean?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Beg pardon?

SUSAN ROGERS: Plywood?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: No, not plywood.

SUSAN ROGERS: I don't know.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I can't get- can't call the name. It's a shredded wood that they use for padding, and for-

SUSAN ROGERS: Can't remember (laughs).

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Can't remember what it is called.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: The stores here were- when we came, the main store was Babbitts'. They had groceries, they had, they had furniture, they had clothing, and for awhile, they operated for quite awhile- not when I came but later, they operated a drug store. And then, the present location of the Moore Drug was called Hunter Drug, and that had been in existence before I came, the Hunter Drug. Ah, the newspaper was the Coconino Sun, and that was operated by Mr. Fred Breen. He was the editor and operated the paper, which is the Coconino Sun, out of which came now our Daily Sun.

Mr. Pollock had a racing course. He was interested in racing horses. And he had a track (coughs) where Coconino- I think it's called the Coconino Estates, from about where the- he had an area from about where the high, the present high school is, out to about- to, well, where the Ft. Valley Road makes a turn. It's the first turn west. And he used to run- I don't remember whether it was racehorses or racing, had a little racing tracks- you know, racing.

SUSAN ROGERS: Cars?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Cars.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was that a big social event around <Flagstaff>, to go to these races?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh, no. He just operated that for his own pleasure.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, for his own.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: It- there were no, there were no races, he just operated that. He liked horses and that's what he did.

SUSAN ROGERS: Didn't there used to be a big horse race on the Fourth of July?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, when I came, the Fourth of July was celebrated rather peculiarly, or off hand. I mean there wasn't any definite- they had a fairground, or I mean, they had a grounds over about where the, where the stadium is, the college stadium. And they used to have- I guess they had horse races. I was never interested, and I wasn't here long enough after they started them, or before they ended with them. I never went over there.

Now, in regard to businesses, the Weatherford Hotel was here, the Commercial Hotel was here. And the line of stores and buildings, on the same street as the Commercial, which was called Front Street at that time, is just about like it is now. At that time there were several saloons and there was one, there was one or two Chinese restaurants on that street, a barbershop; and those buildings are still all there. They've been sort of revamped, and occupied different times by different stores and different organizations. Then, where now is Bledsoe’s Men Shop, there were a- there was a men's shop, and along Aspen Street, east from Bledsoe's Men Shop, there were- there was a grocery store and a meat market, was- let's see, Coffin-Gorham (?) Groom (?) and Coffin, I think that was their name. That was another store where we could buy food. In those days they used to come- they'd send a solicitor to our house from Babbitts', and we'd order what we want, and from the other store, they'd come and we'd order what we want, and they'd deliver it. Now, of course, you don't, you don't have any delivery. So, almost all cash and carry.

Our water supply at that time was a little tank. I don't know how many thousand, a hundred thousand, not a hundred thousand. Ah, it was a little reservoir where the <Flagstaff>, the Flagstaff Country Club is. The people have played the Flagstaff Country Club had- if you've ever been out there, it was a- there's a reservoir, and that reservoir was the main supply of <Flagstaff> at that time. I don't remember when it was, possibly in 19- somewhere in the 1924-25 area. The Santa Fe Co. needed more water and they helped the City build the two reservoirs that are just on the- this side of the road if you cross the <Flagstaff> Country Club turnoff. That was additional water. Then later on, we needed more water and the <Flagstaff>, the <Flagstaff> connected up with Lake Mary and drew water out of Lake Mary. Later there were some wells built, dug in the, in the Woody Mountain area, and then some later on in the Lake Mary area. Anyway, we were we were always sort of scary about our water supply. Ah, one winter, I know we had to ship water from <Winslow>. They- the Santa Fe brought trains, trainloads, carloads, tank loads of water to <Flagstaff>, connected on to the <Flagstaff> water system and pumped the water around to the City.

SUSAN ROGERS: About what year was that or period?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I don't know, that must have been somewhere in nineteen- late 1920s, I think.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mmm.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Ah, there'd be a long string of tank cars. The water was brought from <Winslow> from <Clear Creek>. The Santa- when we came here, the Santa Fe was operating through <Flagstaff> regularly, and they had, they had large water tank and a large oil tank and oil pits(?) right where the Flag- the crossing of San Francisco St. is. The trains- pretty nearly all trains had to stop here to get water and to get oil or fuel. Oil was the fuel that was burned at that time. And then later on, of course, Santa Fe switched over to the new type of engine, and later there weren't anymore stops here for that. All right, do you got any questions, maybe?

SUSAN ROGERS: What do you remember about the Bank Hotel at that time?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh, well the Bank Hotel is, was also here at that time, And I think it was called the Bank Hotel because the building that it was in- the front downstairs, I think, was one, was one of the first banks.

SUSAN ROGERS: Banks. But it wasn't a bank when you came?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: No, it wasn't a bank when I came.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there a restaurant or just a hotel?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I don't know what was in there. I don't remember. I know, I know the bank-

SUSAN ROGERS: That's one of the oldest buildings, I know.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Yeah. Well it's one of the older buildings in <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. You, um. Tell me about traditions of the City, like how they celebrated the Fourth of July. Were there any other big holidays, or the Pow Wow? When did that start?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, I don't know exactly when the Pow Wow started, but we didn't have many celebrations. Ah, unless- I'm trying to think. Anyway, the Pow Wow must be running forty or nearly fifty years. The Indians would come in before they had-

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. You want to start off?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Let me say a few words about the weather.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I was in <Albuquerque> before I came here, and some of those friends of mine, when they found out that I was coming to <Flagstaff>, they said, "Well you don't want to go there, it's so cold. It's almost like winter, real winter. Snow and everything." And I didn't pay much attention to that. I thought, well I'll live through that. <St. Louis> is windy and cold and damp and smoky. I figured I'd- a little cold might not hurt me. I knew, I knew this, that there's always, towards the end of summer, that I got sick, so that didn't bother me at all. I came over to visit Dr. Raymond, just for a brief visit, about the second of January in 1914 to see what he had to offer, and to get together with him on coming out. And I arrived on the train about January second or third. I got off of the train and went over to the Commercial Hotel and walked from the Commercial Hotel to the corner of Santa Fe and Leroux Street and looked up the street. The night before I arrived, during the night that I arrived, there had been a very heavy snow fall, and when I got to the corner I looked up that way and I thought, well that's a nice looking mountain. I think I'll take a walk up there and see how far it is. And I walked about two blocks in that heavy snow and finally, I awakened to the fact that, by George, that mountain must be farther away than I think.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: So, I went back to the hotel. But talking about snow and weather, the summer was- we came in spring, the summer was delightful; the fall was very nice. We had quite a bit of wind, and I think, I don't remember whether it was the first summer, I think it was the second winter that we had a snow storm, about, well it was in between Christmas and New Years. At that time the Orpheum was a plain brick building, rather just about as large as it is now, and it was used for a dance hall, for community affairs, and for a movie house at that time. Well, the evening, New Years Eve, there had been a dance there and the snow kept falling. In the morning there wasn't any, there wasn't any building there. The building had collapsed under the weight of the snow.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I think that must have been about 1915.

SUSAN ROGERS: No one was hurt though?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: 1916. I don't remember. And since that time, the winters have been variable. We've had some winters with very heavy snows. I think on one occasion later on, we shoveled off our roofs because of the weight of the snow. The Orpheum was rebuilt, and more sturdily. So the weather has been- I think it's the weather that's produced the cure in my case. The altitude, together with the brisk weather that we have, and the mild summer. The mild summers. I went down to <Phoenix> to take my examination after I arrived here. And I went to <Phoenix>, I think it was in June, and it was terribly hot. I can't, I couldn't take the heat at that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: How did you get to <Phoenix>, by car?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh, the only way you could get to <Phoenix> at that time was by automo- I mean by train.

SUSAN ROGERS: By train.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: You took the train here in the evening and you went to Ash Fork. And Ash Fork, I think they took the car- <Flagstaff> coach off and waited there for a <Los Angeles> train to come this way. And it would take- they would take off a <Los Angeles> car and then the train would go down. We'd get down there about eight, seven--eight o'clock in the morning. Leave here about nine and get down there about seven. It's the only way you could go down. Later on we did- I can't call the years, but later on we went to <Phoenix> by way of <Ash Fork> on the street, on the road, went to <Ash Fork> and then to Prescott; and then to Congress Junction and then over to <Phoenix>. It was only within the last thirty years that we could drive down to <Phoenix> directly. I don't remember when this road opened up to <Phoenix>, the Black Canyon Highway. It was- have been about 1920, no, 1946 or 47. We always traveled by car, I mean by train and then by car.

In the end my early practice in <Flagstaff>- we had our office, but there were quite a few ranches around. There were, there were several ranches down in the Doney Park area, go on 89 now. And there were some ranches out by <Maine>, and there were some ranches out the Ft. Valley way. Well, when somebody got real sick out there they, they'd send in here for me. Many nights, many nights and many days I've made trips in snowstorms from here to Ft. Valley or from here to Greenlaw Mill.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is this in a car that you went?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Ah yes, sometimes in the- a car, sometimes when the weather was too bad, they'd have to send in a- they'd have to send in a kind of a vehicle.

SUSAN ROGERS: Wagon or a-

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Ah, yes a wagon or a surrey or-

SUSAN ROGERS: Buggy, a buggy?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Yes, a buggy. They'd take me out there and then bring me back. there were many times that I went out into the Doney Park area to deliver babies, treat pneumonias. Never thought of bringing in patients for that, and then you know you always went out. Very few babies were born in the, in the hospital. When I first came, there was a settlement of shanties almost, shacks, right back of where the hospital was, right near the mill, so the mill men could walk. It was about a block, a long block of buildings, mill (?) buildings where the Mexican families lived. And I used to go in there and deliver children and treat them. That has all been moved away, torn down. They had a lot of the same kind of buildings over at the Flagstaff Lumber Co. I would have to go over there at- I had a Model T Ford. The roads were terrible. For a long time, from here to <Winslow> would take a, oh it would take an afternoon. The road after you, after we got down into the cedars, it just wandered on, like a, it wandered around the trees.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: So you, so you wouldn't have a straight route and- it was ah, it was pretty trying.

But somehow or other, inspite of my illness, I recovered. And then there was one time that was in 1918. We'd been here a year in <Flagstaff>. About the bad flu epidemics in the army, across the ocean. And then they started to begin to have trouble in the eastern states. And we heard about the terrible death rate and the terrible number of people who got sick. And we were hoping we'd bypass it. But, (coughs) towards the later part of the year, nineteen, I think it was 1918, the Winslow High School team came to play a basketball, a football game with the University, then the Normal School. And one of their players had recovered from the flu in <Winslow> and- that was a Saturday he was here. And they had a, they had a dance or- yeah I think they had a dance after the game, and the- I guess he was there dancing, one of the students. And Monday morning they called me over to the University, and I saw one. And I didn't get away from the University that day. There was flu all through the three dormitories. At that time there were, there were about maybe six, maybe five or six hundred children there, all for two weeks. We had about nine- about ninety-five percent of the students over there became ill and everything was quarantined. And then it began to break out in the city. Fortunately we had no deaths in the University 'cause they were- I think one reason because they were young, youngsters. And then it broke out in the city, and for a month it was, it was just terrible. Everybody, nearly everybody got sick. I was going day and night. Dr. Schermann was here. He was-

SUSAN ROGERS: What's his first name?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: He was, ah he became sick, and I don't know whether Dr. Raymond was here, but I think he was down in <Phoenix>. I didn't get sick. The Greenlaw Mill was still operating, so I had to go out there every day. Oh it was, it was just terrible. Every, every day maybe- I don't know how many deaths.

SUSAN ROGERS: Really?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: The deaths, without number. Emerson School was converted by the Public Health Service into a sort of a temporary hospital. They put in cots and took out, took out the desks and made hospital wards. They, they, they died there and all over the city. It was just terrible. Fortunately it subsided in time, and we- everything went back to normal. We had another epidemic which was not so fatal. But it was rather wide spread. At the University, maybe nine- 1930, somewhere in the 1940s. So-

SUSAN ROGERS: Was that flu?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Beg pardon?

SUSAN ROGERS: A flu epidemic?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Yes, another flu epidemic. Are we gonna- (?)

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me about some of your early medical practices as compared to now? What-

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh well. Of course when I came here, very few women were delivered of children in the hospital. It was all work in the house. Whether it was Mexican or whether it was American, everybody had their baby in their own home. And it worked out pretty hard for the doctor. But it was- there wasn't any other place to take them. They didn't have room up in the hospital to do it. Occasionally we had a case up there. (coughs) And, of course when we had a pneumonia here, we always had a very sick patient. Before I came here, frequently doctors, families, families would insist that the doctors send them down to a lower altitude. But I never sent anybody away for pneumonia. Because I didn't think it made very much difference. The patients got along just as well here as they, as they did when I was practicing in <St. Louis>. (Clock chimes) But, we had a quite a time with pneumonia, especially with the elder people. Some of them would recover; some of them wouldn't. We had our full epidemics of measles and scarlet fever. We never had typhoid, except what was brought in. We never had, we never had any spinal meningitis. We had, we had no malaria. There was people that had malaria coming from the south. But they would have stayed here a year they'd, they'd be recovered. That was, that was very, a very good thing.

Dr. Schermann practiced with me for about five or six years after Dr. Raymond asked us to take over the millwork. And then I started out for myself. I opened my own office. And then Dr. Proussard (?) came. Dr. Proussard (?) was also a <St. Louis> man. He came out here and started with Dr. Schermann. He came out as a surgeon. He practiced here about five years maybe and then he went to <Phoenix>. His wife is still alive down there. He had a very active practice down there. And then other various other doctors came. Dr. ah, well some of the doctors that are here now came to be associated with Dr. Sechrist. Dr. Sechrist came, and he brought in Dr. Barnes and Dr- well, he brought in quite a few of young doctors, some as surgeons and some in medicine. He brought in Dr. Curran, who is down in <Scottsdale>. Brought in Dr. Kittredge. Dr. Kittredge started- Dr-., my memory must be getting pretty dim. Anyway, quite a few doctors came in when Dr. Sechrist built the hospital and did surgery. I'm trying to think of something else.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want me to ask the question, or?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Yes, you'd better.

SUSAN ROGERS: Exactly how did the people pay you? Did they always pay you by money or did they bring in farm products sometimes?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, yes. When they paid, it was always cash.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was it?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: But ah, there were a lot of bills that were left unpaid. (laughs)

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs)

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: The only one that ever paid me anything besides money was an old timer, Michelbach. Pete Michelbach was a, one of the old time ranchers here, around here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is he still alive?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: No, he died.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: His son is, though.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: He, he died, and his wife died recently. He has, he has two sons here. Pete, I think is one of them, and Frank is the other. They're, they're middle middle-aged, maybe. And he has several daughters still living here you might contact.

SUSAN ROGERS: I think we have this Pete on our list. Either Pete or Frank.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Frank.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, we have one of them on our list.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well there, there are two daughters. Frank, I think, must have been the youngest one. O.K., now what else?

SUSAN ROGERS: You were going to tell me what he paid you with, remember?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh, oh he paid me with ah, he paid me with a sack of potatoes or two.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh really? (laughs)

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: In the fall. He, he had a ranch out somewhere in the- past the Ft. Valley area, out on the mountain. And he, he grew potatoes, and I think he grew wheat or barley. Ah, when I first came here, many of the ranchers were planting beans and barley for- beans of course for Mexicans and for us, too. And potatoes, we had some very good potatoes growing in this area. And we had a, we had a flourmill here for about ten years, I guess. And the ranchers grew wheat. Ah, the mills, when I came, were operated- the logging operations were all by horse and cart. You saw that big two-wheeled cart by the Chamber of Commerce?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Well, those (coughs) those were the wheels that they brought the logs in from the woods to the train. And then they had, they had other conveyances. They had heavy built wagons that they put them on. Now you see those logs were pretty heavy, and they'd have to carry, they'd have to take them from the woods to where the railroad track was. And at that time, they were, there was a railroad track- <Flagstaff> in the north into the southwest part, and into the southeast part by the different mills. They, they, they built their own railroads where they needed to have them to carry in the wood, the logs, or the mill. Now, think of anything else?

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you know a Doctor Cornish?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Dr. Cornish was here before I was.

SUSAN ROGERS: He was?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Dr. Cornish left. He must have left here several years before I came.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Ah, and he was in <Gallup>. He moved from here to Gallup. And that's where he practiced. And he had a son who went to <Albuquerque> and practiced there, later. I met, I met both doctors. Dr. Cornish would come up here sometimes when we had a special surgical need for a qualified surgeon. Occasionally Dr. E. Payne Palmer would come up from <Phoenix> to do some surgery. And then, as always, he had to come up on the train. Came down there in the morning, in the evening, and come up here. In the morning he'd be up there.

The road to the <Grand Canyon> was-(coughs) we did go to the <Grand Canyon> by auto early in our career here. Ah, we had to take the train if we wanted to go to the <Grand Canyon>. To Tuba City was quite a drive by auto.

SUSAN ROGERS: There was a train to the <Grand Canyon>?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Beg your pardon?

SUSAN ROGERS: There was a train going to the <Grand Canyon>?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Oh yes. Train from here to Williams was the main line.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh Huh.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: Ah, we'd take the main line to Williams. And then there was a train once a day, I think to go to the <Grand Canyon>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Hmm.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: That was, that was, when we got here, that was the usual way of getting there.

SUSAN ROGERS: And then did you stay there overnight?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: You'd have to stay overnight.

SUSAN ROGERS: You could come back the same day?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: I don't remember exactly. We, I think, I think if you left here in the evening you could get there the next morning and then take the train back the next night.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. That's just about the end of the tape. Can you think of anything you want to add?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: No, shut the machine off.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K.

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: When I came, <Arizona> had been a state for about two years. The year before I came, there evidently had been an election at which the people of <Arizona> wanted to start to prohibit the use of liquor in the state of <Arizona>. And the date it was to start was January the first, 1915. So, when we came here there were saloons; and there were quite a few. Pretty nearly every front on Front Street then was a saloon. There was some saloons on San Francisco Street. And the saloons were open of course, day and night. The year before the people had voted to not have any more gambling in the saloons. So there weren't any gambling when we came here, but there had been the year before. And in connection with the prohibition (coughs) in <Arizona>, you'd have to send, if you wanted liquor, you'd have to send to <New Mexico> to get it. That was another notation I wanted to add.

SUSAN ROGERS: O.K. Um, can you think of anything else?

DR. MARTIN FRONSKE: No, I can't think of anything else.


