FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Kathryn Rucker

Interview number NAU.OH.28.80





Kathryn Rucker, who is a native of <Flagstaff>. Her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Keller, owned and operated Keller’s Bakers. Her uncle, Al Beasley, was an important figure in the development of East <Flagstaff>. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on July 16, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, February 2000. 



Outline of Subjects Covered in the Taped Interview 

Tape 1, Side 1 

Born in <Flagstaff> in 1906 (this part did not record) 

Parents 

Father, Charles Keller, <St. Louis Missouri> 

Mother, Molly Mary Haskins Beasley 

Father came to <Flagstaff> in 1886 

Married mother in 1892 

Worked for Daggs Sheep Company 

Worked as bookkeeper for stores, town clerk, temporary mayor 

Keller’s Bakery (owned) 

Schooling 

Emerson 

Training School for high school 

Work as secretary 

Teachers at Emerson 

Bertha Kennedy 

Mrs. Harry Embach 

Classmates at Emerson 

Cecil McCormick 

Eleanor Greenlaw, good friends 

Family home downtown 

Neighbors 

John Francis 

Beatty family 

Francis family, discussed 

Activities when child 

Taffy pulls 

Marriage and family 

Husband, Kent Rucker 

Worked for Babbitt’s Department Store 

Babbitt’s store discussed 

Opera house 

Library 

Area around bakery, discussed 

Post Office 

Lutie Packson 

Front Street 

Conditions of roads in snow 

J.C. Penny’s store 

Children 

Charles, heart surgeon in <Phoenix> 

Retta Lou Nagle, teacher in <Flagstaff> 

Friends and neighbors 

Lee Doyle 

Wife was a dressmaker, gave her scraps of fabric to make doll clothes 

Abineaus 

Charlie Schultz 

Hugh Campbell 

Joe Babbitt 

Ashursts 

Weather Bureau 

GAR Hall (Grand Old Army of the Republic) 

Police Department 

Town marshal 

Arthur Beasley (uncle), discussed 

Came to <Flagstaff> in the 1880’s

Tape 1, Side 2 

Beasley, continued 

Sheep ranch 

Land investments 

East <Flagstaff>, owned a lot of property 

Connection with Alf Dickinson, real estate businessman 

Social life 

A-1 Cattle Co. dances 

Racial segregation 

Parties 

Churches 

Presbyterian 

Methodist 

Federated 

Catholic (more people than any other group at the time) 

Michelbachs 

Mormons 

George Babbitt, Jr. and gathering history of <Flagstaff> 

Stories told by Al Beasley 

Story about two young brothers that were killed by a posse 

Life on the ranches 

Fort Valley area 

Location of old fort 

Buck Taylor’s ranch, raised vegetables 

<Williams> ranch, raised mules for the army 

Camp cook story 

City government 

Pulliam 

<Flagstaff>’s position in regards to the rest of the state 

ASU in <Tempe> 

<Winslow> 

World War I 

Brother played in band 

Parade in town 

Armistice 

Prohibition 

Depression of 1930’s 

Salaries cut 

World War II 

Husband’s appendicitis 

Ordnance Depot 

Migrations from dust bowl area in 1930’s 

Epidemics 

Ideal Hotel during flu epidemic 

Love of medicine 

Son’s occupation as doctor 

Mrs. Rucker’s work at hospital 

Ideal Hotel, discussed 

Fires

Tape 2, Side 1 

Fire department downtown 

Pollock’s Carriage house 

Flooding 

In home 

At Normal School 

Sidewalk boards floating down street 

Droughts 

Hauling water in from <Williams> 

Got water from springs to wash diapers in 

Big Snows 

Cleared streets 

Grandfather’s grave (Thomas Beasley) 

Was one of the first three soldiers to win the Congressional Medal of Honor 

First car in family, Chevrolet 

Dr. Adams 

Tourism 

Mrs. Greenlaw’s tourist homes 

Fourth of July celebrations 

Pow Wow 

"The Flat" east of NAU 

Parade 

Chicken pull 

Fireworks, father and brother sold fireworks 

Celebrating Christmas and Thanksgiving 



This is an interview with Mrs. Kathryn Rucker, who is a native of <Flagstaff>. Her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Keller, owned and operated Keller's Bakery. Her uncle, Al Beasley, was an important figure in the development of East <Flagstaff>. The interview is being conducted on July 16, 1976, at Mrs. Rucker's home which is located at 222 West Aspen Avenue, in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [Mrs. Rucker was born in <Flagstaff> in 1906.] 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And who are your parents? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: My parents were Charles A. Keller, and Molly Keller. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was her maiden name? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Her name really was Mary Haskins Beasley, but she was never called Mary. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Haskins? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Haskins, H-A-S-K-I-N-S, Beasley. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did they come from originally? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, my father came here from <St. Louis> in 1886. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So he was one of the original people that came. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: He was, he surely was. And then she came here with her family a little later than that. It was in 1886, and then they were married in 1892. I jotted those down because I knew I'd forget dates. In 1892 they were married here. My brother, Paul Keller, was born in 1893. He also lived here in <Flagstaff> most of his life, and moved to <Phoenix> several years ago, and he died about four years ago in <Phoenix>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You only had the one brother? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, that was all the family we had. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So what did your father do? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: When he first came here, he worked for the Daggs Sheep Company. And I think he was an accountant - a bookkeeper, they called 'em in those days - to begin with. And he worked for some of the brands and some of the first stores here. Then he also was city clerk, or town clerk, way back when they first had a town clerk. He even served temporarily as mayor, I've been told, in the absence of the mayor. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Then did he start.... Now, he had the bakery? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I don't know what year, I have no idea what year he started, had the bakery, but it was known as Keller's Bakery, and it was known all over Northern <Arizona>, I guess. It was a bakery and a confectionery, had an ice cream store, and then he had all kinds of - kinda like a drugstore nowadays - all sorts of other things, too - not groceries, but sundries and things. I sort of grew up in that store myself. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Many people have mentioned _____________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: __________, uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did your mother help him out? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, she did, she worked some in the store. He always said that it was because she liked to visit with people in the store, not because he really needed her to work. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So then your schooling was here in <Flagstaff>? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, it was. I went over here to Emerson School, and then to - gosh, it was "college" then - Training School. And then they had high school right there at the Training School, because there was no Flagstaff High School. But I was just - I don't know whether you call it fortunate or unfortunate - I started high school there the year before the Flagstaff High School was built. So I went there for high school, and then combined it with a three-year college course, too, and got that degree, too, which was a teaching certificate, really is what it was. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you teach then? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, I never did. No, my mother's ambition was for me to be a teacher, and I never did like the idea, and I don't know why, because I love children and I'm very good with children. I don't know, probably just contrariness, I don't know. But I took a business course at the same time and decided I wanted to do office work. So then I went to <Phoenix> to Lamson Business College, and went there, too, graduated from there. And then I came back and I worked many years as a secretary. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Which firm did you work for? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, I worked for Frank Harrison. When I was still going to school, I worked for him part-time. He was the county attorney. You've probably heard of Frank Harrison, he's a very well-known attorney. I worked for him a short time. And then I worked for Jimmy Babbitt, who was their company attorney. While I was working for him, I got married. And then after that, I didn't work until my children were up in high school, and then I went to work for Southern Union Gas Company. I went there to work just temporarily to help them out - their secretary had quit unexpectedly - and I didn't want to go to work. I was very satisfied to stay at home with my children. They talked me into coming just to help them out, and I worked there thirteen years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, maybe we can go back to Emerson School. Do you remember any of your teachers there? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, let's see, I certainly do. Bertha S. Kennedy was my eighth-grade teacher. No one would ever forget her. And her home was where the Indian mission is up here on Leroux and Cherry. That was the Kennedy home. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Across from the library ___________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was a large house. Did she have children? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: She had two children, but she was a widow. As far as I know, there was no Mr. Kennedy I ever knew of, but she had a boy and a girl. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was unusual for married women to teach then. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, it was. But she's one of those old-fashioned, real strict teachers. I remember right now, things that she taught us and told us about pronunciation of words, for instance, and things, so we could remember how to pronounce names. Things like that, I still think of 'em, I still remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: She was an effective teacher. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: She was really a wonderful teacher. And then, let me see.... Oh, dear.... Mrs. Harry Embach. He was a very prominent state sheepman, and I think was sometime an officer in <Phoenix> - a state office of some kind. Harry Embach, E M B A C H. And his wife - I don't know what her [first] name was - about the time I got to her grade, I believe that was maybe the fifth grade - she married him and then she went on teaching. She was one of the few married teachers. I don't believe I remember any other teachers' names. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) Do you remember your classmates, friends? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: There isn't a one of them still living that I know of. I remember some of 'em. Cecil McCormick was one of them. Melvin McCormick lives here still, and I don't know, it seems to me that Cecil died, but I'm not sure. But he was in that eighth grade. And I remember others, but no one who would have anything to do with local families or anything. They've all moved away or gone or dead. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, were you pretty good friends with the Greenlaws? I seem to remember seeing a picture. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: My chum was Eleanor, who was Mrs. Knoles. We grew up together. We were very, very good friends. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was she younger in her family? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: She was the youngest one, the baby, uh-huh. We used to follow Mary and Louise, who were Mrs. Drain and Mrs. Beamer - you know, the twins. We used to, oh, just make life miserable for them: go around and spy on them and.... (laughs) I envied them so because they had a big family and had sisters, and of course I never had a sister. Our family home was up where the city parking lot is now, across from [Vice?] Baker. There was an old house there. I don't know how long you've been here. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There was a large big brown house? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. And it went in a very bad state of affairs. We sold it to a very elderly doctor, and he finally retired and the house was in very, very, very bad shape, and he moved out of it then. It became a hippie house, and oh! really went to wrack and ruin. I felt badly about having it torn down, because I remember it when it had a beautiful lawn around it, and a beautiful great big elm tree in the front. And it was really a nice home. There were only three houses on that block, and to see it go down like that was terrible, but still I was glad when they did tear it down, because it was such a disgrace the way it was. When we lived there, the John Francis home was south of it, on the corner here, where the Kinlani Apartment House is now. John Francis was an old-time sheriff. And then the Beatty family lived in the big house north of us, the third house. But they moved out and moved across the street over here, and John Francis' brother, Dick Francis, who was a doctor, moved in and took that house and lived there many, many years. So those were our neighbors. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I always wondered how the Francis family was related. Now, is Perry Francis related at all to John? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, he was, he was a nephew. There were four brothers: there was Dan Francis, who was a sheepman; and John was a sheriff; and Richard was the doctor; and William Campbell was a sheepman too. Oh, no, wait a minute. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was he in with Francis? Was there a Francis Campbell? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, there's.... Let me see, Campbell and Francis Sheep Company. And he was one of the brothers; he was the one that was in it, that partnership. And their home was up there. Well, it's just a big vacant lot now. It's on Leroux, just below what they call the Bledsoe house. It was a fraternity house, and now some attorneys have taken it for offices. It was right across from there. It was a great big home, beautiful big home. Their daughters were good friends of mine. I remember we used to go there on Sunday afternoons and have taffy pulls. You never heard of such a thing since, lately, but I well remember that. They were real nice people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The taffy pulls. Did a lot of people, a lot of children go to that, like a regular party? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, there would be ten or fifteen - Eleanor Greenlaw and I, and then her two sisters would be there. And of course because they had girls in that family that were several years apart - I mean, several girls, you know - so it took in quite an age span there, so it'd be quite a crowd. But strangely, boys weren't involved in it at all the way I remember it. They kind of kept the boys and girls separate. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they at school too? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they play together? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, no, they played together, but seems to me the boys all sat at the back, and the girls in front - we didn't sit together. Isn't that crazy?! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) Let's see.... I want to go ahead and ask, finish up kind of on your biography. What's your husband's name? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Kent Rucker. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: He came here in 1931? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. He graduated from the University of Tennessee and came here. His father had maneuvered a job for him with Babbitts', and he came here to work for Babbitts'. He worked for them seventeen years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: In their offices? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, he was a manager of the men's department, and then had the dry goods department and became the buyer for both those two departments. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where was the men's department then - right where it is now? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No. That was a drugstore, where the men's department is now. But while he was still working for them, they moved the drugstore across the street, where the florist is now. And the men's department was down - oh, dear, it's changed. Let's see, it was, uh, part of the women's clothing place was, yeah. And the shoe department was there, too, on the south side of that building. I don't remember just exactly. And then the grocery department was in there in it, too. (KP laughs) Oh, yeah! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was that further.... 



KATHRYN RUCKER: It was this way, where the shoe department is, and I guess part of the ladies' department too. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it very small sections? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, it seemed to me it was a big - I don't know just how it was arranged, because the whole thing was changed, the floor plan and everything. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The shell is the same as before; they just changed the inside? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there a theater right in there, too? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, not that I remember, but I remember hearing them talk, they called it the opera house. Whether that was upstairs, over Babbitts' Store, or over where the Moore Drugstore is. I'm not sure which of those two places it was, but it was upstairs, and I know there's outdoor steps that went up to it. But I don't remember that, really, but I remember them talking about it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was in your childhood; it was still existing. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I think so, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there a library downtown? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: You know, I just don't remember a library AT ALL until… it was over - well, where our bakery was, upstairs there. It was in those windows that look right on the street. And I don't remember a library before then, but there must have been one. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You said you don't remember when your father started the bakery? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, I don't. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think it was like around the turn of the century, before you were born. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I imagine about 1905 or somethin' like that, I imagine. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he own that upstairs and just rented it? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No. No, he just, I guess, rented the store, place itself. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I see, so ______________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, unt-uh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What stores were right around by [the bakery]? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: There was a grocery store just THIS side of them, but I don't remember what was at the corner. It was Chet(?) Black Grocery Store, and then Joe Crawford bought it, and it was Joe Crawford's Grocery Store. I think that and Babbitts' were the only two grocery stores in town. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is that a Black family kept that? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh, part of them. And you know, from there on down that block, I don't remember one thing about what was in there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: A lot of people can’t remember because it changed frequently. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: The post office was down there on the corner, come to think about it, across from the Moore Drugstore. That was where the post office was. I don't know from what year, but I remember that. And Miss Lutie Packson was the postmistress. That just popped into my head! I haven't thought of her for thirty years! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And she just pretty much ran it by herself then? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There wasn't much. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, I don't know, she probably had one clerk or something, I would think. Maybe not. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was Front Street still pretty active when you were growing up? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, I guess the Commercial Hotel was there. I don't know when that was built, but women wouldn't have walked around that block for anything, because it was saloons, like it is bars and cocktail lounges now. You just didn't go around there on that side of the block. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Pretty rough part of town? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there any paving on the streets? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, I'm sure there wasn't. And there was no snow removal equipment like we have it now. They'd go out and shovel down a path right down the middle of the road, and it'd pile up on the sides and it would freeze and just stay there for ever and ever, and there'd be ice still stacked on the street there. I remember that. So now they scrape it off and it's gone just in a short time. But then it would just stay, and there'd be great mounds of ice and snow. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It must have been hard in getting to the store because the building faced north. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) So you kind of described the neighborhood. You were living right downtown then. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh, we were. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There wasn't any like downtown area beyond you, north? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, no, unt-uh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, there wasn't any J.C. Penney Store? _________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, unt-uh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, later then, was J.C. Penney like where McMahon's Furniture is now? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes. I think that was the original Penney Store here. And we were still living in our old home up there then. We had married, and we stayed there because my father was quite elderly, and we stayed there with him. And I remember Penney's. I remember the children always just played up and down the sidewalk there, because, well, there were cars, but not anything like they are now. I remember my little boy, who was about five came home one day carrying a little girl's dress, beautiful little pink ruffly flowery dress on a hangar. And he was holding up the hangar, with the dress over his other arm. He said, "I brought home a dress for sister." She was three. "Where in the world did you get it?" And he said, "I got it at that store." And so I grabbed him by the neck and we went back to Penney's. The children's department was upstairs on the balcony. And he'd gone up there and picked out this little pink dress, which was darling and very fluffy and ruffly, and he'd just carried it out - nobody saw him at all - and he brought it home to sister. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughing while speaking obscures comment) What are your children's names, while we're on this? They were born and raised in <Flagstaff>. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh, Charles. He's a heart surgeon in <Phoenix> now. And our daughter lives here in town. She's a teacher. This (referring to photo) is her son. She has three boys, and she teaches over at Lura Kinsey School. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And what is her name? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Retta Lou. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I think my husband’s team taught with her. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, really? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Nagle is her last name? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. Does he teach here now? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No, ________________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) It’s amazing to find a connection there. Okay, let's see, we talked some about your friends and neighbors. Can you think of anyone else who particularly sticks in your mind? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, some of those old families and old people are really very plain in my mind, but I'm sure.... On the corner there, where Babbitts' Thriftway was, and they lived out right there. There are also three big houses on THAT block, facing south. And the one on the front, there was a great big stone, red sandstone, and it was the Lee Doyle home. And why they had such a big house, I don't know, because it was just a man and his wife, they had no children. Her name was Pearl and she was a dressmaker. I well remember, because she saved all her little scraps of satin and velvet and all of her little fancy materials and gave 'em to me to make doll clothes out of. So I went to visit her quite often. 



And then next to it there was also a great big two-story house, the Doyle family. And maybe you've heard of them, because he was a very well-known guide of the Grand Canyon and various other places. I think he only had one daughter, Lena Doyle, who lived in the southern part of the state many, many years, and I think finally has passed away. But she lived down there someplace. I don't remember what her married name was. She was older than I, but I remember her real well. 



And then the Abineau family lived in the THIRD house on that block. Well, it was also where Babbitts' Thriftway parking lot is, but it's the third one. The Abineau family lived there, and they had, I think, three boys and one girl. I saw in the paper, oh, sometime during this past year, something about one of those Abineau boys had been living in <Phoenix>, and I think he died or something. It mentioned that he came from a pioneer family here. I'd never known what happened to any of them. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. And then across the street from THAT house, to the west, was the Charlie Schultz house, and it was also big and brick and two-story. And those have all been torn down. It's a shame. Charlie Schultz was a German sheepman. And his wife, he married a woman from the East. I think she could have been a schoolteacher, maybe, from back there. But she was quite aristocratic in looks and actions, and very persnickety. They had one daughter, Cecil, I remember. Nothing was too good for Cecil, you know - or nothing's good ENOUGH, rather. She kept her away from all the other.... I think she was about the age of the Greenlaw twins. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Are they the family that Schultz Pass is named after? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. The Schultz Ranch was up there. It's still called the Schultz Ranch up there in Schultz Pass. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, no, unt-uh. I'm sure Mrs. Schultz would never have done that. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, yes! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, that's fine, this is good. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: On Leroux, the second house going up north on Leroux, there was that one house there, and then the Hugh Campbell family, which is still there in that house. It was a beautiful home. It's very changed. It has been remodeled and repainted and everything. That was the Hugh family, he was a senator, and his family lived there. And [Louella?] was also a classmate of mine. I don't remember that she was in that eighth-grade class that I mentioned. I think they went to <Phoenix> for the winters, and she went to school mostly in <Phoenix>. But during summers and when we were here, we were great friends. And she became Mrs. John Dearsall [phonetic spelling], and lived in <Phoenix> and <Oak Creek> for many years, but she has passed away now, too. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There is such a big house that they just changed into the Coconino Guidance Center, or something, that is up there. It is on Leroux, I believe. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, that was the Joe Babbitt home. They had five daughters and one son. And Viola Babbitt is very active in Art Barn and bridge circles. She's a REMARKABLE woman. And all her children live here but one girl. Mrs. Mike D’Mura and Mrs. Norma Sharber, and Mrs. Ralph Bilby, and Joe Babbitt Junior - he's an attorney. Two of them live away from here, I think. I'm not sure. That was their home, and they lived there until just a very few years ago. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It's very large. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: It IS. Oh, they built onto it, but they had such a family, you know, and lots of company. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I was going to ask you, now is the Ashursts' home down Aspen here, like a block on down to the school… is that the Ashurst home? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I think probably. That's that brick house across from Emerson School, the big one, just a block from here? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, I'm thinking of the one that's, I think its Park; Park and Aspen, on the corner. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I know the one you mean. I don't know whose home that was, I don't remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It looked so funny. I saw pictures of it. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Maybe it was. I don't remember, but I remember the Ashursts - I mean, ABOUT them. In fact, a cousin of mine married a brother of Henry Ashurst. But I just don't remember where the family home was. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was the weather bureau.... This was all when you were very, very young, so I have a feeling you might not remember. I don't know if you remember the weather bureau. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, I don't remember where it was or anything about it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think, yeah, it must have been.... 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I remember there was a little brick building, just a funny little square building, over here on Beaver and Santa Fe, facing south, and it was the GAR Hall - Grand Old Army of the Republic - and it seems to me they had meetings there to drill, to practice. Whenever they'd have a parade or anything, they'd have someone from there. Now, what it was, I don't know, because I must have been very small. But I remember that little building. It was torn down LONG, long, long ago. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: ___________, so it must have been. ________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Maybe I can ask you about, do you remember the police department? Was there one? Or was it just like a town marshal? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: It must have been just a town marshal, because I remember the sheriff, of course, because we lived next door to him. I remember a lot of things about the sheriff, but not about a policeman. I don't think we had any. I think there was a town marshal. I don't remember who he was or where he had his headquarters or anything about it. In fact, I don't even remember where the sheriff's office was. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I always thought I should ask people that. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: You know, I knew years ago that I should get a lot of things down and ask my aunt and uncle, especially, a lot of those old things. And I didn't. And I could have found out all those things. 



My uncle - we didn't say very much about that family that lived here in this house. My uncle, Arthur H. Beasley, came here even before my father did. He came here in 1884. Then he went back and got his mother and her family and built this house for her. They came here in 1886. My grandfather was in the ... Civil War? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Could have been. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: And he was injured and came home an invalid, and he lived several years, but he was an invalid. Evidently they didn't take care of veterans then like they do now. And he died and left her with eight children. My Uncle Arthur went back there. He brought her on.... 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2] 



KATHRYN RUCKER: He and the rest of the eight children all came here and lived in this house, around, and they sort of scattered. But he and his sister, Retta, never married, either one of 'em. They lived in this house, oh, years and years and years, just the two of 'em. And he was really a character. He had a sheep ranch and he sold it, oh, golly, must have been in about 1915 or something - sold it to Babbitts - 1916, I believe. And then that money, he invested it. Well, what he did, he loaned it to people who had homesteaded. He just took over an awful lot of property where people abandoned or go off, or if they couldn't pay for it. And he'd just take over the property. And he owned half of East <Flagstaff> at one time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, that was Art Beasley? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Al. Al Beasley was the name he was known by. He was really a character. He and my father both had the old-fashioned idea that you didn't need to sign a deed or a lease or an agreement, because if you put your word on something and shook hands on it, that was it. That's all anybody needed. And they lived by that. Their word was just as good as gold, and they expected everybody else to be the same way, and it was getting so that wasn't so. And he just lost an awful lot of that property out there. In fact, he sold it for so little. He wanted to be so good to everybody, and he practically gave lots away. He sold lots for a hundred dollars that were worth many, many times that much. And he always said, "Now, if I think that anybody's trying their best and just can't pay, I'll never take anything away." When he died, he left that word with me, that he didn't want any property ever to be taken away from anybody. Now, I'm talking about little lots, homes, out there where they first started building East <Flagstaff>. That's just the way he was. He'd gotten the whole amount of it in two or three ranches, you know, where people wouldn't be able to pay, and they'd just get up and move out and go back East or something. So that's the way he acquired all that property in the first place. 



But one thing that I've always felt real badly about: our family's never been publicity seekers, heaven knows, any of us, and still aren't. But I think it's kind of a shame he didn't get more recognition than he did. He told me one time that he had told some fellahs out there that he was gonna give them a piece of land for a city park, for a little park, you know, because he could foresee the future, and he knew that country out there was really going to grow up. Nobody else knew it was, but he knew. And he wanted to have a little park out there. And he said he was gonna deed it over to the city, I guess, but he never did mention any names or anything. And the only thing he was gonna ask was that they'd name it Beasley Park. Well, years went on and on, and the next thing I knew, the city owned it, and they had built the fire station on it out there. And I never did know what happened, who he deeded it to, or how they got it, or what. But he was never given any recognition for it. I KNOW he gave it to them. He didn't sell it, because if he had, I would have known that. And I've always felt very badly about that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well we can talk maybe a little more about East <Flagstaff> then. There just wasn't anything out there for years and years. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, you know where the corner… where it goes up on Fourth Street, which is a very busy intersection there, and Chapman's Market was in there. It's now the motorcycle place. There's a fish store and a drugstore and Mom's Recreation place and all that was there. There was nothing there but a little - seems to me it was kind of a motel. They didn't call 'em that then, though. I've forgotten what they called 'em. Mrs. Greenlaw had one, too, out there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: A little tourist court? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, tourist court, that's it. And then there was a little grocery store there. And he used to say, "This is gonna be the busiest corner on 66," and everybody laughed at him. But it's pretty close TO it! (laughter) He never did live out there, or build a house or anything of his own out there, but that was his child, East <Flagstaff>. They called it Sunnyside then. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, was he in with… some of the land with Alf Dickinson? Or they owned different parts. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: He was in the real estate business, and Uncle Arthur really wasn't. He did most of his business through the Spencer Insurance Agency that's still here, but it was Ted Spencer then. He handled his business for him. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, is Alf tied-into Dickinson's ranches around? I'm not real sure about his family at all. Do you remember him? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, they lived out on Verde someplace, down around Cottonwood or someplace else, Alf Dickinson's family. And I don't know of any other Dickinsons around here. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I didn't know, I thought ___________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, there was a Carl Dickinson here, too, but I just don't remember whether he was part of that same family or not. He might have been a nephew of Alf Dickinsons. I think there's somebody knocking at the door. No. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, do you remember much about the social life of <Flagstaff>? Or WAS there? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Listen, I can tell you something not that I remember, but that my aunt and my mother used to tell me about when they were growing up here. The A-1 Cattle Company was the big cattle company. That wasn't Babbitts, I don't believe. I don't know who [owned it]. But there's an "A-1" Mountain out here, you know, and their cattle ranch was between there and the mountain, someplace up there. And they said that periodically they'd come in and invite all the girls in <Flagstaff> to go. They'd take a great big wagon and take 'em up there to that ranch, and they'd have a big dance. And they'd dance all night, and of course it was very well chaperoned. Then they'd have a big breakfast and then the girls would come home the next day. And that was the highlight of the whole year! I don't know how often that happened, but they said, oh, that was really fun. There'd be just many, many, many more cowboys than there were girls available, and so they just really had a grand time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Danced all night. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. Of course it was an awful lot smaller, when there was a party. Of course it was very racially divided, nobody thought anything about it, that was just the way it was. In fact, there were VERY few colored people here. When I went to school, there was one colored family, and this one boy that I remember that went to school at the same time I did. And nobody mistreated him, as far as I know, or he was never ridiculed or anything, but he just wasn't there, just wasn't included. It's terrible, isn't it, to think of it now. But I don't think anybody was ever mean to him like that. 



But for instance, I remember Eunice Babbitt, was one of the George Babbitt girls, and she's Mrs. Veazy now, Eunice Veazy. And when they'd have a party up at their big house, all the girls from the school, everybody was invited. We used to have an awful lot of parties, too. Everybody was invited, it was all just one crowd, there were so few, you know. Now it's quite different. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So everyone knew everyone else? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Must be nice. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about the churches in the area? How many were existing here __________? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, there was a Presbyterian Church over across from the courthouse, where the Transamerica Title thing is. There was a Presbyterian Church, and in later years, that building was moved down on South San Francisco, and it still stands down there. It's a Mexican Methodist church. That was the Presbyterian Church. I know, because my father was raised a Presbyterian, and my mother was an Episcopalian, and there was no Episcopal Church here, so when I was very small, I went to the Presbyterian Church. I can still remember some of the hymns, "Bringing in the Sheaves." (laughter) And then in about 1910 or '12, I believe it was, they started an Episcopalian church here, and of course she was very active in the beginning of that, and was active in guild. She was also very active in the Women's Club, which was the big thing for women. You know, that was a social organization. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. That was quite a bit later. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: And the Methodist Church, I believe, was on this same corner that is now. But when the Presbyterian Church… I don't know what happened, but they went together, and that formed the Federated Church, Methodist and Presbyterian. And of course there was always the Catholic Church from way back - I don't know what year, but I remember Father Vabre, who was such a loved man. I remember him very vaguely. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you think the town was equally divided between Catholic and Protestant? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I think it was probably more Catholic than anything else, because it just happened the Riordan families were Irish, and they were very Catholic. The Babbitt families were all Catholic, and the Brannens were Catholic. And all those big families and the monied people were all Catholic. And then on top of that, the mill hands were all Mexican, and they were, of course, Catholic. So I think there were probably more Catholics than Protestants. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, and that brings to mind the Michelbachs to me. Do you remember them? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, sure I do. Yeah. I grew up sort of in the middle of that, and then my daughter and Dorothy Ann Michelbach were chums all through school. She's Dan Michelbach's older daughter. She lives in <Seattle> now. But there wasn't a Baptist church. I never heard of Baptists. There was very little ever said about the Mormon Church. I don't think there was a Mormon church here, though I remember hearing about Mormons - not in a very complimentary way, either! (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: There weren't any in town? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Unt-uh, there weren't. The Compton family, they were Mormons, but I don't know who else - don't know of anybody else - but there were very few of 'em. No Baptists, no Christians. What else is there? 



(man's voice, far away, inaudible) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: We're just gonna keep it on file, so that other people can use it. (man's voice, far away, inaudible) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Public library and the NAU library. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: George Babbitt, years ago when my uncle was up close to ninety years old, he used to ask me, "Do you know about So-and-So?" Why don't you ask your Uncle Al?" And I'd say, "Why don't you come down and talk to him?" And he always said he'd love to talk to him, but his trouble was that you couldn't tell where fact ended and fiction began, he had such a vivid imagination. And his sister always said that he told things so many times that he'd think they were true. You know, he'd swear on a stack of Bibles they were true, when they really weren't. So George would just laugh and say, "I'm gonna take a tape recorder down there and just talk to him a long time, and let him tell me all those old things about the early days." But I don't think he ever.... Now, he DID come and talk to - he was known as "Al," but to me he was always Uncle Arthur, and I just adored him. I know George came down and talked to him lots of times, but how much he recorded or wrote or what, I don't know. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: This is George Junior? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh, and he lives in <Phoenix> still. I remember lots of stories that he used to tell that were quite wild. But my father also told some things about the old days, but he was quite different: he was very reserved, and anything he told, you knew it was true. And I remember him telling me about how the jail was over where the jail is now, but it was just a small square, red rock building. And there was some terrible thing about… there were two young brothers who were arrested for stealing something - a horse or something - and a posse got all riled up, and they went at night and went over there and dragged these two boys out and I don't know whether they shot them or hanged them. And I remember one of 'em was only seventeen years old. And you know, in those days, they didn't really think anything of that - I mean, about that. They were guilty, they did something crooked, and so they deserved what they got. And even the women felt that way. I think we need a little bit more of that back - I think we're too good to criminals nowadays. But gee, it was really rough in those days. I read something about that lynching in some history about <Arizona>, but I heard my mother tell about that, and my father. My father thought that was terrible, because he was very kind-hearted, a very gentle man. But that was just the way people lived. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I imagine out on the ranches life was pretty hard, too. Did you ever hear any stories about life out on the cattle ranches or the sheep ranches? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I know that when I was a little girl, that was the happiest part of my whole life. I had a pony my uncle got me, and I used to ride from here to Fort Valley, where his ranch was, all by myself. And it was a Shetland pony, but it was a large size one, it was as big as a small horse. He went back there to sell a carload of lambs, to <Kansas City>, and I guess he made quite a lot of money, he felt rich, so he bought this Shetland pony and brought it home to me. I was five years old when I got it, and I rode it until I was just too big to ride him. But anyway, those sheep camps were quite rugged. And I can't imagine my mother - I'd go out there and spend two or three nights out there with my uncle and sleep on a bed on the floor and think nothing of it. Now, you couldn't LET a little girl do that now. But I'd ride back and forth all alone on that horse. I just LOVED it out there, loved Fort Valley, and I still do. I always thought if I could have a second home, I wouldn't want to go to the ocean or to the mountains or anyplace, but Fort Valley, I just loved that place. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was the old fort still out there? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, I remember that very vaguely. And I remember when they tore it down, which was a horrible thing. It was right out there in the middle of Fort Valley. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it like, north of Cheshire now? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, it was.... Well, see, Fort Valley's way past Cheshire. It's way out there. (man's voice, far away, inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, where you turn to the ski bowl - great big open.... 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, that's right. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: And you turned left right there to go up to my uncle's sheep ranch. And part of it's still up there. The fort was right down right in the middle of that great big open valley. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were there many ranches out there? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, I remember an old - there was a Buck Taylor who lived right north of the intersection where you turn off to go to the ski bowl. Buck Taylor had an old log house there, and isn't it too bad THAT was torn down. And he was an old bachelor, lived there alone, but he had a vegetable garden, and he raised peas and vegetables. Evidently people here in town didn't raise vegetables, and I remember going up there with my mother and my aunt and buying vegetables from him: peas and corn and things. And if he was home, we'd go in. But if not, we'd look in his house, because it was always just so immaculately clean and scrubbed. A wood floor, and he'd just get down and scrub it. It was just clean as a pin. 



And then over right past it - not north, over toward the west - there was ... somebody Williams. That name has just escaped me. He raised mules for the Army. I think that ranch place is still over there. Williams. Now, what in the world? Dee Williams? No, I can't remember his first name, but he raised mules over in there. And there was not another ranch out there that I know of, that I remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I remember going out there and I'd come back - my aunt was a wonderful cook, just a marvelous cook. In fact, she had had a boarding house back in the early days, and right in this house. And she just… oh, was such a good cook. The old camp cook was a one-armed man. He'd had one arm injured or something. His one arm was all withered up and was useless, and he did everything with one hand. And I know he must have been just a dirty and disreputable-looking old creature. I remember he had a moustache, kind of long, it was kind of reddish, and he chewed tobacco, and it always ran out on his moustache. But I'd come home and I'd say, "We had stew and the best biscuits I ever tasted!" And oh! my aunt would just get so INSULTED! "Oh, that dirty old man! I wouldn't eat a biscuit that HE touched!" And they WERE good! I KNOW they were. (laughs) And he did all the camp cooking. I thought the meals were wonderful, because I liked it so well out up there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You said your father, you think in the early days, was kind of involved with the city government? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: He was city clerk and everything. Do you have any other recollections of city government, and who was involved in it? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I sure don't. I just can't remember one thing about any of it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you know Maggie Pulliam? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: A lot of people seem to remember him. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. And I remember his father very vaguely, too. Now, he was some kind of a city something, had to do something with politics, but I don't know what. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. That's the only person ___________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember what <Flagstaff>'s position was as regards the rest of the state? Were you kind of isolated? Or did <Phoenix> have any control over what happened in <Flagstaff>? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, <Phoenix> wasn't so very big either back when I even remember. I don't remember that it had any particular hold over <Flagstaff>. I know that when I went to school up here - <Tempe> it was called then - was our bitter rival, and it still is, as far as I'm concerned! (laughs) Oh! they really were. They were a very small school then, too - not much bigger, and it was a teachers' college, just like this one was. Then of course it grew so much faster as the valley grew so fast. 



(man's voice, far away, inaudible) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was <Winslow> about the same size as <Flagstaff>? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, I think it was. And what made it bigger, it was a railroad section place - roundhouse, you know - and everybody there was connected with the railroad some way or other. And to <Flagstaff> people, it was a very rough bunch of people. (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, railroad people. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Let me see, do you remember World War I very clearly? You were pretty young. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I remember it because my brother went and was overseas. He played in the band, with the 158th Infantry Band, and they were chosen to be.... Who would that be, the general there? Who was it? I should know. It just slipped my mind. But they toured all over <Europe> after the war with this big general. I remember my mother grieving, and oh! she really took it hard when he left to go over there, but he came back safely and all was well. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember how it affected <Flagstaff> particularly? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I remember when the war was over, when it ended. I remember the WILD - everybody got out and piled on all the cars and horses, wagons, or anything that was available, and just stacked on as many people as could climb on, and they went up and down the streets yelling and waving flags. I remember that. I don't remember whether it was an organized sort of a parade or not, I don't know. It just seems to me that it was all just sort of spontaneous. I remember my mother was very excited and elated, because Paul would come home. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You might remember Armistice Day, too. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Unt-uh, I don't remember a thing about that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember the Prohibition period? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, nothing that I could even put in words. I DO remember it, sure. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you know, did it change the character of Front Street a little bit? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I don't even remember what was there. They must have been closed up, those saloons. I don't remember even what it was like. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about the Depression? Did it affect your family at all? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I do remember IT quite well. In fact, upstairs I have some food stamp books up there, too, from the war. I looked at 'em the other day - I'd forgotten all about them. Those were bad days. We weren't TOO bad off in the Depression. That was right when we were married, and I was working upstairs there for Jimmy Babbitt. At first, instead of letting people off, they cut everybody's salary. I remember that. It was cut down to almost NOTHING, but they kept as many people employed that way as they could. And then they got so instead of working five days a week, you'd work three. It was pretty rough for families, but we were never too badly hurt. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It wasn't as bad as in the big cities. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, unt-uh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Then World War II, we can go ahead and discuss that. What memories do you have? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, it didn't really affect me too much. It just happened that at the time that my husband was of the age to go. He had a very bad sick spell, he had a ruptured appendix. And it was just when penicillin came into use, and he said if it hadn't been for them experimenting on him with penicillin, that he would never have lived. People used to die. You know, gangrene set in, and it did with him. But with the use of penicillin, they were able to save him. But he was sick a long, long, long time with it, and getting over it. So he missed going to that war. So our family really wasn't too badly affected by it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember the building of the Ordnance Depot? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you think that was when <Flagstaff> started to grow? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, I think it was. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember when people from the dust bowl area migrated _____________? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I don't think so. I remember reading that book, and I don't believe we ever saw.... I'm not sure, though. Maybe I just remember the book so vividly, but I don't remember that we ever saw anybody. We may have, though. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: They must have had to go like right downtown, though, too, but there on the corner. Was that 66? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, I think that would have been the old road, and then right on up; like the road that goes to <Williams>, was the road that they would have had to go on. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Many of people have said ____________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Unt-uh, I sure don’t. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) Do you remember any big epidemics? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I remember the flu epidemic. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did it affect your family? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, none of us ever had it. You don't know where the Ideal Hotel was, because it was torn down, but it was over there across from the jail and the sheriff's office. There was a big three-story hotel there, a gray stone hotel, the Ideal. It was where that Post Realty new building is. And they used that as the hospital, an emergency hospital, and it was just full, every room in it, full of beds. And they got everybody that could come. I didn't realize it at the time, but I was so fascinated by anything that had anything to do with medicine or hospitals, and I remember when I was a little girl - see, we lived just two blocks from there - going over at night and standing outside and wondering if there was anything I could do to help. I was so fascinated by what was going on in there. And I'd see nurses scurrying in and out - or women, you know, with white aprons or uniforms or something on. Oh! I just wished I could be old enough to be in there doing that. 



And then our son grew up and started suddenly wanting to be a doctor when he was six years old. And it's been just the biggest satisfaction to me, because I've always had that interest. I didn't mention a while ago, I worked for Southern Union for thirteen years, and then after I retired from there, I worked at the hospital for two-and-a-half years. I was secretary to the superintendent of nurses. And that was the most rewarding work I've ever done. I just LOVED working in that hospital. So I think maybe he kind of got his interest in medicine from me, and I never did realize. In those days, girls didn't go into medicine anyway - very few of 'em did. Well, you could be a nurse, but most of 'em were just practical nurses, they'd learned it by experience. But that never occurred to me or to any of my family, I guess. I think NOW, if I were growing up, that's certainly what I would have done, I would have gone into medicine of some kind. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) Not many people remember the Ideal Hotel. Was it not there very long, or was it there many years? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, it was there quite a long time. Hadn't you heard about the Ideal Hotel being there? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I didn't know of its location, _______________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, that's where it was. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any big fires in town? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No, I don't remember any. I remember a very BAD one that was up on the top.... It was a big two-story house - frame house, of course - where that apartment house is up on San Francisco. It's right at the top of the hill. You know, it faces that way. I think it was right there, there was a big house there. A man got up early one morning and left, I guess to go to work or something, and evidently left a fire burning. It got too big or was too hot or something. Anyway, the house burned down, and his wife and I think there were three children were burned up. Oh! That was the talk of the town for years. You know, that's such a horrible thing to happen. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was the fire department… were they able to control… 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I don't know, I don't remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: ___________. 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1] 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, the fire department was down, where? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Where the city parking lot is there on Leroux Street, across from the Weatherford Hotel, you know. It was in there. That's where they had the fire engine. I suppose during my time there were several different kinds of fire engines or things, but I just don't remember. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was probably very small. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: And of course back in the early days I remember them talking about the fires. I think there were two different ones that just wiped out… burned all the buildings that were in town. But I don't remember that, of course. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, maybe some of your relatives. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, they did, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I'm sure ____________. You kind of sparked a question that doesn't have much to do with what we're talking about. There's an old building that's up on San Francisco, and I guess it's like Dale or Fine or something, up in that area, and it looks almost like it was an old school or something, with a little belfry at the top. It's brick and it's across from an open field. Do you have any idea what was in there? It's abandoned now. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Oh, on San Francisco Street? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, it's not really ON it, but you can see it from San Francisco, right up here at the crest of the hill. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Ohhhh! Well, that was the carriage house of the Tom Pollock family. And that house is on Leroux Street, and it's the Sigma Nu, or some fraternity house there. That was the Pollock home, and that was their carriage house. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! I've passed that so many times _____________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. I was trying to place it right ON the street, but it's right in the middle there, in the back. That's what that was. And they had horses and a very beautiful carriage or two, and beautiful horses. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm glad to find out what that is! 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I'm glad I knew about that! 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I thought it was a school. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any flooding? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes. I wasn't living here in this house then, but I remember one year that the river flooded, and this was all standing water out here. In fact, it seems to me that it came up in the house and ruined the carpet or something, that’s when my Aunt Retta and Uncle Arthur lived here. And I remember when I first started going over to school at NAU - well, I mean, it wasn't NAU then - I remember a flood over there. There were board sidewalks everyplace, and the sidewalks were just floating around. We'd get on a sidewalk and go floating around. But what year that was, I don't know, but I know I was pretty young. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any particularly dry years? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: No. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Any water shortages? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, I do. When my son was a baby, they were hauling water in here from <Williams> in big water tank cars on the railroad. And it had a lot of chlorine or something in it, and it was very harsh, very hard, and so people who had babies went up to either the Old Town Springs or to the springs up here where the museum is. You know, there's a spring up there. We used to go up there with buckets and jugs and everything to wash his diapers in (laughter) because that water was very harsh, and it would burn the baby, give him diaper rash. Sure I remember! But except for that, I think we drank and used the water that they shipped in, without any trouble. I don't know whether we paid for it, whether we went down there to get it, or whether it was pumped into.... It must have been pumped into the water pipes, because I don't remember having to go get it anyplace. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about some big snows? Remember any years of really big snows? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, I think the biggest one I remember wasn't too very many years ago, when we had the huge big one. When was that? Five or six years ago? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It was in the sixties. We got like seven feet in ___________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. I remember lots of times when we had big heavy snows, but when it was or how many years ago, I don't have the least idea. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You were talking about how they cleared the streets. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, and I remember that when they'd shovel sidewalks, and it'd be just like walking in a tunnel, between here and town. It'd be snow piled way up high. I remember, but I don't know what years that would be or anything. (tape turned off and on) 



My family's grave plot over here in the cemetery has a headstone that is marked Kathryn Beasley, who was my grandmother, and Thomas H. Beasley, my grandfather. And she was buried here, but he wasn't. He was buried in <Kansas>. But evidently they put his name on there. She probably wanted it on there. But he was one of the first three soldiers who ever won the Congressional Medal of Honor, and we didn't even know it. Now, I said our family were not publicity seekers, because that was never mentioned, I never knew anything about that until all my family were dead. And then I found it through a second cousin who lives in <Oklahoma City>, and she wrote that SHE had found out about this, and so we went over and looked on the headstone, and on the side of it, there's a metal thing there, and it says "Congressional Medal of Honor" and it gives the date and everything and why and all about it. But I would love to know how they got that on the headstone if he wasn't buried here, and how that came about. I don't think they brought his body here, but nobody knows, and I can't find out. That's something I'd sure like to know. (man's voice, far away, inaudible) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I don't know, for some reason I think that there was an old cemetery near Old Town. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, well, you see, that would have been an awful long ways to go over there when they didn't have cars, so I'm sure it wasn't over there. But I don't know where it was originally. It would be someplace between.... 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: (inaudible) 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah. And the city doesn't seem to have records of that, although they might. I'll get after that some day. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, go to Special Collections at NAU Library. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Maybe they might have something about that, 'cause I'd like to know if his body was brought here, and if it was, brought by the government, or if my family did it, because it was never mentioned. Isn't that funny? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: A thing like that. And I've told my little grandchildren about it - especially one who lives down at <Phoenix>, and oh! he was just so thrilled and so excited. He'd been reading about the wars and all, you know. I couldn't tell him very much, so I ought to get busy here before it's too late, and find out more about that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right, right. Do you remember when your family got their first car or anything? Remember that at all? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yes, it was a Chevrolet. (laughs) My Uncle Al had a great big Studebaker, and it was a seven-passenger touring car thing. I learned to drive, driving that car. And then after that, my mother got a Chevrolet, and it was the kind that you had curtains that you had to snap 'em on - they had snaps, and if it started to rain, you'd have to jump out and everybody snap curtains on. That was the only way to have any kind of protection. I don't know what year that was. 



And I remember there was a Dr. Adams here. Have you heard of a Dr. Adams? He was one of the first doctors, and he had the first automobile in <Flagstaff>. I remember them talking about it, but what kind of a car it was, or whatever became of him, I don't know. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When did tourism start here? Do you know? Or has it always been here? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I mentioned a while ago that Mrs. Greenlaw had the Greenlaw Tourist Homes out there. Well, it wasn't for tourists, really. Most of those people were people from <Phoenix> or down there, who'd come up here in the summer to get away from the heat. And they were VERY crude. There was just an outdoor privy there, and no water piped into the houses. They had a central wash house place where they washed their clothes. It was VERY primitive. But I remember that. Now, that was the beginning of the motel business, I guess you'd say. I honestly don't remember when that started. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The roads were pretty bad, weren't they, around? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, they were. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Can you think of anything else? I think we've covered most of the things that ____________. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I don't remember anything.... (tape turned off and on) I've seen a lot of these in the newspaper here the last few years about the origin of the Pow Wow and the history of it and stuff, but I've never heard anybody tell this, but I remember it myself, and I know it's true. My father and I used to walk over there in that flat - they called it The Flat then - they had a racetrack over there and it was east of the college. And that's where the Indians would come in. I remember them coming in and camping over there, and there'd be this great camp of Indians with all their fires, and they would dance between or in front of these tents. And I remember going over there with my father and walking around. That's also where they had circuses, too, the first circuses that came here. But I remember that. Now, no one brought those Indians to town - they came in. You know, they talk about it being commercialized and brought here for the white man's good. That is not true, because they used to come because they loved coming in here and loved getting together, and it was just a big event for them. And I remember that. And I also remember the first days, when they first started having a parade, and oh! those pitiful poor little horses and mules that they used. They would be practically falling down, they'd be so thin, and sores all over them, and they'd beat them. You know, they'd have a whip and they'd keep whippin' 'em, and the flies would get in those sores. Oh, it was terrible. The Indians, I don't know that they still are, but they were basically rather cruel. And I don't think a suffering horse meant a thing to them, you know. They'd just keep on drivin' 'em 'til they dropped dead. And I remember that, I didn't like the parades because I didn't like to see those horses and mules. They'd have a great big high mule and a little teeny weenie horse paired up together, and they'd be so unevenly matched it was hard on both of 'em, and they'd be both of 'em just skin and bones. I do remember that, so I remember back - a lot of people remember about the Pow Wow. Of course they didn't CALL it a Pow Wow then - it was just the Indian camp over there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, it was just Fourth of July. 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Uh-huh. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they have horse races and things? That might be why they came into town? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I think they did. And I remember they had chicken pulls. And if you know about a chicken pull, they'd bury chickens with just their heads out, and they'd ride just as fast as the horse could go, and reach over and pull the chicken's head off. (laughter) I don't remember about the horse races, but I'm sure they did have horse races. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you used to have fireworks? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Yeah, they had fireworks. In fact, that was part of my father's big business during the summer - they sold fireworks. And then finally there was a town ordinance, they couldn't sell them IN the store, so my father and brother built a little stand right out on the sidewalk in front of the store, and my brother, that was his project, and he sold firecrackers. Oh! they really sold a carload of 'em, and everybody, all over the streets and everyplace, had fireworks. That was fireCRACKERS. And then the city would have fireworks at night as part of the.... Seems to me they had 'em over there by the Indian camp, so I guess they sort of went with the Indians and added to the celebration. People had a good time then. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that the only big town celebration, that was on the Fourth of July? Or were there other parades and such? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: I don't remember of any others. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: __________ long time _________ Christmases, and how families would celebrate Christmas. Do you remember your family's ______? 



KATHRYN RUCKER: Well, I know in OUR family - and this still is a belief in our church, but nobody hardly ever abides by it - they didn't trim their tree days or weeks ahead of time like they do nowadays. The tree was trimmed and put up on Christmas Eve. I remember that, my dad coming home from after working in the store all day, and then he'd put up the tree and trim the tree until midnight or one or two o'clock. That's when all the toys were put on and everything. I remember that members of the Beasley family who lived in this house really had scattered all to <California> and Southern <Arizona>. I remember they used to come, a lot of 'em, by train and in cars for Thanksgiving, but I don't remember them coming so much at Christmastime - probably because of the snow. But I know at Thanksgiving we'd have twenty or twenty-five people for dinner, all relatives. But Christmas seems to me that it was more just a family thing. With us it was anyway. 





