CLIFF "BILL" KRAMER INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-11



[BEGIN SIDE A]



This is February 3, 1961. An old friend of ours is in the office here at <Flagstaff> at (unclear), Cliff Kramer. Cliff and I have been talking about taking a recording for, oh, several years now, and Cliff has had some very interesting experiences during his time of living in <Flagstaff>, and one that was particularly outstanding was the time that he was returning with a number of other cowboys to gather horses out in the Anderson Mesa country. 



Babbitt: Cliff, when did you come to <Flagstaff>, please? 



Kramer: In June, 1908. 



Babbitt: And how old were you when you came in, Cliff? 



Kramer: About seventeen, [a little over?]. 



Babbitt: How'd you happen to come out to <Arizona>, Cliff? 



Kramer: Well, I wanted to come west somewhere, and I met Henry Alberts [phonetic], who had been in <Flagstaff> before. And a friend of his, and a friend of mine, introduced us together. So I talked to him quite a bit, and he told me all about <Flagstaff>. So I decided I would go to <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: (unclear) wonderful place. I don't know if you ever regretted the fact that you moved here. I know at lunch one day you told me a very interesting account of gathering these wild horses out on Anderson Mesa. Can you tell me something about the reason for gathering these horses? 



Kramer: In that year, (unclear) cowboy (unclear). 



Babbitt: What year was it, please, Bill? 



Kramer: In 1908. Sometime during the Boer War, the British calvary or army had lost a lot of horses. So they came to (unclear) western states and came into <Arizona> here to buy some horses. Well, they were buying these wild horses delivered to the stockyards in <Flagstaff>, (unclear) fourteen dollars a head. (unclear) who rode those horses and broke 'em. Yeah, there was quite an outfit, this horse outfit. (unclear) Bennett, one of our old-timers of <Flagstaff>. And there was Joe Isabelle [phonetic] used to be an old-timer of <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: Yeah, still is. 



Kramer: Bob Gleason [phonetic], he was one of (unclear). Larren Bates [phonetic], his brother-in-law, was one of the owners. Mr. Fred Voltz [phonetic], who had a trading post at <Canyon Diablo>, came to be the business part about it. But anyway, these horses were pretty thick on Anderson Mesa, which was fairly open country, and you could see quite a ways. These outfits would build a corral in the timber a little ways, so they'd be concealed. And they would string what you would call wings, out into the open country. Then the riders would ride out and they'd spot a bunch of horses, and they would head it towards the wings of the corrals. Then, of course, when they got 'em in the wings, why then they just pushed 'em fast and got 'em into the corral.





Now, another way that they done it was to run these horses into a general saddle horse herd, the horses that these cowboys rode.



Then, another way, there were some of 'em, when you saw some especially good-sized horse or somethin', they'd rope him out of there, out of the bunch, and take him for their own.



And another way they got 'em was to put a trail of salt from out in the open country, up into one of these concealed corrals. And of course the horses, needing salt, followed that in there. And a man was at the corral gate, hid out. After they got in there, they closed the door.



These horses were pretty wild. Some of 'em were saddle horses that had become wild, had been turned out and were branded already. But most of the horses, of course, were not branded. And this particular outfit that I was with had bought up, oh, I don't know, forty, fifty brands. (unclear) that would more or less entitle them to pick all them brand horses up, all their increase, and deliver it.



Now, these horses then, in wintertime they were put in a corral somewhere, a good-sized corral. And in the daytime, after they got a little more gentled, they were herded by these cowboys. My job was to herd the saddle horse herd, which amounted to some 250-300 horses, gentled for the saddle horses. And in some instances, they threw these wild horses in with the gentle saddle horses, which kind of gentled them down a little bit. 



Babbitt: I might mention, when we started talking today, that I called Mr. Kramer "Cliff," and I thought at the time that his name was Bill, but the last few years I've heard people callin' him Cliff, so I changed and called him Cliff, and he just told me that his nickname, especially all the time he's been in <Arizona>, is Bill. Isn't that right, Bill? 



Kramer: Yeah, that's right. In fact, a lot of folks didn't know my name until I went in the army when I turned eighteen. 



Babbitt: Bill, there was a question I wanted to ask you about these corrals. About how big were they? Were they wide corrals with this open gate and wings? 



Kramer: Well, as a rule, they were square, and they were made out of fairly heavy jack pines, (unclear). You know, the one that's the biggest, and I remember the most, was on the side of a hill, Cow Hill. 



Babbitt: Where is that now, Bill? 



Kramer: Now, that was up the side of the slope from Cow Lake, which is on Anderson Mesa. 



Babbitt: About how far south of Flag? 



Kramer: About thirty-five miles, I guess. Cow Lake is a half to three-quarters of a mile from <Kinnikinick Lake>, which is quite popular, near (unclear). Now, this particular corral at Cow Hill, I just don't remember, but it must have held, oh, 500-600 head, and it was square. But it had wings a mile long, which extended from the timber down into the open flat. And those wings consisted of a steel cable. Where they got 'em, I don't know, but that cable stretched for a mile on both sides, on either side, right side and left side, as a wing. Then interwoven in there was boughs off a tree, or anything to make it so that it was (unclear) that they wouldn't run through it. I don't see why they'd jump through it, but not very much. But anyway, then these horses run through there, in the wings, which extended, oh, mighta been a mile wide at the opening. And then, of course, from there to the corral. Once they got in there, why, of course these fellahs just rode in there after 'em, just a howlin' and a-whoopin' to get 'em in to the corral. 



Babbitt: How high did they have to make the corral, Bill? About how high, would you say, to keep the horses from jumping out? 



Kramer: Well, it used to have been twelve or fourteen feet high. 



Babbitt: That was quite an enclosure then! 



Kramer: Yes, it was. 



Babbitt: A horse couldn't jump it, if it was that high, is that it? 



Kramer: Well, there was one big black stallion tried it once, and he got halfway over. His front legs was on the outside, and his hind legs was on the inside. They finally went around, went around the outside of the corral and more or less pushed him or forced him back into the corral.





Another way that they handled these horses -of course, let me add that these cowboys in this horse outfit, their own saddle horses were fed grain, so that they were stronger than the grass-fed horses. They'd ride out into the open flat, which Anderson Mesa was, and when they spotted a bunch of wild horses, they would spot their men so that they would relay them. One man would go and round up, get on the far side, and start the horses, we'll say, south. He would run 'em a certain distance, and then another one would take up and chase 'em. This, like I say, was a relay. Kinda have 'em fresh horses as they went towards the corral. 



Babbitt: That's very, very interesting, it truly is. Now, one thing that occurred to me, you said there was a lot of horses. Would you have any idea how many head there might be, a wild guess? 



Kramer: Well, I'd kinda hate to say that, however I have seen all sixty-five or seventy in one bunch. Now, there would be quite a few bunches. I did one time, as they were gatherin' 'em, saw some 200 head or more in one bunch that they were running towards the corral. That might have been 210, 215, but there was over 200 head of 'em. 



Babbitt: Do you think there were 3,000-4,000 horses out on the mesa? 



Kramer: Oh, there must have been that many, yes, or probably more. Of course it's a little hard to say, because you may see the same horses twice, just like the deer. And the game, of course, was quite plentiful then. Some instances, when they trapped these horses with the salt trail, they also trapped a lot of animals, which they had to turn loose. 



Babbitt: (laughs) I see a lot of possibilities there. You know, I wonder where in the world all these horses came from. You mentioned that some had gotten away from the cattle outfits and were not branded. Do you suppose these horses were hangovers from the old Spanish days? 



Kramer: Yes, I think they were. Of course, you've got to admit, quite a few of 'em were increases from the various, we'll say, saddle horses or work horses that had been turned out on the range and got into a wild bunch. Sometimes those saddle horses, when they got into a wild bunch, could be just as wild as the wild horses. But I think that that would account for quite a bit of it. I would say that's about it, I guess. That's [the idea?]. 



Kramer: In other words, you feel that the nucleus of the herd might have been the days of the old Spanish conquistadors, horses that got away from them, and ran wild; and these other horses with the cow outfits came in, (unclear) and ran wild, and then they increased. 



Kramer: Increased, uh-huh. It would be the increase. Some of those cow outfits were pretty good-sized outfits in those days, and they had lots of saddle horses. If they were turned out, or they got loose or something, and happened to be mares, some of the wild horses would be increases from there. 



Babbitt: About how large were these horses? What blood stock do you think they had in 'em? 



Kramer: Well, some of 'em was 800 pounds, and some of 'em went so high as 1,200 pounds. Those 800-pound ones, I imagine were more or less interbred, if that's the correct word for it. I don't know whether they.... (recording turned off and on) They're probably, more or less, mustang strain. 



Babbitt: Do you think they were bigger than the Indian ponies that you see around the reservation nowadays? 



Kramer: Oh, yes, they were. I'd say 90 percent of 'em were bigger than the Indian ponies. In fact, some of 'em were good-sized horses. You find that every once in a while. 



Babbitt: Were there any unusual colorings? Were they pintos or (unclear) colors? 



Kramer: Well, there was the beige and the blacks and the sorrels and the roans. Once in a while there'd be a pinto. And of course one of the riders was more or less a little partial to trying to own some of those pintos. Yet, I don't know if they made a better saddle horse than the other ones -or the bucks, for that matter, buckskins. They were all colors, is what I'm saying. And I might also add that their manes were very long and their tails were very long. They would, of course, gather leaves and burrs and so on like that. Somebody told me once that was where the name "broomtail" come from. 



Babbitt: (laughs) They were like a broom, sweepin' up all the [growth?] and that, huh? 



Kramer: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: You know, you read these stories about "Rex, King of the Wild Horses," and (unclear) stallion that took care of all the mares. Did you see anything in the way of a horse that would qualify for that sort of a designation? 



Kramer: No, nothing like that. But as a rule, about 50 percent of the time, there would be a stallion that more or less herded a bunch of mares. But it wasn't uncommon to see a mare, lots of time, leadin' 'em. About 50-50, let's say, sometimes stallions would lead 'em, and lots of times mares would lead 'em. 



Babbitt: That's interesting, I'd never heard that before. (unclear) bands of forty or fifty horses? 



Kramer: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: Is that right. 



Kramer: Yeah. And lots of times those that were led by mares were really just a little bit faster and a little bit wilder than those that were led by a stallion. 



Babbitt: Did you ever see any of these horses fight? We've seen movies of these wild horses fighting. 



Kramer: Oh, not too many, George. You would have to be around 'em quite a bit. They were just like deer, you couldn't be around 'em quite a bit unless they were in a corral. In other words, you couldn't watch 'em in the open country unless you had field glasses or something like that. 



Babbitt: Well, after you'd gotten these horses in the corral, I understand you herded them then with tame horses, but you didn't make any effort to break them in the sense that bronco riders used to get them ready for the cow outfit remudas. Or did you try to do that? 



Kramer: Well, certain, let's say, some of the better horses, this outfit had two bronco busters. And then, of course, there was Frank Bennett, who was a first-class bronco buster himself, and a few more boys, that they would break some of these better or bigger horses. Of course the little, smaller ones, those 800-900-pound ones, why, they didn't bother breakin' them for saddle stock or for cow ponies. 



Babbitt: Would they just take them in, drive them in to the railroad and load 'em on cars and ship 'em out? Is that it? 



Kramer: Yes, they would drive them to the stockyards at <Flagstaff> here, and I just can't tell you who handled the financial end of it, but they were put in cars and then shipped out. But I know there was one instance they came up from Anderson Mesa with some over 200 head, and they got just about three-quarters of a mile away from the stockyards here in <Flagstaff>, and some newspapers that had blowed off of a train, blew into the leaders of this herd, and they just all swapped ends and went back to Anderson Mesa. Lost the whole bunch of 'em. 



Babbitt: How long would it take you to gather up a herd of a couple hundred? That meant an awful lot of work, didn't it? 



Kramer: Yes, it did. 



Babbitt: How many generally would you get in an average drive, when you worked (unclear)? 



Kramer: Oh, let's say maybe 30-50 at a time, because you built your herd. That is, you built up from there. Lots of days, maybe if a lot of people were runnin', I might add that there were other outfits there that were doin' this on the side. Lots of times you wouldn't get maybe but forty or so a day. It took quite a little work. And I might add that it took quite a little money. And I don't know about the financial end, whether it was really profitable or not. 



Babbitt: Talking about money, what wages did you get from this outfit? 



Kramer: They paid the regular hands an average of thirty dollars a month and their board. Now, I might add for myself, being as I was a green kid right from the big city, I worked for my board. 



Babbitt: (laughs) Weren't puttin' money ahead for (unclear). 



Kramer: And I might add this, in all due respect for the outfit I worked for: Every once in a while, they got some nice pony, wasn't too big or so, or too wild, they'd brand 'em for me -kind of a little compensation, we'll say. 



Babbitt: What did you ever do with 'em? Did you build up a horse outfit then, Bill? 



Kramer: I built up, oh, an outfit of saddle horses. I was goin' into the cow business, I had a permit for cattle. I had some financial troubles and just couldn't get the cows. So I kept the horses until I went into the army, and then they were sold. 



Babbitt: (unclear) better than fourteen dollars a head, then? 



Kramer: Yes, I got a little better than fourteen dollars a head. Of course we had raised some colts out on the ranch there with Riordan. There were maybe sixteen head or more altogether. A couple of 'em were work horses -three of 'em were work horses, and the rest of 'em were saddle horses. 



Babbitt: Did you ever hear or have any experiences these poor fellahs had that got those wild horses and were supposed to ride 'em in the calvary? Did you ever hear any reports at all on that? 



Kramer: No, but we had talked it over many a night, sitting around the campfire, wondering about these British soldiers, in this case, or British calvarymen, riding those broncs. I would imagine that their own calvary horses that they had previous, that they had lost, that pretty much were on the trained or gentle side. But I might also add that all them horses didn't go to the British army. Some of 'em were sent back to <Nebraska>, <Oklahoma>, and states like that: sold to farmers there. 



Babbitt: No, I didn't know that either. Do you have any idea how many hundreds of head were shipped out from here? It must have been up in the several thousand, though, wasn't it? 



Kramer: I imagine so. Of course, like I say, I didn't know how the financial end was handled, or how the count was handled. But I imagine there were several thousand, because quite a few of the cowboys that maybe was out of a job for a little while, he'd take and run his hand to catchin' two or three horses or somethin', by ropin' 'em. 



Babbitt: Which way did you prefer in grabbing the horses? You mentioned several. Which one appealed to you the most? 



Kramer: You mean would be the easiest? 



Babbitt: Yeah, (unclear). 



Kramer: Well, to run 'em by relays into this corral, concealed corral, I believe was the most successful, then the salt trail. When you roped 'em, you only got one at a time. 



Babbitt: You mean you ran 'em down and roped 'em sometimes, huh? 



Kramer: Oh, yes, some of 'em roped 'em when he saw an especially good horse. They went out on their own and roped 'em. 



Babbitt: That must have been quite a battle, taking down one of those old wild mustangs. 



Kramer: Yes, it was quite a battle. Once in a while, somebody got hurt. 



Babbitt: I imagine they did. How long did this operation last? 



Kramer: Well, I was there, I'll say, about two years maybe. And then, maybe some of the old-timers will remember that two fellahs came here from <Nebraska>. They were called or named the Smith brothers. They bought all the horses, saddle horses, brand or wild horses, and we'll say the rights to gather wild horses, from this outfit I was with. So that was the end of that.





After the Smith brothers bought this horse outfit out, most of the men went on their own then. That is, they went in various directions, to various places. Myself, I went with Bob Gleason, to his ranch up [Little?] Springs, up on the mountain. I just don't remember where Frank Bennett went -he may have came into town, because later he had a livery barn. But I'm not sure what was in between there. 



Babbitt: Wasn't Frank considered to be one of the greatest bronco busters that ever hit <Arizona>? 



Kramer: My personal opinion was that he was the greatest bronco buster in this locality here. He could do it easier and calmer than most all that I had seen. 



Babbitt: He came into the state from <Montana>? 



Kramer: Yes, he come in from <Montana>. And I might add that he was used to big horses, and therefore he tried to pick and get big horses to ride. 



Babbitt: The bigger and tougher the better, huh? 



Kramer: The bigger and tougher the better, yeah. 



Babbitt: Did Frank have a sense of humor when he was out on the range, like he did later on when he came into town here? 



Kramer: Yes, Frank had quite a sense of humor. I was around him quite a bit, when we were out in the outfit there. 



Babbitt: I remember when he was running the service station here in <Flagstaff>, some tourist woman was asking about the wind -it happened to be a windy March day, you know, like we get here sometimes in the spring -and this woman asked Frank if the wind blew that way all the time. And he took off his hat and scratched his head, and he said, "No ma'am, sometimes it turns around and blows the other direction." (laughs) Do you know any stories like that about Old Frank? 



Kramer: Well, I do, but I just can't think of 'em at the time. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Kramer: Yes, hard to pull 'em out. 



Babbitt: You know that story about our old friend, the bronco buster and the wind blowin'. I wonder maybe if they didn't pull somethin' on you when you came out here as a green eastern kid. 



Babbitt: Yes, they did, George. They pulled a good one on me. When I went out to the camp, about that night or the next night, those fellahs kept complaining about seeing bears. I hadn't seen any myself, but they were talking quite a bit about it. But anyway, after supper, and they were all sitting around the campfire, and they had their night horses saddled and tied to the trees and everything, one of the fellahs jumped up and took his six-shooter out and he fired out into the woods there, and he said, "There's a bear now!" So another one jumped up and fired and said, "Let's see if we can't get him!" And in the meantime, the rest of the crew more or less climbed up into the trees. So when it come time to go to bed, somebody suggested, well, somebody ought to guard the camp that night. They all made various excuses that they couldn't, they had to do this, they had to do that. So they nominated me to guard the camp. I said, "Well, I've got no gun or anything." So, we'll say Jim gave me his gun, his .45, old frontier-style in his belt, and suggested that maybe I should climb up in a tree and do my guarding from there, 'cause I could see around better. So I climbed up into the tree, and I set there with the gun and belt on, and I set there 'til daybreak, daylight. And then when they all got up, they called me down and said there's no more use of guarding now, that they were all up, and they would take care of things. So Jim said, "Give me my gun and my belt." I did, and Jim pulled out the six-shooter and flipped the little ejector or little cap there, and showed me that every one of those shells in there had been fired. 



Babbitt: (laughs) I'll bet they had a lot of good laughs over that. 



Kramer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: You never did live that down, did you? 



Kramer: No, I didn't. In fact in the war I'd been in <France> with a combat division, Frank Bennett met me on the street one day and he said, "Did anybody put you up in a tree over there?" (laughter) 



Babbitt: That's really a good story. (unclear) pulled something on you, being a greenhorn from the East, or tenderfoot from the East. You mentioned some other names there that certainly are from the old pioneer group. Voltz, for instance, who had the Voltz Trading Post in <Canyon Diablo>? 



Kramer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: What kind of a man was he? 



Kramer: This Mr. Voltz apparently was a good businessman. He had this Indian trading post there, and I suppose, as far as I know, was more or less successful. 



Babbitt: I heard that Old Mr. Voltz was buried down there near his trading post which is now nothing but a ruins (unclear) down there. But he must have been a pretty courageous old boy. He was out there alone when the Indians were really rough and tough. I suppose you had to be pretty rugged to get by in those days. But you mentioned another name or two, years ago, (unclear). As I remember, when I was a kid, they used to be outstanding here at the Fourth of July shows and one thing and another. (unclear) a little more about those two fellahs? 



Kramer: Well, I didn't know so much about him, the youngest one, but I did know, and was with, Joe, on several occasions. He was a good bronco buster, and he did quite a bit of riding in the rodeos on Fourth of July and so on. But Henry was, of course, a lot younger, and I wasn't around him too much. 



Babbitt: (unclear) the Smith boys. They were a very prominent family, Jim and Al. 



Kramer: Yes, they were, a prominent family. I didn't know Al too well, but I saw him two or three times in the Padre country, which we might say was where the wild horses and the cattle wintered in the wintertime. They came down off Anderson Mesa, and wintered in the open country, which, like I say, was Canyon Padre, <Canyon Diablo>, <Sunshine>, and all through there. 



Babbitt: That's interesting. In other words, you'd move an operation in the summer, riding your horses, then you'd move on down into the lower country in the winter. 



Kramer: Down to the lower country, yeah. Lots of times they didn't do too much operation in the lower country. Somebody would have a....



[END TAPE 57-11, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Kramer: ... caught. Too wild to be caught. Consequently, some of the cow outfits' saddle ponies were shot, and some of the buggy horses were shot. 



Babbitt: (laughs) Were a little bit too (unclear). What I can't understand is you fellahs in the early days could go out and bring these horses into corrals and (unclear). I don't suppose (unclear) they had any value, particularly. They didn't use 'em for dog meat in those days. 



Kramer: No, they didn't. They just sold 'em wherever they had a market for 'em. I guess that's about all that I can say right now, unless you have some more questions. 



Babbitt: Well, one thing we did want to do is to thank you.



