COL. GEORGE HOCHDERFFER INTERVIEW AND OTHERS FROM ORIGINAL COMPANY "I" OF THE ARIZONA NATIONAL GUARD

George Babbitt Collection, 57-32



[Transcriptionist's note: Tape label says "George Hochdoerfer 7/11/52." Platt Cline spells the name Hochderffer, so I will also. George Babbitt says the date is June 11, not July. Many names mentioned, all spellings are phonetic.]



[BEGIN SIDE A] 



Babbitt: Good evening, friends. Tonight is quite an auspicious occasion: As far as I know, it's the first get-together in recent years of the original Company "I," officers and those remaining enlistees, together with the present-day men who are in this organization. This is June 11, 1952. We're at the home of Colonel George Hochderffer, who originally started Company "I." We've had a wonderful dinner, and we're now ready to start the little program. Colonel Hochderffer, of course, is our master of ceremonies this evening. I'd like now to introduce to you Colonel Hochderffer, the original organizer of Company "I." Colonel Hochderffer. 



Hochderffer: I will mention here by our petition, the governor of Company "I" of National Guard on April 1, 1891, with headquarters in <Flagstaff>. I will now read a letter from the (unclear) <Arizona> office of the adjutant general, <Phoenix Arizona>, May 25, 1891. "George Hochderffer (unclear) <Flagstaff Arizona>. Dear Sir, I have undertook and noticed receipt of your telegram of May 23, and your letter of May 22. They have been forwarded to Colonel (unclear) commanding the First Regiment. I expect Colonel Brody in <Phoenix> in a few days, when a consultation will be held regarding the entire National Guard of Arizona. And special attention will be given your petition for another company in <Flagstaff>. Very respectful, Edmund S. (unclear), Adjutant General." Now I'll read the answer. In the meantime, I sent a telegram again, with the request (unclear) <Arizona>, Office of the Adjutant General, <Phoenix Arizona>, May 2, 1891. George Hochderffer (unclear). "I have the honor to inform you that Colonel H. T. Brody, commanding First Regiment, National Guard of Arizona, has recommended the organization of a second company in <Flagstaff>, to be known as Company "I," First Regiment, National Guard of Arizona. Colonel Brody will forward you blanks for rolls from Prescott, which you will fill out and forward to this office, through the regimental headquarters. At time of muster, have all your men sworn in. Upon receipt of your bond in the sum of $2,000, and the same approved by the governor, your commission will be issued." Then he further here informs me to make request for blank requests for uniforms and [with a pipance?]. I won't read that part, but here I will read now of Company "I's" sixty-first birthday today. Company "I," National Guard of Arizona, was organized April 1, 1891, by me, George Hochderffer. The first to sign the petition was George Babbitt, the father of George Babbitt, Jr., whom we are pleased to have present here today. Second (unclear) Thomas Pulliam is represented by his son, Colonel Clarence Pulliam, present Lieutenant Colonel of the National Guard of Arizona. The other men [all phonetic spellings] mustered in by Edmund S. Spill [phonetic], Adjutant General, the original muster, George Babbitt; T. E. Pulliam; Bevans, Bruce; Borden, Carlton; Camen, (unclear); Casper, Fain; (unclear), Gibson; Gibbs and Astoria, Jason; Gongeval, Hamilton; Hart--Olio Hart; William; Hickey; Hoag; Hochderffer, Fred; Hochderffer, William; Hosey, William; Jones, P. E.; Jones, Edgar; Jones, James O.; Colt, Kusiko; Loy; Lovell; McClain; Owensby; Raimie, Richey; Robert (unclear); Spencer, Steiger; Stealth; Switzer, William; Tinker, William; Tyler, Watson; Watson; Watson; Weaver; Welch; Wilson; Yost; Ilegewich. George Hochderffer, commissioned captain June 11, 1891. Now I wish to read, which about a month later, after the organization, (unclear) 



Babbitt: These are letters from the Territory of <Arizona> from the adjutant general, isn't that right, Colonel? 



Hochderffer: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Madwood Gill [phonetic], that's quite all right, go ahead. This is (unclear) anyway. Did he [criticize?] your company, Colonel? 



Hochderffer: That's what I was (unclear) what happened about a month later. In the meantime, we were called out. I'd better explain this first. 



Babbitt: Well, Gill, if I could just have your roll, and you're trying to find the criticism, may I call for the.... 



Hochderffer: Here (unclear). Here. (unclear) 



Babbitt: While you're looking for it, Colonel, why don't we get the present members of the original company to come up and say hello and make any comment they'd like. Bert Campbell Slacher [phonetic], will you come over for just a moment please? These are the two gentlemen who are with us tonight. I understand that there is one other, in addition to Mr. Cameron and Mr. Slacher and Colonel Hochderffer, who is still alive. What is the name of the other member of the original company who's living, Bill? Isn't there another member living, who isn't here tonight with us, of the original Company "I"? 



?: Earl Hyde. 



Babbitt: Earl Hyde, yeah. (unclear) <Flagstaff>. 



Cameron: I am enjoying this evening very much. Colonel Hochderffer has given us a banquet here in honor of the organization of Company "I," of which I was a charter member. Due to circumstances, I was not a member very long at the time, my work taking me away from the city, and not having an occasion or opportunity to attend drills, I dropped out soon after the organization. But I kept in pretty close touch with the membership, all down through the years, and I'm very happy to be one of the old-timers that can say something about it. 



Babbitt: That's fine. Thank you, Bert--Bert Cameron. Slacher: I was a charter member of Company "I" also. I was also a member of Company "C," the first company that was ever organized in <Flagstaff>. But they disbanded, and then I joined Company "I." Colonel George and I have been talking over--George Hochderffer--have been talking over (unclear) that happened in the last forty years, about the old times we used to have. And I certainly appreciate that I was a member of Company "I." I think I did get raised up, I was a corporal at the time I left the company. 



Babbitt: Thanks, Bert Cameron. Now, what have you found? 



Hochderffer: (unclear) what Mr. Switzer said, (unclear) still has the records, and he has a really good record, and he was in and attended a great many drills. In those days we used to (unclear) <Flagstaff> was connected with Company "I." The company gave dances, and I remember quite well that Switzer served on quite a number of the executive committee of those dances. And also, (unclear) my records will show that.... 



Babbitt: Bill? (unclear) Bert Cameron? 



Hochderffer: Bert Cameron also has a really good record. And I looked it over only the other day, and I was surprised (unclear). And it shows he served his full term. Now, I wish to say here, in 1891, (unclear) Indian (unclear) you will notice here it was only about a month later from the time of my commission, and the muster of Company "I," that (unclear) threatening the massacre of settlers. So John W. [Fats?] tried to organize (unclear) as nearly all the men available belonged either to Company "C" or to Company "I" of the National Guard. Joe Francis, July 14, 1891, in accordance with the Code of the Territory of <Arizona>, which gave this power to the sheriff, was first to call upon members either of Company "C" or of Company "I" for assistance. Captain [Fitzenberg?] and I wired Governor John N. Irwin for orders. The companies were preparing to set out at once. All that day and that night we waited for orders. None came. The following morning Sheriff Francis selected the following stockmen to join his party: William Ashurst, father of Senator Ashurst (unclear) <Arizona>; Tom [Parr?]; William Babbitt; John Marshall; Godfrey Sykes; Stanley Sykes; Frank Copeland; Walter Durham; Al Doyle; William Morris; Joe Titus; Fechum Fairchild, undersheriff; and Jeff Flenders [far de wagon?]. Still failing to hear from <Phoenix>, and unable to wait any longer, the sheriff set out for the Indian country with the above mentioned thirteen men. The following members of Company "I" joined the sheriffs party: Ostoria Gibson; Charles McLean; George Camel, later captain of Company "I"; B. M. Spencer; and I, George Hochderffer; with my brother, William Lee Hochderffer, first sergeant in command and in charge. I left, giving him instructions to follow within two hours whether a reply came from the governor or not. As none came, in accordance with my orders, Company "I" followed the sheriffs party. Because of a previous request by the sheriff, Company "C," under command of Captain Pitsonbury, followed Company "I." Not knowing that the two companies were already on the march, the following day the sheriff sent a message to <Canyon Diablo>, with the following telegram: "3:16 p.m., 7/16/1891, <Canyon Diablo> A.T.P. Organized, start for [Owen?] Springs tonight without fail. Men in danger of massacre. I have arrested Blanton. J. W. Francis, Sheriff." Now, they were already on the road, although by my orders. (unclear) Here is the order to me, and also the telegram. 



Babbitt: He was an Indian chief who caused a lot of trouble, wasn't he? 



Hochderffer: Yes. (unclear) 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: Several of the Indians were shot afterwards, you know. Well, after that, I also made a trip with Charles Fannin when he was (unclear), (unclear) a little later. That was within a month, July 20, 1891. "Captain George Hochderffer"--see, I was captain then--"commanding Company 'I,' left Fort (unclear) <Arizona>, flag of Arizona. Sure. I (unclear) receipt of your cable of (unclear) in which you say that the (unclear) requested you to order out your company, which you did. I would like to ask you under what law or by whose instructions you were so ready to obey this request of the sheriff of <Coconino County>, (laughter) You have in your possession of the session laws of the 16th Legislature, containing the military code of the territory, and if you had studied and read that code, it was your duty to do, you would find that you have no authority to turn out under a sheriff, except upon his written request, and then only when it is impossible to communicate with the commander in chief. In this case, there was ample opportunity for the sheriff to communicate by telegraph with the governor. Upon his request, you too turned out your company. You should have immediately notified these headquarters and asked for instructions as to what you should do. Your company can receive no pay from the territory or from the government for the service rendered, as you were not acting under military orders. The only chance for any of your company to receive pay for (unclear) will be for the county to pay you as deputy sheriffs. Let me warn you now that any such breach of discipline in the future, on the part of any officer, will be severely punished. It is overlooked this time, in your case, with only this slight reprimand, because of your inexperience. But should such an occasion ever arise again, you report to the commander in chief for orders, and obey no orders from any civil authority unless you are first approved or endorsed by the proper military officials. I am so very respectful, your obedient servant, Charles S. Gill, Adjutant General." 



Babbitt: (unclear), didn't he, Colonel? 



Hochderffer: I'll tell you what Pitsonbury and I both did. We both tendered our resignation, and wrote the Adjutant General to go straight to hell. Well, that wasn't very military, but then at the same time, that's the way we felt about it. And the funny part of it was, they accepted Pitsonbury's resignation, but the governor would not accept mine. (unclear) was hard. (laughter) (unclear) I remained in Company "I," and I still claim I'm a Company "I" man. (applause) 



Babbitt: Well, Colonel, there's one thing I can't help but notice, you're reading this fine print in not too bright a light without any glasses or anything of the sort. 



Hochderffer: Never wore glasses. 



Babbitt: Are you twenty-one years old, may I ask? 



Hochderffer: (unclear) 



Babbitt: How old are you? 



Hochderffer: Well, sir, I'll tell you (unclear) old I am. For the last several years, why, my brothers (unclear). 



?: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: Beg pardon? Wait just a minute. I want to say (unclear) Company "I," it's really May right there, when she was a little tot. I took up (unclear) and came out (unclear). The same Indians that we arrested.... 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: That's right, (unclear) Indians. And they came there to my place, and I was working in town at the time, and I'd ride back and forth each day, and May was a little tot then, about two years of age, I guess, at that time. And the Indians, you know, in those days, I believe now that they were more curious about May, being a little tot in there. I was wondering, when I came out from town, and they were in the room, and my wife was in bed, sick with rheumatism in the adjoining room. But she could see the Indians in there. Well, May was (unclear). They were admiring, I think, May. But her mother believed and feared that they would steal her, so anyway I objected when I saw that she was frightened, I asked them to leave. Well, the little house we lived in was tucked right on the raise of a hill, which went down about twenty feet from the house, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Is that on the south side of Mt. Elden? 



Hochderffer: It's right there near the spring, and near the (unclear). And so I asked them to leave. Well, they just made fun of me, the idea. I told them, "I don't want you to come in. My wife (unclear)." But they made fun of me, and so I got into a fight and I threw three of 'em down the hill and (unclear) himself. He was there. And then one of them, (unclear) went after (unclear) about twenty feet. And two of 'em started to come back up. Well, I had a rifle back of the door, and I reached for that, and I said, "Now, if you come back, I'm going to shoot you. I won't stand for your coming in." Well, but still my wife, she got to dreaming that the Indians shot me and killed me and all those things. I gave up the place out there, and I took up the ranch that I have today on this site, homestead. So May really was the cause. (unclear) 



Babbitt: (unclear) trouble with the Indians (unclear). 



Hochderffer: I organized the company on account of the Indians. 



Babbitt: You didn't tell us exactly how old you are, Colonel. 



Hochderffer: Oh, I didn't, that's right. I'm not ashamed of my age. If I live [until] the twenty-second--I want to, of course--twenty-second of next December, then I will have, counting that birthday, and the one on which I was born, that'll make me ninety years. But I'm only eighty-eight now. 



Babbitt: Wonderful! Eighty-eight years young. We just had a little story concerning the early days of Company "I" and the original officers, and the list of personnel who are still living. We also have with us tonight the officers of the Company "I" of the present day, and now it's my pleasure to call these different gentlemen to the microphone, and ask them to introduce themselves. We have with us one of the young men of the Company "I," Lt. Col. Pulliam who now says he is no longer a member of the company. What do you know, [Maggie?], (several speaking, unclear) I want to ask him a question or two. Maggie, you were in Company "I" many, many years. I remember that when I was a little fellah. How long ago was that you went into Company "I"? 



Pulliam: Well, I originally come along about 1912, for a short time. But then I dropped out, and then really went into the National Guard of Arizona, which was the battery of field artillery just after the First World War. The letter that Col. Hochderffer read just a short time ago interested me in the fact that that was written by the adjutant general to him on May 25, 1891. The National Guard was reorganized in <Flagstaff>, not as Company "I," but as the Battery "A" First Arizona Field Artillery, on May 26, 1921. 



Babbitt: You've got a wonderful memory for dates. (unclear), was that about that time? 



Pulliam: I went in the organization at that time as one of the charter members, after the First World War. Stayed in the artillery for a few years, then I transferred to the National Guard Reserve, and then came back in 1930 in command of Company "I," and kept it on through the time that we went to the service in the Second World War. 



Babbitt: That was in the capacity of captain, wasn't it? 



Pulliam: That's right. 



Babbitt: Then later on, I remember you were a major. 



Pulliam: That's right. 



Babbitt: Also in Company "I" at that time? 



Pulliam: No, after you passed that. I went over to the First Battalion, and went into the First Battalion (unclear) time. After about a year after we went to Fort Sill. 



Babbitt: I remember very well how instrumental you were in keeping Company "I" together. I'm sure that the people of <Flagstaff> are indebted to you for all the good work. 



Pulliam: Good ol' outfit. I used to look at 'em and (unclear) maneuvers (unclear) platoon (unclear) outfit. 



Babbitt: Thanks a lot, Maggie. Everybody knows Lt. Col. Pulliam. Incidentally, I understand my father was the first enlistee in Company "I" and Lt. Col. Pulliam's father was the second enlistee in that original company. Would you please introduce yourself here? 



Carter: I'm Second Lieutenant George Carter, Third Platoon Commander, Company "I." 



Babbitt: Thank you. 



Black: Second Lieutenant Garland Black, Second Rifle Platoon Commander, Company "I." 



Babbitt: Thank you, lieutenant. Buck: Warrant Officer Sheryl Buck [phonetic], Unit Administrator of Company HT 11 



Langdon: Second Lieutenant Langdon, commander of the First Platoon, Company "I." 



McGill: Second Lieutenant Jimmy McGill [phonetic], commanding the Weapons Platoon. 



Dunfey: Lieutenant Harry Dunfey, Company Commander, Company "I," present time. 



Babbitt: Thank you Lt. Dunfey. These gentlemen are the full complement of officers of Company "I" existing at present day, is that right? Well, thank you for your comments, gentlemen. Were any of your fellows in World War II, or are you too young for that?--in Company "I." Let's see, McGill, Dunfey (unclear). 



?: Company"I." 



Babbitt: You were with the Bushmasters, weren't you? (no audible response) Were you? I thought Company "I" went out with the Bushmasters, is that right? 



?: I'm the only one present that stayed with 'em. 



Babbitt: The officers of Company "I" who were with the company at that time, and the Bushmasters are now probably resigned or separated from their company, is that right? (no audible response) Thank you, lieutenant. Colonel, we've had a lot of interesting information concerning the organization of Company "I," and about your membership. I'm wondering now, what were some of the missions that Company "I" performed during the early history of the organization? 



Hochderffer: Well one--the most important one-was during the [Manson?] strike. I was put in charge--at that time, though, I was lieutenant colonel of the National Guard, and McClintock was colonel. So he put me in charge, and he remained in Manson, I was out on the striking line. So that was about the most important. At least, McClintock saw the role of his (unclear) only he took no charge out there. And there were about over a thousand strikers, all Mexicans, excepting three Italians, the leaders. One was what you call a Three-fingered Jack. I remember that was in about 1902. 



Babbitt: Was that Three-fingered Jack Hennessy? 



Hochderffer: Hennessy, no. And McClintock, he decided that was one of the most important. Even (unclear) though he was in <Cuba>, and was injured in <Cuba>. He was shot (unclear) Cuban fight. Well, that, and then afterwards, which I related tonight, about going out to (unclear) on that Indian (unclear). 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: (unclear) and another time with Cameron--Ralph Cameron--while he was sheriff. I believe Bert was along that time. (unclear) And that was a Skull's Tank [phonetic] and down on the river. But we didn't have any Indian trouble at that time. But it was expected. The Indians, even at those times, they had their blanket smokes, all over the desert. During the first time, why, we arrested--that is, we left him there, but we took away the rifles from a good many of the Indians. In fact, they had better .45-.70s than we had at that time. 



Babbitt: Where in the world did they get those? 



Hochderffer: They got 'em from Wolfram [phonetic], from the traders. 



Babbitt: (unclear) <Canyon Diablo>? 



Hochderffer: Yes, <Canyon Diablo>. That's where they got the rifles. I have one today, the same kind of rifle. 



?: Wolf was down (unclear). 



Hochderffer: (unclear) 



?: (unclear) <Little Colorado River> there. 



Hochderffer: About twelve miles below the (unclear). I have a picture upstairs that shows where Roden [phonetic] (unclear). That was at the time when we went down after Roden. We separated. That was the posse ahead, that went before the soldiers came down. We separated, Roden and I. We went down the river, and about two miles on this side of (unclear) camp, where we filled in with the rest of the squad of the sheriffs posse from here--why, we came upon an Indian driving a bunch of ponies. And Roden thought it was Bowetin [phonetic]. He said, "Now, we'll settle this right now," and he jumped off his horse and (unclear) and began to take aim at which he thought was Bowetin, but it was Bowetin's brother. You remember, they called Happy Bowetin? You remember him? (unclear) stop him from shooting. I said, "Oh, no, don't do that!" So (unclear) when we got through, we met the other party and we came upon him about two miles below that, where Bowetin was camped with his wife. There was no other Indians in sight. Even his brother was gone with the ponies. But he soon came back. While we questioned him, Sheriff Fairchild--he was deputy sheriff--he (unclear). 



Babbitt: Which Fairchild was that, Colonel? 



Hochderffer: Fletcher. You never knew--oh, I guess you must have known him. Fletcher. 



?: He was undersheriff under Francis, and he was undersheriff under (unclear). 



Babbitt: I knew (unclear) and Fletcher, Jr., but I didn't know Fletcher, Sr. 



Hochderffer: No, that was the senior Fletcher. Well, he served the papers. I have a picture upstairs which I was painting, which shows him serving the papers, and his squaw, she's appealing to [Asher?] who was placed in command by the sheriff. Well, when we were going down, on that trip down there, we got down below Indian Hills, you know, where those mountains, before we get to the river. And Asher told me, "Here's an old Indian trader." And he said, "Now, you know, I wish I'd (unclear). I feel I'm never going back." 



Babbitt: Was that Henry's father? 



Hochderffer: Henry's father. And I can remember seeing him (unclear) he was bald-headed, and he thought that the sun shining on his head would make the hair grow, you know. So he only had a rim of a hat. So I, of course, I had already been bringing up [packets?] you know, and I also had quite a map of the country. And so I said, "Well, I'm going back." But it struck me right about then (unclear) there was a long hill to the right of us. I said, "No, we was put in command, because you're an old Indian fighter, but I'd rather (unclear) would have been leading." 



[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 



Hochderffer: (unclear) top of his head, you know. He said, "I don't know." That was after he'd told me that he thought he'd never go back. I said, "Well, I know what I would do," and I told him just exactly what (unclear). And what I'd do with the [money?]. But after that, he said (unclear) never known about that. But I've got him in this picture up here. 



Babbitt: He did come back, nothing happened to him? 



Hochderffer: He got back. (unclear) while we were there, it happened there was about (unclear) came a-horseback. It was right on the river, on the far side of the river, and the boat was [hollow on the other side?] from where we were, and the Indians come riding up there all in a row, every one of 'em armed. So we expected there might be some trouble, but (unclear) right then, they didn't seem to pay any attention to it. You know like a whirlwind will come occasionally? Just about that time, while he was reading the papers to him, a whirlwind came, and sand just encircled us. I jumped off my horse, quick as I could, and (unclear) did too. And (unclear) was down on one knee, with his rifle. (unclear) 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: And I had my rifle there, but I knew that it would be a good idea, I believed, that they would take advantage of that and shoot at us, you know, but they didn't do it. But then they rode away, and then after we left there, (unclear), he come riding up, and Charlie McLean (unclear). I hauled afterwards, and (unclear). And the report got through there, that the soldiers were there, you see, and the Indians, they were getting ready to come into <Flagstaff> (unclear). And (unclear) we left a wagon down at, I guess (unclear) I believe (unclear) isn't it?, from there down to (unclear), from that point (unclear). 



Babbitt: Grand Falls. 



Hochderffer: Grand Falls. Well, (unclear) was down there in the wagon, and we could see smoke signals all over, all through the country, as far as you could see-one over here, and one here, and (unclear). But the (unclear) there were only a few of the Indians there. We found them going down after the wagon. We started down, and I asked McLean--he was one of the soldiers--I said, "Now, we've got to get (unclear) out of that." (unclear) takin' him up to the railroad, to (unclear) to go in by rail, and (unclear) Diablo. That's where they were going. So when we got to the first gulch, I told (unclear), "We'll go up the gulch, so they won't notice us. And also, we want to get (unclear) to let anyone go down there. And so we've got to notify (unclear)." So when we got near there, (unclear) he was horseback, on a sheepskin blanket, is all he had. He (unclear) and he said, "Pretty soon, me shoot you." So he meant not me alone, but all of us, you know, the Indians, you know, would come in and shoot us all. So I let him come on a little further before we got (unclear), and the other party had already passed through this gulch, and gone up on the other side. (unclear) "Don't you (unclear) another step, or I'm gonna shoot you." I only did that so we could get away. When we got down into this gulch, we were nearly a mile up before he even (unclear) noticed that we were away. So then he sent [Fairchild?], and I think one or two of the other men, (unclear), "You darned fool, you're gonna get killed up there." And so in going over there, I think I got twelve rifles on my horse-all my horse could carry, you know, with me, and a heavy saddle. And the other fellows (unclear) when we got up to the wagon, we had almost a wagonload of rifles we took away from the Indians--all of about the same calibre, same kind of rifles, like the one that I carried myself. 



Babbitt: What calibre was that, George? 



Hochderffer: Twenty-one seventy. I've got the gun upstairs right now. (unclear) it's still a good gun. We got out, (unclear) we got up there. We pretended we was on a camp trip. But as soon as it got dark, we pulled out (unclear), you know where they are. 



Babbitt: Yeah. 



Hochderffer: Stopped there 'til morning, and the next morning the company came down to meet us. 



Babbitt: That's about like another thing (unclear) bring back a lot and the body.... 



Hochderffer: It was so funny a coincidence, (unclear) Babbitt, Billy Riordan, (unclear) the principals, you know--he was the one that they really wanted to get rid of. And he was the one causing most of the trouble. So (unclear) he notified (unclear) who had many sheep. He said, "Now it's springtime. If you shoot Billy Riordan, (unclear), you shoot Billy Riordan, you lose 4,000 sheep." He said, "Huh! Me shoot him anyway." (laughter) 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Well, Bert, I understand Company "I" had a lot of interesting social events. 



Cameron: Oh, yes. 



Babbitt: What did you do in the old times? 



Cameron: Oh, danced, square dances, round dances. 



Babbitt: Did you fellahs wear your uniforms when you went to these dances? 



Cameron: Oh yes, sure, you bet. 



Babbitt: What did your uniforms look like? 



Cameron: Oh, they were blue, and they had these (unclear) caps you wore. 



Babbitt: I noticed the stripe down the (unclear). 



Cameron: That was for officers. 



Babbitt: What color was the stripe? 



Cameron: White. 



Babbitt: And the uniform was blue, right? 



Cameron: Correct. 



Babbitt: What sort of a hat would you wear? 



Cameron: Just a little cap. Very peculiar (unclear) cap. Hard to keep it on your head. 



Babbitt: You didn't wear leggings or (unclear)? 



Cameron: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Were these issue, or did you.... 



Cameron: Oh yeah, (unclear) caps. 



Hochderffer: (unclear, far from mic) 



Babbitt: Had a big moustache, I can see that, (unclear) (several talking at same time, none discernable) It looks like the trousers were a different color than the coat. Were the coats darker? 



?: Were they, George? (unclear) all the same color, weren't they? 



Hochderffer: No, no, the pants were lighter. 



Babbitt: A lighter blue, looks like they would have been. What about these social affairs? What's this I hear about a couple of kegs of beer on your lawn? 



Cameron: Well, I don't remember that, George, (laughter) (unclear) remember that. But I guess it happened all right. 



Babbitt: Bert won't admit. What do you know about it, Billy? Billy: Well, I don't know anything about beer. I know that Company "I" in the early days had the reputation of having a complement of twelve officers and one private. I was the private. (laughter) 



Babbitt: What was the total strength of the company? 



?: Have to remember that. (unclear) pretty high at one time. 



?: There wasn't supposed to be more than about--not more than sixty, I don't believe. 



?: It was right up towards quota. 



Hochderffer: (unclear) we didn't have the men here anyway. 



?: No. 



Hochderffer: You know, when the two companies were asked to go out on this Indian skirmish, why, they only had, I believe, thirteen men that could pick up the (unclear) company. 



Babbitt: Didn't you have some very outstanding characters? Were you talking about Ed Tewksbury, who started the Tewksbury Feud? 



?: I didn't know him. 



?: I knew Ed Tewksbury--very quiet fellah, nice-lookin' man, very quiet. I'll tell you a story about Ed Tewksbury (unclear). It was on the Fourth of July--you remember this, George. In those days it was what was known as the Groves Hotel, which was on the corner of South San Francisco, right across the street from where.... 



Babbitt: [Hotsin Jompin?] 



?: Yeah, motor company is now. There was a dining room in there, and my mother and I were in there eating that evening, and the place was full. Who should walk in but Ed Tewksbury, and he went over and got him a seat and sat down. Old Man Sheppard--you know of the Sheppards. 



Babbitt: The old colored fellow? 



?: Yeah. They were running the place. And Old Man Sheppard took Tewksbury's order, went back into the kitchen, and (unclear) swingin' doors, going into the kitchen. Ed ordered soup, and Old Man Sheppard, he brought in the soup, and when he set it down, he spilled a little (unclear) burned it. And Ed (unclear). So Old Man Sheppard walked back in the kitchen. Pretty soon he come out with a big long butcher knife. And I guess Ed was watchin' him, I don't know, but anyhow, just as he come through that door, Old Ed pulled his six-shooter and blazed away, and Old Man Sheppard fell. Everybody thought he was killed, you know. And they all tore out of the restaurant, and Old Ed Tewksbury stayed right there. He and Sheppard, they talked awhile. I'm gettin' ahead of my story. He just creased the top of Old Man Sheppard's head (unclear). And thereafter, everybody got out of the restaurant, Ed and Old Man Sheppard talked for a few minutes. Pretty soon Ed walked out, (unclear) town, that's all (unclear). 



Babbitt: No hard feelings a'tall, huh? 



?: No. 



Babbitt: This may be a little digressing from the Company "I" business tonight, but I heard you gentlemen talking about hanging, was it seven or nine, men, from a tree right over across the street from your house here on Cherry Street? What was the circumstance connected with that hanging? 



Hochderffer: Well, all the [devil?] I knew about that (unclear) who had to take three of the boys over here to what we called the Boot Hill Cemetery, (unclear) And that was where those boys were still laying there. This happened before my time. But I have a write-up in here, in the paper, which come out in The Coconino County [Sun]. [Ed Christiansen?] said he saw the men, the boys, hanging there on the tree. 



Babbitt: How many were there? 



Hochderffer: Nine of 'em. And that was at the time when Old Town up here was (unclear) <Flagstaff>, and all the buildings except one or two here, I guess were saloons. So on the Saturday[s], and other occasion[s], why, they would come in to celebrate. There was the saloon, (unclear) those boys were young men from (unclear) that weren't able to [cook time?], but came out for the--I guess like men want to go to the West, you know, like Greeley said, young men (unclear) and grow up with the country. Well, those boys, they had nothing else to do, but they had to live, and with no work for 'em except the kind of work they couldn't do, so (unclear). They should have sent 'em off, back home, or out of town, rather, than to have hung 'em on the tree. 



Babbitt: What happened, why did they hang 'em, Colonel? 



Hochderffer: On account of robbery. Tom McMillan, he lived out, what many people believe (unclear), but it was out at the old (unclear) where he had his home, up where Colton is living now. (unclear) Taylor was the [holt?] (unclear) this place. But they did have the name of (unclear) McMillan (unclear). But McMillan never lived there, but Asa Clark and Charlie Clark did when I came here. 



Babbitt: And McMillan had something to do with this hanging, did he? 



Hochderffer: McMillan, he probably had nothing to do with it, only he pointed out the boys that robbed [DandC?] different times. 



?: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: There's an article. Yes, there's an article in the paper. And it was put in by Christianson. 



Babbitt: Who was Christiansen? 



Hochderffer: Christianson is an uncle from the Christiansen here. He lived at <Tuba City> at the time. And he mentions where he was bringin' in [ore?], him and another Mormon from up from <Tuba City>, or <Moenkopi>, up near the same neighborhood. And he was bringin' in corn and watermelon at the time, sold 'em (unclear). And as they passed by the road, came right past here, through here. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: Yes, right over, cross over around the hill, and right near this tree, (unclear) oh, probably thirty, forty feet from the roadway, that they used. And so they were hanging there, and he and this other man--he gives the name also. I knew him and also the other man. 



Babbitt: He's the one who told you this story? (unclear) 



Hochderffer: He didn't tell it to me, he gave it to the paper, to the Sun. But Bob didn't tell me the story, Pete Baltin [phonetic], he told the story also, (unclear) he didn't know as much about.... He saw the men hanging there, the boys, and he saw some of 'em before. And he helped carry three of 'em over here (unclear) probably 300 yards from where they were hanging. 



Babbitt: Who's supposed to have done the hanging? 



Hochderffer: Well, the only man's name that was mentioned was McMillan, in the paper. And the others weren't mentioned. They were mostly Mormon (unclear). 



Babbitt: And they were pretty much put out about these boys robbing them, is that it? 



Hochderffer: Well, you know how men are. You can't (unclear), they'd shoot fellahs over nothing. Probably you boys remember when the Hawks boys were killed in the jail up there, (unclear). I used to take prisoners there. They'd beg me not to put 'em in the cell where those boys were killed. Well, I know one thing, John Hawk one day, he come out of Sandy Donahue's saloon, he was [above the other two?], and there was a Mexican sitting on the steps outside, (unclear). He pulled his gun out and he shot him. They arrested him and the only thing that ever happened was they said, "Well, why did you shoot him, Beau?" He didn't like a Mexican anyhow. That was about the only reason. And he got out of it, (unclear) and there were several cases just like that. 



Babbitt: Life wasn't very valuable, was it? 



Hochderffer: Well, it seems not. But there's one thing I can say: I was in <Dodge City> before I came here, and (unclear) there. The troubles in <Dodge City>, all of the shooting and the troubles there were always between the officers, the town officers and the county officers--the deputy sheriff and the marshall. Well here, I say to this day, they always work together. I know when Ralph Cameron, when he was sheriff, at that time I was a marshal. We helped each other and we worked together, and we never imposed upon each other's rights. And there never was any trouble between the officers in this town that I knew of. And think of down to <Tombstone>. That killing, I knew (unclear). 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hochderffer: They were driven out of that city when I was there. And I knew Bat Masterson well. He was driven out of <Dodge City>. So was the (unclear) that became the United States Marshal of Arizona. Let's see, what was his name now? I knew him well. And I was there in Dodge when he was driven out. 



Babbitt: Are you thinking of Doc Holladay? 



Hochderffer: No, not Jack Holladay. I've got the pictures of all of those fellahs, too. But I never had any trouble there. I was deputy sheriff there, just so that I could carry a gun, because I (unclear) carry a gun in those days. So I never had any trouble with either (unclear). Anyway, Bat Masterson, he never was an officer, neither was (unclear), excepting they was deputized so they could carry a gun. But there were no paid officers, never. And I wasn't either, when I was there. But I'm afraid I can't think of this man's name, that became United States marshal. And he was marshal in Dodge, and he was a good marshal there. But some of those others have a reputation of being marshals. Now, [Wyatt Earp?], he was United States marshal, appointed, I guess, at <Tombstone>. Well, there the trouble was, all the shooting I ever heard of there was, you know, both sides were a bunch of thieves, and they, of course, had their friends that they were trying to protect. But the shootings were (unclear) between (unclear). You know that to be the fact. 



Babbitt: I suppose that's true. Well, if these nine men are supposed to have been hanged in a tree, do you believe that story, that's true? 



Hochderffer: It's true, absolutely true. Absolutely. And I've got--I wouldn't know just where--I believe I could find it for you right in there now. (unclear) and he mentioned the names of the men. I know Brogan [phonetic] told me the same story. 



Babbitt: Pete Brogan? 



Hochderffer: Pete Brogan. His son worked there for a long time, there at the store. He was an old cowboy. I'll show you a picture. 



?: (unclear, far from mic) 



Babbitt: These nine men, were they supposed to be hanged from one limb over here? 



?: (unclear) George, while we're on this subject, I want to tell you the location of Boot Hill right now. 



Babbitt: Where these nine men are supposed to be buried? 



Hochderffer: Well, yes. I don't know if they're all buried there. I don't know anything about that. But, you know where Bill Cameron's property is? 



Babbitt: Yes, right over here on.... 



Hochderffer: Well, that was a part of the Boot Hill Cemetery. 



Babbitt: Right on Santa Fe, isn't it? 



Hochderffer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Santa Fe, and what's the cross street here? 



Hochderffer: Toltec. 



Babbitt: Toltec and Santa Fe. 



Hochderffer: Actually, that's the location. 



Babbitt: How'd it get its name, Boot Hill? Is it because there were a lot of men buried with their boots on? 



Hochderffer: (unclear) 



Babbitt: <Tombstone> wasn't the only place that had a Boot Hill cemetery was it? In other words, there's nothing original about the name Boot Hill. It's more or less commonplace in <Arizona>. 



Hochderffer: So many people will ask where Boot Hill is. I thought I'd give you that. 



?: (unclear) from there, the cemetery over to where the armory is now--before they moved it over to where it is now. Cameron



?: The Hawks boys were buried just a little, right down in front of the old armory there. The Hawks boys were killed (unclear) mob (unclear). And I don't know what ever become of those graves, do you? 



?: No, I don't. 



Babbitt: After they moved the cemetery, when they built the armory.... 



?: Wasn't very many buried there. I don't know of anyone, only the Hawks boys. 



Babbitt: Well this tree where the nine men were hanged.... 



?: Right across here. 



Babbitt: Right across from George Hochderffer's house? 



?: Last Sunday I was over in [Hogan's?] yard there, and I (unclear). George is the first man that ever told me anything about that. 



?: I wonder when that was supposed to have been, anyway. Way, way, early wasn't it? 



?: I don't know about that. I don't know a thing about it. 



Babbitt: Brogan is the man who told you about the nine men being hanged from the same limb on this tree here? Is this the man here, this Bob Brogan, this picture you showed me? 



Hochderffer: Pete Brogan. Here's Pete. Now, he was a cowboy in Company "I" when I was a cowboy there. And I'm the only cowboy.... 



Babbitt: Could you depend on this fellah's word, this Brogan? 



Hochderffer: I would, yes. 



?: Oh, yeah. 



Hochderffer: Yes, you bet your life. He was killed, him and Switz, in that automobile accident, not many years ago here. 



Babbitt: In other words, if he told you that those nine boys had been hanged there, there's probably some truth to it then? 



Hochderffer: Well, if you read this article, you'll believe it, all right. Oh yes, Christianson, I knew him personally, and he wrote the article. I'll have to dig up that article and get the paper. (unclear) paper. 



Babbitt: About what date was that? 



Hochderffer: I'll find it for you in a few minutes here. 



Babbitt: All right, fine. 



Hochderffer: Do you know who that is? 



Babbitt: No. 



Hochderffer: You know him all right. 



Babbitt: McGonigle? Or McLean? 



Hochderffer: Neither one. That's Lockett, that's Henry Lockett. 



Babbitt: We have Betty Jean Berman [phonetic]. What relation is she to you now, Colonel? 



Hochderffer: She's my great-granddaughter. 



Babbitt: Your great-granddaughter! Well, Betty Jean Berman can recite the oath of allegiance to the flag almost better than anybody I've ever known. Betty Jean, how old are you, honey? 



Berman: Five. 



Babbitt: Five years old. We just got Betty Jean out to do the honors on reciting the oath of allegiance to the flag. Will you give the oath of allegiance right now, Betty? 



Berman: I pledge allegiance, flag of the American States of America, 'cause it was established and which it stands, one nation (unclear) with liberty and justice for all. 



Babbitt: Well, that is wonderful, Betty Jean! Thank you so much. Did you notice how she puts her hand over her heart when she recites the oath of allegiance, just like everybody should do. We've had a wonderful dinner here tonight, and I noticed particularly that fried chicken was so good, it was just as tender as it could possibly be. I'm kinda like a Baptist minister, I can smell it two miles away, but I don't think I've ever had one like May.... May, come here a minute and say hello. May is Colonel Hochderffer's daughter. And also the hot biscuits. Nobody should forget those, either. Can you tell 'em how much they ate tonight? How many chickens did we eat here? May: There were five, I believe. Well, I was personally glad to be able to give this dinner, and especially for what it was for. 



Babbitt: It was a wonderful occasion, you bet it was. And we certainly enjoyed your chicken. And you have a grand helper here, too. May: (unclear) granddaughter. 



Babbitt: You're Mrs.... 



Clofter: Clofter [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: You're Mrs. Clofter. You made that beautiful red, white, and blue cake, didn't you, Mrs. Clofter? 



Clofter: Yes, sir. 



Babbitt: Well, you certainly got out a wonderful dinner. How many were there here tonight? Let's see, there were.... 



?: Ten. 



Clofter: Eleven. 



Babbitt: Well, it was a grand dinner, and on behalf of the men who were assembled here tonight, I surely want to express our appreciation to you and to our grand host, Colonel Hochderffer. We certainly enjoyed being with you all. I don't know (unclear) we have as much pleasure as we've had tonight. We should get together more often, I think--especially the old-timers. (unclear) Thanks again to you nice ladies for all you did to contribute to a wonderful evening tonight. 





