LOYD FOUTZ INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.21

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. We're here at Beclahbeto Trading Post, interviewing Loyd Foutz. It is Wednesday, August 12, [1998], at 11:35 a.m. [Brad Cole is also present.] 

Underhill: Mr. Foutz, thank you for agreeing to the interview. We'll try to make it a painless process here for you. Can we start with where and when you were born? 

Foutz: Well, I was born in <Kirtland New Mexico>, September 26, 1926. I was born right close to the LDS church, and I had five sisters older than I was, and they were going to school. The man that was laying brick on the church--they were redoing the church there at that time--he saw the girls and he said, "I heard that you have a new baby brother at your home." They said, "Yes, we do." He said, "Well, what did you name him?" And they said, "Well, they haven't named him yet." So he told 'em, "You go home and tell your mama to name him Loyd." So that's where I got my name. 

Underhill: How great! 

Foutz: 'Til he died, he almost always called me on my birthday. 

Underhill: Oh, how nice! And that was his name, too? 

Foutz: His name was Loyd--Loyd Taylor. I kinda had to live up to my name. (laughter) Not too well, but I tried. 

Underhill: Very good. And who were your parents? 

Foutz: Elmer Foutz was my dad. My mother was Marie Elizabeth Brimhall [phonetic spelling]. So I have a Brimhall line, also a Foutz line. 

Underhill: And what were your parents like? 

Foutz: Well, my dad was a slim fellow. He never did carry a lot of weight, but he later in life was crippled most of his life. So he drove a truck. And as I remember my mother, the best about her, and the most important things about her was during the Depression times, we didn't even know we were poor people. She made everything so good, and we had it so good, that all the neighborhood kids came in, and they had it so good. So they didn't even know they had a Depression either. So she could make.... When she cooked, regardless of how many we had there, they all left full. It was amazing, and it happened all our lives. We could go there and have family get-togethers and I don't care how many came late, they all went away full. She never ran short of food. I think that was really what you'd call an amazing thing about her. She just had a way about her that nobody else had. We were real proud. 

Underhill: And she must have been organized, to have a large family. 

Foutz: Yeah, she was. Laundry for ten kids--I mean, she had ten kids. And so we grew up, we had things well--clean clothes. They were ragged and sometimes torn and patched, but they were clean. And our Dad's were clean. And I can't say that about all my neighbors. We didn't stay with our neighbors too often, but we tried to a time or two, and we got up and went home, 'cause their beds were dirty. (laughter) So we had people at our house, we didn't go anyplace, because we felt at home in our own home--other people's home, we didn't. The other neighborhood kids always liked to be at our house because it was a good atmosphere. 

Underhill: What values do you think you got from your parents? 

Foutz: Oh, golly, I don't know. My dad liked to drink, as I could always recall. We tried it at times, when we got older, but never liked it too well. I could say probably the smoking habit--he had a smoking habit--and all ten kids had the smoking habit at one time, but every one of 'em was able to kick the habit in later years--all but two sisters, and they died with the habit. The others, all were able to kick the habit. I believe it was a serious habit with everybody--you know how that is. When you get to smokin', it's a serious habit. I mean, it's not a good habit. So everybody was able to kick it but those two sisters. And the drinkin' habit wasn't all that much. So it was a good life. I mean, she always had clothes ready for us for Sunday. If she could get us to go, we had clothes ready. That's what she'd tell us every Sunday. "Your clothes are ready. You get out of here and go to church." We didn't always do it. We had to walk two miles--that was a big drawback. But we enjoyed life there. We had a lot to do. We had to milk cows and get in chores and get up at four o'clock, build a fire in the morning. We took turns. Daddy would holler, "Time to build a fire!" My brother Jay, and my younger brother, Bruce--he didn't ever take up trading--Jay and my younger brother, Hank got a pawn shop and took up trading, but Bruce never did. But the three of us slept together, and we'd always punch each other when Daddy would holler. And he wasn't one to wait too long, so whoever was guilty jumped up pretty quick and got the fire built. (laughter) We didn't wait 'til he came to tell us it was time--we did it. But that was good for us, we enjoyed it. Fun life, the way they did.

We didn't have much when we were kids. We got one bicycle for Christmas one time, and that was for the three of us. Everything we got, it was for the three of us--a horse or whatever. Whatever we had, had to do for the three of us. We made out. It wasn't good, but it was fun. So we had a good life. Like I say, we didn't have anything, but we didn't know we didn't have it. It was all right. We went to school, and in those days we didn't have a lot of help in school. With ten kids, as I recall, we didn't get much help at home, learning in school and books and things, but we all got by. I probably was the one that got the worst grades out of the whole family. 

Underhill: What did you learn in school that has been useful to you? 

Foutz: Well, I don't know, maybe some of the teachers kept telling me I got a good personality. "You'll find something that will help you with." So I guess maybe that's why I've come to the reservation. Maybe I could use that. I didn't know it at the time, but it's helped, I'm sure. The people out here have been real excellent to me, and I've enjoyed it out here on the reservation--me and my family, my wife. We just have made some friends out here that just think the world of us, and we think the world of them. If they have something, they invite us to it, and vice versa-- we invite them to the things we have. So it's been a real good relationship with most of these people. Like my wife says, "You can't go anyplace else and find royalty, to where they make you feel like (with emotion) that you're somebody." Excuse me. 

Underhill: No, that's powerful! 

Foutz: And ___________. But that's what we are sayin'. ____________ they put us right next to them. The rest of the family were setting someplace else. We sat right next to them, so it was kind of royal treatment. 

Underhill: What did you hope to do when you were younger? 

Foutz: Well, I always respected my dad quite a little bit. He talked Navajo. My dad was a trader, and he talked a lot of Navajo, and when the Navajos would come to the house and stuff, why, I thought, "That'd be nice to know how to talk that language." It's interesting and fun. I don't know as that's what it was, or anything else. I don't know. I'm like Jay, went to the Navy. I joined up. That was in, I think, 1945 or something, when the war was almost dwindling down quite a bit in different areas. So I volunteered and I went in the fall when I'd just turned eighteen. I went into the Navy. I was just a snot-nosed kid, I know, and I'd never been out of town (chuckles) any further than <Gallup> maybe you might say. So I went to <Gallup> to get on the train. From then on I was a changed kid, because I was no more a kid. So when I got in the service I enjoyed the service, I really did. I saw a lot of the world. I was aboard a small aircraft carrier, one of those converted ones, and our duty was to train pilots to land on 'em. Then we'd qualify 'em out of <San Diego California>, and we were gone about a month, maybe, out in the ocean to qualify these pilots, and then we'd bring 'em back in, and then we'd take out another squadron, and we'd do the same with them for months and months. Then we went down in the South Pacific, and when the war was over, we were in <Japan>. From <Japan> we went to <China> and picked up 1,800 Marines and brought them back to the States. 

Underhill: Happy Marines! 

Foutz: They sure were! And they slept on our flat deck, all those 1,200 Marines, and it was quite crowded, to say the least. But they were happy to be coming home, because that was when <China> was just starting to have a lot of turmoils, and they weren't safe, really, ________, so they were glad to see us come and get 'em. They decommissioned our ship up in <Bremerton Washington>. After that, after the war was over, [we] came on home. I'd never had a job other than.... Well, I take that [back]. I got home for a week, and Russell Foutz, my cousin, called me, and said, "I've got a job for you." And I said, "Well, is that right? I'm not ready to go to work yet, I just got home." (laughter) He said, "Well, I want you to come...." They had the Gallegos Store out where this Navajo-Napi, where the old farm and stuff is out there. They had some land out there, and they owned the store out there, and they had a big sheep camp. They owned a lot of sheep in those days. They changed it to cows later and stuff, but at that time they had sheep when I went out there. I spent over a year out there with 'em, him and his wife. Kathy--you probably interviewed her--she was a baby at that time. 

Underhill: This is Kathy over at <Teec Nos Pos>? 

Foutz: At <Teec Nos Pos>. She was a baby at that time. So I helped--the first year of her life, we were real close--and I haven't been since! (laughter) That's neither here nor there. She's a good lady.

After I left there I went seismographin'. We worked, Jay and I, my kid brother. That was when the oil boom was just gettin' ready to get started in this whole valley here. There weren't any gas wells or oil wells to speak of there at all--probably not any. But we went seismographing, and they drilled these holes and put powder down in 'em and blew 'em up, and they recorded all the things that happened. We went all over San Juan County, and almost to <Gallup> and to <Cuba>, <Dulce>, <Cortez>--all over San Juan County. It was a good job, we enjoyed it, but we had to get up real early, and it was a ten-hour day, five days a week. But it paid us good. It was some of the better jobs, because there weren't any jobs in there. And after I did that a while, I did go in the oil field business. I worked there about a year. In fact, I worked on probably one of the first drilling wells that came into San Juan County. We went up to <Wyoming> and tore it down and moved it down here. Went out of <Bloomfield> and drilled about two wells out there before I.... Well, and then we went to.... I don't know whether that was in San Juan County--probably is. I had to go up to <Durango> and back down across the <San Juan River> there, and drilled a well right up on the bank of the <San Juan River> there. That's probably one of the first wells that was drilled in the industry in the country, because there wasn't very much going on at that point. 

Cole: Did they hire many Navajos in the oil business? 

Foutz: They didn't at that time. I don't think there were any for years and years. But in the last few years.... They're really not that oil-field- minded, either. Down at <Aneth>, I think, down here, on their own reservation, I think they have a lot of employees down there. But as far as the drilling part, I don't think they were as involved there as they are now that it's drilled--roustabouts, you might say, and well heads and taking care of that part of it. But as far as drilling was concerned, I don't think they were that.... That was a hard job. I don't know as [their] experience and stuff.... They might have been able to hold up, but a lot of 'em wouldn't have. They weren't available. They didn't have the transportation to get to the.... A lot of 'em, when I was out here, transportation was a big thing. I mean, wagons–they used nothing but wagons. We sold wagons, $495. They shipped 'em from <Indiana> out here, $495, brand new. We sold 'em at the store there at <Teec Nos Pos>, for years and years. Then all of a sudden they got to where they got outdated transportation. Years ago, when we first started at <Teec Nos Pos>, most of our customers we didn't see but once a month. I mean, they came in and bought their flour and their staple things--baking powder, their salt, their salt pork, and potatoes--the things that they really needed. They had their own meat, they didn't have to worry about that. Most of them had their own meat, so all they needed was the staple items to make food. They still, most of 'em have to have those staple items before they can make a meal. To this day, they have to have their baking powder, salt, and make their bread. They start basically from base. (

Underhill: From scratch.) 

Foutz: Of course a lot of 'em have other things now that they didn't have in those days, but they made out real well, because they had the basics, and that's what they were used to eating. 

Underhill: What year did you go to <Teec Nos Pos>? 

Foutz: In 1949. Got married, went out there, within ten months I had a new boy, my only boy. We got in the family business real quick, which was good. Then we had twins. And that was another experience I wouldn't want to go through again. That happened in October, the thirty-first of October. That night, I'd been on a big deer hunt up in <Colorado> and just got home and picked up my wife in <Farmington>, and my mother told [my wife], "You'd better not go to the store. You're just too big. That baby could come any time." I said, "Well, it's thirty days, and I'm not going to that store and spend thirty days by myself out there, so she's going too, 'til that baby comes. I'll get her in here someway." So she went to the store with me and we hadn't been there I think maybe the same weekend or the next weekend, Russell and Helen had moved out of the store, and we were living in a little apartment next door. And so they moved out of the store, and so my wife was eager to move in. I didn't have time to help her, I was busy in the store, and I told her, "If you'll wait 'til after night, I'll help you." But with just me and one Navajo--Jay wasn't working with us there at that time--just me and the Navajo boy--I said, "I just don't have time to help you." So she carried all that stuff back and forth. This one night she said, "Boy, I can't hardly walk." I said, "Well, I understand that, but you didn't listen to me." So we retired pretty early that night. About ten o'clock, she woke me up, she said, "I think we gotta go." I said, "Ohhh, nooo. I'm the only one here, and this can't be happening." She said, "I think so, I think so." So my brother was at <Beclahbeto>, so she got on the phone and she called her and visited with her and said, "I think we're in trouble over here. I think this baby's going to be coming tonight." So she asked her all the women questions and she came back in and got me out of bed, and said, "Yeah, we're gonna leave right now." So I got up and got dressed. She picked up all the diaper bags and stuff that she had for David and headed for the car. She said, "I shouldn't be carrying all this." And I said, "Well, I don't know why not! you moved everything from the house over here. I don't know why you shouldn't be carrying that to the car." So we laughed about that, and have since, but it wasn't too funny at the time, because she was gonna deliver. So that was about ten-something.

We got to <Shiprock> and we told the guys we were going to stop at Shiprock Hospital, which was a public health hospital, but it wasn't really called that. It was an Indian hospital at that time. So we stopped there and went up and asked the ladies there if my wife was gonna have that baby, and they said, "Well, we can't enter her here without the doctor saying so." So they told us where the doctor lived, and I went up and got him out of bed. This was about eleven o'clock. Got him out of bed and said, "I don't know doctor, whether we can make <Farmington> or not. [Her] water has broken and she's having contractions and all the things that go along with that. I don't think we can make it." And he said, "Well, you go back down to the hospital, you tell them that I said...." So we did. We got back down there, and they still weren't too happy to see us, but they did let her in and got her ready, and the doctor came and checked her. I took off onto some little ol' room there. They led me off there, just one chair and what have you. Four walls, but a chair right in the middle of it. It wasn't very big. I sat there for quite a little while. He came in and said, "Well, I'm sorry to tell you, but this is as far as you're goin' tonight." So I went back outside. It was raining cats and dogs out there, and I'd left my little son out there on the floorboard. So I went out and checked on him, he was just sleepin' good. So I went back in and waited. I didn't have too long to wait. About ten after twelve, the doctor come in and said, "Got one! A little girl." I said, "A little girl?! She's too big to have a little girl." He went back and said, "Well, that's what we got so far." He went back in. About fifteen minutes later he came back and said, "You got another one." So that's the first time we'd even thought about havin' twins. It was just a surprise to us. So I called my mother and told her I'd be up to pick her up. So I went and picked her up, she came down, and we called a Farmington ambulance. She knew the [Kolb?] Mortuary or the guy that worked there that owned the mortuary, the ambulance service. When he come, she was real close friends with him, so _____ came down, "Hey, what are you doing here?!" So he picked her up, and Mother and I picked up the twins and we carried the twins with us in my car, and took them to the hospital that night at <Farmington>.

I called my doctor, and he was out at the country club, and he said, "Well, there's nothing I can do tonight. Just bring 'em to the hospital, I'll check 'em out in the morning." He was having a big party, I could tell, on the other end of the phone. He was enjoying himself that night. So that's what we did. We just took 'em up to the hospital there and they checked 'em, and everything was hunky-dory. It was fun. It was quite a night. I went back to the store the next day. 

Underhill: And what is your wife's name? 

Foutz: Bernie. Well, her name's Beulah, but she don't want to be called.... That's another story. It'd take an hour to tell you about that one, too. I won't go into that now. She likes to be called Bernie, so we do. 

Underhill: When you first came to <Teec Nos Pos>, what did it look like then? 

Foutz: Well, I was just kind of a kid. Of course, like I say, I've been around the Indians a little bit, and I've learned a little Navajo, so I could get by. And they nicknamed me right off, (in Navajo) ___________. That means "slim boy." That was when I had the smokin' habit, and I weighed 135 pounds if I was soakin' wet, so I was a slim boy then, to them. I outgrew that name, and they've had several since. But anyway, that's what they called me _______________. I got along real well with everybody there, I really did. I tried and tried. You know, you gotta try. And you have to take a lot of guff sometimes to make everything work, you have to. When I went there, I guess I was too good, and I opened up the credit. That was probably the worst part of the whole situation. I opened up the credit to the Navajos there, and that was probably the downfall, because when Russell got ready to settle up with his partner, Kenneth Washburn, the first year out, he told him there wasn't any money, no split that year. Kenneth Washburn said, "Oh, no! This ain't gonna be!" So that's when they had to try to find a way out. Russell had to buy Kenneth out, because he was so upset about not gettin' paid that year for his part of the store. So I said, "That was a downfall. I may have caused a lot of problem." It's been a bad thing with us ever since. I guess the credit has been our downfall, we've been too good to a lot of people. And it's been good for them--and us too, I guess--but it's been a way of life. I kind of wish I hadn't been so easy, because they talk you out of a lot more than they would if you.... So that's been part of the downfall. But that's why I guess I like 'em so well. That's why I stay, I guess, is because I think I'm gonna get even with 'em. But I'm never gonna make it. I keep thinkin' that one of these days they're gonna come in and pay their bills. They pay all of 'em, but they don't like to pay 'em up. Some guy the other day, he only owed a fifty-dollar bill. He said, "I want to pay forty-five dollars." I said, "How come you just want to pay forty-five dollars?" And he said, "Well, if I pay you all of it, you probably won't let me have any more credit." And I said, "That's just the opposite of the way I operate! I want you to pay it all up, and then it's open for you. If you owe me five, then I wonder why you didn't pay it all up." He said, "Is that right?! I thought that was different than that way." "You learned somethin' today." I think we've had a lot of disconceptions that way too. But, you know, they really didn't understand what you expect of them, and vice versa. We didn't communicate a lot with that kind of.... 

Underhill: How would you describe the Navajo approach to money? 

Foutz: To money? 

Underhill: And credit. 

Foutz: Well, money's important to 'em, but it doen't last long. If you don't get it the first day, forget it, you're not gonna get it. If they miss you on the first of the month, 9 times out of 10, or 99 times out of 100, you're not gonna get it that month-- you'd just as well forget about it--'cause they had a reason for it, and they're not gonna pay you that month. But if you're kinda forgiving and whatever, if you believe the story that they have, and they can make it good enough, you go on and you do ____________. 

Underhill: _______________. 

Foutz: If they make the story good enough, chances are they go home with something. That's 99 times out of 100, too, that they talk you out.... 

Underhill: What's a good story? Do you remember a good story? 

Foutz: Well, I don't know as it's.... Most of the time it's that they've had a problem with the family. The family needed money for a medicine man, or school kids. They really do have excuses for it. Most of the time they do, but the bad part of it is, that I've been experienced with, is when they did, if you let 'em have an extra fifty, they still owed you for the next fifty the next month. They didn't worry about that fifty, they worried about what they'd done the month before. They paid what they regularly paid, but they didn't want to pay the fifty--that was there, that stuck there from now on. So that was the bad part of saying, "Yes, I'll go ahead and let you have the groceries today." But they had forgotten that they used the money and they wanted to pay it back next month--that didn't matter, they needed what they ordinarily needed anyway. They needed it and you had to take it, you had to go with it, or else you had a fight, and who wants a fight? Or an argument, not a fight--an argument, really--you'd have an argument with 'em. And they usually won! That's been my experience. They went home madder than a hornet sometimes, but the next day they come back and we worked out the problems they had. I've heard 'em say, "Boy, you're goin' to the devil! We're gonna kick you out of here!" And even the councilmen at times, the one that went to <Window Rock> and did all the good things that you was supposed to do for you, he'd tell you, "We're gonna get rid of you," if you didn't do what he wanted you to do. So sometimes you didn't sleep good that night 'cause you had an argument with somebody that was kinda high up, and you didn't do what he wanted you to do. Maybe you could have done without so much friction and stuff, but a day or two later it would all work its way out.

I have kind of a philosophy: hang it on the shelf and put it up there and don't take it down for a few days. Chances are, it's gonna work its way out. Most of the time it has. You just have to kind of forget about it for a few days and it'll work its way back. First thing you know, it's back into the circle, and you never know you had the problem. So I guess probably that's.... The good thing about it, that's what they tell me all the time. "Well, sure, I didn't pay you this month, but where you goin'? I'm not goin' anywhere, I'm gonna be here. Where you goin'? What's your hurry?" So that's basically their philosophy, "I'll be back. Where you goin'? If you're leavin', then that's too bad." So far, I haven't left. I might someday, I don't know. After almost fifty years, it's about time I do something, I think. But I enjoy this. My wife likes it. She doesn't come out all that much, but she does come out, and they make her feel good when she does. She really goes back home sayin', "I just really was blessed today to go out there and 'get them hugs,'" she calls it. 

Underhill: At <Teec Nos Pos> in the early years, did you have a bull pen? 

Foutz: Yeah, we had the bull pen that came in the front door, and we had a wooden gate in the back, a swinging gate there. And the bull pen went around both sides. We had dry goods all one side, and then the groceries and stuff all on the other side. Then we had a big wareroom in the back. Yeah, there was a great big ol' bull pen. They stood out in there. It was round, kind of like a horseshoe. We had the old kerosene sprinkler can. We'd go around there every morning, sweeping the floors--an old cement floor--and we'd keep the dust down. We'd kind of dust it down with a little kerosene and sweep all around that. The main thing that I kept my wife--my wife would have liked to work in the store. Of course, she had those three kids under nineteen months. She didn't have much time to help me. She wanted me to help her. But TB was running rampant at that time--I mean bad. Just a lot of these people died with that, right in that area. A lot of 'em were in sanitariums. And so it was bad, so I didn't want her to work in the store. If I caught it, I felt like I was strong enough, maybe I could get rid of it. But her, raising a family, exposing the kids to it, I just felt like it wasn't the right thing to do, so she didn't work in the store. She'd come in the store, get what she needed, and right back out. 

Cole: Were there traders you knew that contracted TB? 

Foutz: Well, I had it. I took some pills a year one time. They gave me that test on my arm. I didn't know I had any symptoms or anything of it, but I took some pills for a year and got whatever it was out of my system. That was after things had probably got a lot better--cleanliness--and a lot of things had changed for the better. And so yeah. But I didn't have any cough. I didn't know I had anything. I wouldn't have known I had it, if I would have had it. I never did contract it, and it didn't go to any of the others. That's as far as it went--nobody else in the family ever tested or anything for it. But it was bad, it was bad news. Real bad. A lot of people died with it. Some of 'em would go to <Phoenix>, and <Albuquerque>, and all over, where they had the sanitariums. Spent lots of time there. Some of 'em come back _______. Good treatment there, good treatment. 

Underhill: Were many folks trying to cure it with a medicine man and not go _________. 

Foutz: Oh, they all did that. I mean, I used to get so mad at 'em! They'd come in, and you'd see that they were so sick that they shouldn't have been in the store, they should have been in the hospital to start with. They'd come in and get me off to the side there and tell me, "I've just gotta have one more little sing. I'm going to the doc." They knew I was gonna tell him, "You'd better get to the doctor!" But they'd come in, they'd say, "I gotta have one more sing tonight. Tomorrow we'll go to the doctor. Gotta have this medicine basket and a little cloth." You know, the things that the medicine man used. They make them buy that, to have the ceremony, and then that belongs-- the basket and the buckskin or whatever they use, the cloth--that all goes to the medicine man, and then he'd bring it back to the store. I'd buy it back from him, and the next day or two, I'd sell it back to somebody else. So it kind of was a vicious circle. This basket may heal half a dozen people in a year's time. But I kept 'em there all the time, and I'd buy 'em right back. Of course in those days, they only cost $8 to $15, and now they cost $50 to $150. 

Underhill: Who made the baskets? 

Foutz: Well, I'm not sure exactly where.... (chuckles) The Utes over in.... But the Navajos made quite a few of 'em too. They learned how. But they used to call 'em Ute medicine baskets, so the Utes made quite a few of 'em. Then the buckskins, they tanned themselves. They had to have the ears and the horns and the tail and everything, and the less holes it had in it, the better the medicine. If it didn't have a bullet hole in it, that had a lot stronger medicine than one that had several holes in it. They liked the ones that didn't have holes--stronger medicine. They got healed quicker, I guess. (chuckles) But they believed it. I mean, I believe it too, because I really saw it work on a lot of people. I felt like at times some of 'em were too sick to wait that long to have.... I thought they were gonna die before they got there, because they were that sick, and I could tell they were that sick. But they needed to have that medicine man's approval, and do that first, and then they could go. It worked on a lot of 'em, it really did. The hospitals got to where they even told them after they treated 'em with medicine, "You go ahead and go back home and have this ceremony. Go ahead and have it, it won't hurt a thing, you go do it." And they did, a lot of 'em still do, even to this day. They still go home and have a ceremony after they've been to the doctor. They say, "That doctor didn't do me no good." But the medicine man did all the good. So I'll agree with it. But the doctors didn't heal 'em, it was the medicine man. That's all right too, that's good. 

Underhill: What other kinds of things did you do for people? You were part doctor? 

Foutz: I used to do about everything. I used to read their letters for 'em. Kids would be gone someplace, they'd bring their letters in, and I'd read the letters for 'em. I'd write letters for 'em. I took care of a lot of business for 'em throughout the years. And they still like my judgement a lot. They'll come by and they'll say, "I got this letter. I want you to read it. Tell me what I should do, or what it's all about." I still do that. I guess they still have that trust in me and like me. That's why I say there's no place to call it quits. I don't know, it's tough. And I like them as much as my own family. Most of 'em come by, and when they come by, they want a hug from me. Then they come by, these kids, been gone for a certain time. Hey, try to shake their hand, "No, no, no, I don't want to shake your hand. I want a hug!" (laughs) That's changed. That's been a big change with them because they were so bashful. When I first came out here, they were bashful. I mean, they'd get behind their mom's skirt and they'd peak around at you. That's all! I mean, they wouldn't say anything, do anything. When the mama started to walk toward the door, they'd change positions, they went to the front side of her, instead of the back side. When she was tradin', they'd hang onto that skirt. I mean, they'd get ahold of that, and they wouldn't turn loose. They were so bashful, you can't believe it. But they've changed so much now, these little ol' kids are so cute. They come in smilin' and so glad to come in and see you and stuff. It's different. But it's still the same, a lot of it, too.

A lot of it's still the same. We enjoy each other about the same. They need something, why, here they come! I'd like to have 'em, some of 'em, to be able to handle their own affairs, but they don't want the other part of the family to do it for 'em. I'll tell 'em, "Hey, here's your son and daughter over here. College graduates and high school graduates! They can help you." No, they don't want 'em to know about it. Maybe they think they'll make fun of 'em or something. 

Underhill: How would you describe the Navajo people in general? 

Foutz: Well, they're really a happy people. Their language is kind of happy. I think that's why a lot of people, they hear it and they'll see people react to what's said or goin' on. It's kind of a reaction that people get from their language, it makes 'em happy. They smile and they laugh. Mostly, that's what it's all about to them, is laughing and having a good time-- making a joke or something, out of anything. They like to pull each other into it, if they know 'em. If you get a bunch of 'em in the store, talkin', and you're talkin' about some subject or somethin'. Well, they're not strangers, they don't like strangers. They won't shake hands with a stranger, really, unless they're introduced. They're really funny that way. Years ago, when I first went out there, you didn't blare their name out. I mean, if you hollered.... We'd ask 'em, even, we wanted to write their name down on their book, and you forgot their name or something. They wanted you to whisper it, "What is your name?" And they'd lean over the counter, then they'd tell it back to you real quiet-like. They didn't want everybody to hear their name. I don't know what--their superstitious with it. I think it was a superstition, that they didn't like their name blared out. Somebody didn't want 'em to know 'em or somethin'. Superstitious with it. 

Underhill: You mentioned the social aspect of coming into the post. In the early years, when people traveled by wagon to <Teec Nos Pos>, did you have a place for people to stay? 

Foutz: We sure did. We had a big ol' rock hogan just across the street there. We had a fryin' pan, a coffee [pot], and we kept coffee in it; and cookware, you might say, just out of a big box there. We had the staples--baking powder, salt, and all of that--right in this box. They had to buy their other food--sometimes we furnished it too, if they were just gonna be there.... I had some of 'em come and want to spend a week there, because it was so nice and I waited on 'em so much and pampered 'em and stuff. (laughter) That's a fact, they'd come with their family. Not only that, but he got special treatment. He'd come in the store early, him and I were usually the only ones there to do business, and they liked that one-on-one. They liked that, staying over there. They'd bring their wives, and some of 'em stayed down in the canyon under a big ol' cottonwood tree there, and they'd spend two or three days down there, just living there. Water was handy and everything was nice there. It was shady. They just loved it. In fact, I'd jog around the store area there in mornings, gettin' my exercise, and sometimes I'd have to jog right through camp (laughter) to make my trip around there.

We used to butcher our own sheep, mutton. The ladies would come in every day wanting to know if we didn't need meat, because they liked to butcher the sheep right there. They took everything but the meat, and they liked that. I mean, they got all the goodies out of it, you might say, that they liked. They got a week's eating out of it, for just butchering the sheep. My son would go down there and help 'em. I've got pictures of him going down there, helping the ladies. He's an expert butcher now. He [can do] elk and deer and sheep and stuff. He still knows how to do all the butchering. Most everybody else, when they do it, they'll call him over to do their animals for 'em, because he's an expert. But he learned it right there from those ladies, going down and butchering those sheep. 

Underhill: Who did most of the trading in those early days--the women or the men? 

Foutz: The women. The women did it, they really did. The men didn't want to say that they weren't the boss. There was no way you were gonna tell 'em that the ladies were the boss, that wasn't so. But they did let the ladies do most of the trading. Most especially, if I did a little credit against rugs and stuff like that, they had their separate accounts, and they had their regular accounts for livestock. The women had the regular accounts for their rugs, and they knew what their limits were, and the men knew what their limits were--more or less, 'til something happened, and then they'd get over and out. Most of 'em knew what their limits were, and they tried to stay within it. Like I say, there were times when they got out of hand, [and I] had to talk to 'em a little bit, but you hated to, because they took it a little bad, you know. It's like scolding your kids. They didn't like to be scolded. Like I say, they'd go home sometimes and tell you that you were naughty and bad, but they'd come back in a few days, and everything was a whole different ball game, you might say--that day was a different round. So they forgave just like we did--maybe better. But they've got good dispositions-- most of 'em did. I got along real good with 'em. But like I say, it took sometimes two or three days to work it out. I think all of 'em, even though they owe me money still, they'll stop in and say, "Loyd, I owe you money, but I'm gonna pay you!" I say, "Yeah, I'm waitin'." But they are gonna pay me, I guess. But I'm still waitin'. But they know what they owe, and they know they owe it. They just haven't gotten around to doing it. That's why I have a credit balance all the time. They mean well, but it just hasn't come around. 

Underhill: How much credit would you have extended in an average year? 

Foutz: I've probably got a half-million dollars in there that I haven't been able to collect. And I've probably got $100,000 or so that I work on all the time, that I call active maybe. But we do quite a lot of business every month, through the credit system. We cash a lot of checks and do a lot of business with 'em. They know what they're gonna pay every month, and there's really no questions asked. If they owe a little more than that, you say, "Would you like to pay this?" "No, we don't want to pay that." So you just go right off to the next with it. And you hope, well, maybe next month they didn't need as much as they did this month. It very seldom happens, but it works. We work with 'em on it. When they die, I guess most of 'em I still got their name on credit. The family doesn't want to pay it, so I don't push anybody for it, never ask anybody for it. There are a few once in a while that the kids will come in and say, "I know you did my parents well. I want to pay $50 or $100 on their credit." Or some of 'em come in and pay the whole thing up for 'em. But that's a few. That's why I'm sayin' there's a few that have done it, but that's few and far between--but they do, some of 'em. 

Underhill: So how did you make a living when you got that kind of credit extended? 

Foutz: Didn't get paid that month! There's been months I've had to put my payday off. They wouldn't believe that. A lot of 'em don't even know that I get paid. (laughter) They think they're haulin' it all home. They don't even know I get paid. A lot of 'em really are surprised when I say, "Well, I gotta get paid." They look at you like, "You get paid?! You've got a store here! What do you get paid for?" They really look at it in that respect. "You got a store, you don't need payin'." That's the way it is. 

Underhill: What were the wool and lamb seasons like for you? 

Foutz: Very, very busy times--very busy times. Wool season was a heavy-duty time because you had to do a lot of work then--it required work. You had to go out and you had to weigh all that wool. Most of the time, we had to resack it. We had Indian boys to do that. We'd help 'em, and then a lot of times we'd have to move those sacks and stack 'em, or move 'em to the barns. When we got a load, we'd have to load them on those big trucks, or on a small truck and haul it to storage or wherever ________. Those wool bags weighed a couple hundred, 250 pounds. Mohair weighs 250 on up to 350. You take two people, there's two ears on each bag, and you try to throw 250 pounds up into a truck-- hey, you gotta have muscles! 

Underhill: How's your back? 

Foutz: Still all right. We used to roll 'em a little bit, but you still had a lot of work, pullin' _______. That was work. And then lamb season, it wasn't so much work, but it was fun. I remember you liked to look up on the side of the hill there or somethin', and here come a little band of lambs comin' off the hill down to the corral to be weighed--twenty or thirty at a time. You had the scales set out to the corral, and I think Jay said something about the number two tub that we had out there set on the scales, and we had 'em balanced to where we knew how much the tub weighed--I think three pounds, as I recall. And we'd weigh the lambs and write their name down and an amount. When you got all done, you took the tub weight off. They sometimes didn't understand that tub weight. 

Underhill: (laughs) Did people fill 'em up with water before they came in? 

Foutz: Well, they did that. They'd grunt when-- most __________--when you put 'em in that tub upside down, they'd start gruntin' pretty bad. We've had some of 'em that done it so bad that they'd die on the way to the store in their pickups and stuff, and that's bad, when they do that. I've had some of 'em lose half their lambs comin' to the store, just because they brought 'em right off that water hole, and the bottom of their pickup would get so wet and so messy and so slippery that they'd get down, and then the others would get on top of 'em. Sheep don't have any will power, you might say. They'll let one fall right on top of him, and he'll die right there. He won't make an effort to get up, hardly. Maybe right when it first happens, they'll make a few efforts to get up, but most of 'em don't worry about it, they just smother. And that's what happens to a lot of 'em. 

Underhill: When you were doing wool, did people bring it to you already bagged? Or did they do any shearing there? 

Foutz: No, we didn't do any shearing right there. Most of 'em did it before they got to the store. We'd try to tell 'em to keep it clean, but that's why we really had to resack it. They wouldn't listen--try to get a little extra weight here, or a little extra weight there. Either way, you couldn't blame 'em. We don't ever blame 'em. We tried a lot of different ways to get 'em to not do that. We'd try, if we knew who it was, we'd take it and put it in a sack or a box or something and set it up on the counter, and write their name on it or somethin'. (laughter) Ohhh, you don't want to do that! That creates a problem right quick, try to label one of 'em for what they done, because that's a no-no more or less, you don't do that. That's not too good a way to label somebody that tried to cheat you. You'd rather say, "Well, next year I'll try to remember who he is." I'll try to maybe dump his wool next year, or do something to get even with him, or show him why you're doing it to him. "Well, last year I remember you did this, you put a big gob of this or that in there, you tried to wet it down, or whatever. You tried to get extra weight. I remember that, and I don't want you to do that, because somebody else suffers from that. I suffer and some of my other customers suffer from that, because when I get ready to sell that wool, they look at that and they say, 'Boy, that Loyd Foutz cheated me there, too,' because that went on to them if I didn't see it. They say, 'Hey, that trader tried to cheat me too!' But I don't have any idea who it was, so I can't say, 'Well, I guess that belonged to this guy or that guy,' so I have to take the blame for it. So therefore, I gotta dump this out and look at it and make sure you didn't try to cheat me. Then I won't have to worry that I tried to cheat somebody else." So it works, and you learn. But some of 'em never learn. They'll try to do it year in and year out. But we know who they are, and get by. 

Underhill: How did the pawn system work at Teec Nos Pos and here? 

Foutz: Well, when that store burned down over there, I had to set down with every one of those Indians and make a settlement--their jewelry, their accounts. I guess I was probably the only one that could have ever done it. They didn't know 'em well enough, or didn't have that kind of a rapport with 'em that I had, that I could take each individual in there and take a book, write his name down and say, "Yeah, you're account was $325 or $300 or $250. Yeah, and I remember your wife had some red beads in there. Yeah, and they had $150 on 'em." Well, I wrote that down, "red beads, $150." Or she had two big cluster bracelets. I wrote it down. She owed me so much money on this rug. So then I wrote down "cluster bracelets," or whatever, "row bracelet" or whatever type. "Turquoise beads and a jack_________." I wrote all that down on their name. So then I said, "Okay." We opened the store next door in my brother's house there. Two-by-fours and two-by-twelves, we made some counters and had the groceries boxed underneath, and we set up business the next day, or two days later. And so we had staple items. So then I had one little room off to the side there, and that's where I went in and interviewed 'em, and wrote all this down. Took the book accounts, a lot of 'em that got checked and whatever they got, or a failed wool accounts or sheep accounts or whatever. We had it all on record. So then actually, in a way, we were back in business in that respect, because all we had to do was go find jewelry that matched about what they had, value-wise, and I'd say, "Okay, this cost me $500, but you had $150 owed on it, so when you get $150, you come and get this back. Your book account was such-and-such, you can trade on that, as soon as you can pay it, or whatever. But that's what we're gonna start with. This is base, right here. You can go up, and then you can go down, or vice versa, but this is basically what we're gonna start with." I had to get 'em to sign it and everything.

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

Underhill: This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. This is Part 2 of an interview with Loyd Foutz--Loyd with one "L"--and it is now about 12:40 on Wednesday, August 12, and we're here at Beclahbeto Trading Post.

Loyd, you were telling us a little bit about the fire. Maybe you can tell us the year and what happened. 

Foutz: Well, you talk about the year--that slipped me. I think it was about 1958 or 1959--in the spring, anyway. We were just gettin' ready for a busy wool season that year, and we had ordered a lot of extra blankets and cloth and everything in, that would sell while they had money. We kind of teased 'em a little bit and tried to get 'em to spend their money at home. We had lots of new items. We had that in the wareroom, we'd never opened the boxes. It was on a weekend, and they'd just gotten in. I lived in <Farmington> at that time. My kids had started to school, and I drove back and forth, and I spent two or three nights at the store, and then I'd go to town and spend a night and then come on back, 'til the weekend. We always locked our store up on the weekends so we had somebody there to watch the store. And this particular weekend, why, we had this fellow there, young fellow, him and his wife, to watch the store. Oh, golly, I think it was one Sunday afternoon I got a call, and I don't know whether I was in church or at home, but said our store was on fire at <Teec Nos Pos>. And I said, "Oh, my God, I can't believe that!" So my wife and I jumped in the car and I don't think we took our kids, I don't remember, but we headed for the store, and sure enough, when we got there, there was nothing but walls there. It burned the house down and everything that we had owned, that we used while we spent weekends there at the store. It just devastated us--rugs and jewelry, pawn, and just book accounts--everything that [had to do with] the business just went up. It just devastated us, we just didn't know what we were going to do. And I think I've told, in another segment of this, what kind of went on as I settled with each individual, to get back in business so that we could operate.

At that time, there was some talk about the Four Corners area. They were building this new highway from <Shiprock> to <Flagstaff>. All the way through, they were gonna build this road. So far, they had only just started, I think, probably part-way between <Beclahbeto> and <Teec Nos Pos> they had finished. But anyway, when this had all happened, we decided, well, maybe instead of rebuilding it right there on the spot--because it was all devastated, it was all burned up, there wasn't anything left--we decided maybe we'd go to <Window Rock> and get a new lease over on the highway there someplace. So we scampered around while all this other business.... Oh, I was so busy doing other things, trying to put something together. We did find a spot that the store is now built on, and the Navajos that owned that land gave us permission to build it there. So we took that to <Window Rock>, and a survey, and got that. This one councilman there, he kept telling Russell he didn't want him to build it back. So some of these--Howard Gorman [phonetic spelling] or some of the other big officials there said, "Hey, what's the matter with you? Don't you like those Indians? The Indians like you. You'd better give this man a lease so he can go back and help those people." They all laughed about it, but they did, they went ahead and gave us a lease up on the highway. That's where we rebuilt the store. But we operated out of that house there maybe six months or maybe almost a year. Went ahead and bought wool and everything out of that little house. 

Underhill: Who owned the building? Did you own the building, or.... 

Foutz: The tribe owned the building. We were in partners with Russell. That's another story, too. When Russell decided to go back out to the res there, the chance to buy <Teec Nos Pos> from Kenneth Washburn, his wife and I and Russell kind of lived together for a year, out there on this Gallegos. And I helped her with the baby and did a lot of dishes and helped her a lot there. So she told Russell that the only way she'd go back to <Teec Nos Pos> was if she could get me to go. Well, here I was a single guy working in the oil field business, making good money. So Russell approached me and he said, "Loyd, I'm gonna buy all of <Teec Nos Pos> and I'll cut you in on that when it's all done and everything. If you'll come out and do a good job for me, I'll cut you in on part of it. But my wife says you gotta get a wife first." So I was dating Bernie then, so maybe the next date or whenever it was, I had to do some proposin'. Maybe I wasn't quite ready, but I still.... (laughs) Maybe she was just lucky (laughs) and I approached her to get married. And she said she would. So I told her where we were goin' and what was gonna happen, and she accepted it, so we got married, and that was our honeymoon home. 

Underhill: And what did she think of it then? 

Foutz: Well, it was hard to get used to, because she had lived in town. All of a sudden she's withdrawn from all that, a month at a time. She didn't know how to drive a car at that time. She'd never driven a car. So I had an old used car, and it was kind of a clunker, but it was a pretty good car. It was an old De Soto. I told her well, she was welcome to take that old car and go to town. At first she said, "Well, I gotta learn how to drive first." She never did drive that car, but we bought a new 1950 Chevrolet, two-door car, over in <Albuquerque>, paid $1,800 for it. And I gave Russell $300 and he went and bought it for me and brought it home. We didn't have time to go get it, so he brought it home to us and we paid it off. He signed all the papers and I signed it off. Maybe that's my first year on financing, because I gave him that $300 and he brought that paperwork home and said I still owed $1,500. I almost owed $1,800 for two years or however long. They included the payments back into it. It run to $1,800, but I looked at that paper and said, "What did you do with my $300? I still owe $1,800!" (laughter) He said, "Go ahead and read on. That's with the finances and all that, that you owed 'em." I thought he'd run off with my $300. I wasn't gonna let that happen! But that was my first experience in financing, too, so I learned a lot then. 

Underhill: How did Jay come to be a partner in the business? 

Foutz: Well, that was kind of funny, too. I almost went to <Beclahbeto> by myself. My uncle, Hugh Foutz, owned it. At that time it was a pretty good little store. A lot of my customers were working in the uranium, because uranium had just got started. A lot of Red Rock workers. Red Rock Valley over here had opened the uranium. A lot of customers were working over there, and they had to pass right by <Beclahbeto>, so I thought, "Well, shoot, I'll just branch off and go over there by myself." But when I talked to my uncle, he kind of thought I ought to buy it with Russell, because Russell had more means, maybe, and was quite a bit older than I was, and had more experience with the trading business. So he talked to Russell, and all of us bought these stores together. That's when Jay came out there. And then we worked out an agreement to where we all split it up. Then one day later on, about ten to fifteen years later--ten years, whatever it was-- Russell decided he'd like to have it all. So he came up with the idea that we'd take <Beclahbeto> and some money. He was gonna give me <Beclahbeto>, and Jay was gonna take money, 'cause there wasn't much business here then. We didn't have much goin', and it wasn't a very good store, you might say--just run by somebody else, somebody who didn't know what they were doin'. So we did, we split it up. .... 

Underhill: Now, what did Beclahbeto look like when you first came? 

Foutz: Well, the old store burned down, see, and it had burned down, too, previous to all this. I don't think Jay even told you that. But it had burned down previous to that. And so we had to move it too, and we decided to move it over onto the highway, instead of rebuilding it where it was. So we moved it over here. So actually it was a little better store, but we still didn't do any business, and the highway hadn't helped all that much and what have you. But it was a bigger store and it had living quarters and the business. More of a station. We kind of had a service station type thing. We had a place where we could grease cars and do all this, 'cause the wagon age had gone, and the pickup age was comin' in. So we were gettin' ready for that too. 

Underhill: When you built it here, did you have a bull pen, or different arrangement? 

Foutz: Yeah, it started out with a bull pen--just a small one. We had a little café in one corner of it. My wife made a lot of pies. The guys on the highway, we did a lot of business with them, with her pie- making. She learned to make a pretty good pie--still knows how. We got pretty close with a lot of those people that worked on the highway. Good friends.

Yeah, it was a bull pen type, but not quite like the old store was at Teec and the old store at <Beclahbeto>. It was dark, the old store was dark. As I recall, I don't know whether they had a light plant there at <Beclahbeto> as I recall. We had a light plant at <Teec Nos Pos>, but I think they had the old gas lamps at Beclahbeto. I don't think they had electricity. You had to carry the water up from down below the big rim, that big rock, just a little trail down there. You had to carry water all the way up. So he and his family had it a little rougher. 

Cole: Who was that? 

Foutz: Jay did, at <Beclahbeto>, before he came to Teec. He had it a little rougher than I did. We had a spring at <Teec Nos Pos> that furnished our water. It was piped down from the spring on the side of the hill over there.

I had an experience there one night. My wife and I were sleeping and had our window open, it was spring, woke us up about one o'clock, hearin' all this clangin' and bangin' and what have you. This Indian had come from workin' in the mines down here at <Dennehotso> and back in those big mines back there in that area. He left there real early in the morning, he'd just got off shift, and he went to sleep just as he hit the top of the rim there, and he came off that hill and came down into my corral and everything, and I could hear wire squeakin' and everything. And I told Bernie, "I'm not even gonna get up and go out there. I'm scared to go out there and see what's goin' on!" So the guy tore down some of the corral--that was why the fence was squeakin', because he tore down the corral. And his pickup landed up on its wheels. So he went through one gate and tore part of a corral down. But that afternoon he come back and bought some gas from me. It was one of these stake-bodied pickups and I picked up out of the corral a part of the stake out of his sideboard. He had a fifty-gallon drum in the back end of his pickup. He bought fifty gallons of gas from me, and during the conversation, I asked him, "Did you wreck in my corral down there last night?" And he said, "Yes, I did. I went to sleep up on that hill. I turned over twice and I landed on my wheels down in that corral. Nothing wrong with me, and the pickup was still runnin' good, so I just found my way out, went on to <Farmington> and came back." He gave me $300 to repair my corral. He was working in the mines and had a lot of money, and he tore that corral up pretty good, so he gave me $300 to fix the corral. That's all that was ever said about it. And he and I were good friends. His last name was Sloan. I never will forget him. Quite a guy. In fact, he built a store down there close to the mine one time. Quite a man. 

Underhill: Tell us what you remember about the FTC hearings. 

Foutz: Well, you know, I was just a flunky at that time. I was doin' all the work and lettin' these other guys do all the thinkin' and all the doin'. Most of that I just--second-hand, you know. I let Jay and Russell and them get involved with that. So yeah, I was involved with it, but yet I wasn't, directly. Jay and them went over and sat in on those. Somebody had to keep store, so I'd stay home and let them do that. Most of mine is just hearsay, but I know that it was a bad deal. The conversations and everything, I think it was one of those government coverup.... I don't know for [what reason] or why the DNA or whoever they were that was involved with this investigation and stuff, why they wanted to get rid of pawn, because the trader was the best friend the Indians had. I mean, they came and got everything they wanted, whenever they wanted. You didn't sell their pawn, you kept it. Sure, they didn't take it out when they were supposed to and you're hollerin' at 'em and all, but their pawn was in good hands. So when they did away with all of that, they took out all their good pawn from us, in time. But either they or their families, some of the kids or some of the family, usually took all that good jewelry and borrowed it, took it and pawned it. Those people weren't so nice to 'em. I mean, they had limits and time, and they had paperwork to tell 'em, "Hey, this is dead pawn," or whatever. For a small amount of money, some of 'em lost their treasures--for a small amount of money. And I don't know whether those guys--I don't think they really tried to do it that way, but it just happened that way. And a lot of 'em were traders. I mean, they had been traders on the reservation, saw an opportunity to deal, to do good, and they did it. So it was bad for us, too, in a lot of ways. It was a way for us to make extra money--and secure money. In other words, they weren't open accounts, they were secure. You knew [they weren't] gonna pay for it maybe today or tomorrow or in a month or two--but they were gonna pay for it [eventually]. 

Underhill: And if not, you had something. 

Foutz: We had something. But most of the time, we didn't have to go to that end. I mean, they found a way to get it. These other ways, they didn't, they lost it. Had to go back, and there was just nothing they could do. They had contracts and paperwork. A lot of 'em [off-reservation pawn shops] saw a chance to make some extra bucks. They moved it on out and nobody was the wiser, you might say. I'm not knockin' those people--hey, they're legitimate, a lot of 'em are my friends and relations, my brother! (laughter) It's the way it is. But he's good, he takes care of it like I do. We talk about it a lot among ourselves--me and the Indians will talk about it. They say, "Oh, Hank's your brother?" "Oh, yeah." "It's all right then." 

Underhill: Well, what do you think separates a good trader from a bad trader? 

Foutz: For what they come from, or for what they come for. A few come for only money--that's bad. I don't know, I think most of the traders had people with people. We realize that. The traders realize they're with people, they're your friends, they were your family, almost, 'cause you were out there with 'em day in and day out. They were your family, and their problems were our problems, and we made it our problems, and I think that made the difference in the traders. A lot of 'em didn't ever like.... Well, "like" is [not] a good word. They didn't have the rapport with the Indians that a lot of us had. A lot of old traders, they learned their language. A lot of people have been out here all their lives and never learned their language. That's the ones that I think that maybe had other ideas on what they were there for. They were there to make bucks, and a lot of 'em did. And I think a lot of 'em cheated, I really do. I wouldn't want to mention any names, I don't know whether I know any names or not, but I'm sure there were, because I've heard of it. I've heard stories that I don't think Indians themselves would have told me that "he cheated me," unless he had it done. I really believe that sometimes they were cheated. But, I mean, everybody can't.... There's two sides to every story, you know. So I believed them more than I did some of the traders. They did cheat people. 

Underhill: Now, in your opinion, who were traders you respected, or good traders? 

Foutz: Oh, the McGees--there were a lot of McGees. And the Lees--there were a lot of Lees. And Tanners, a lot of Tanner boys were just as good as gold to 'em. I mean, Buddy Tanner. I don't know names. There's one guy that came out there when I was tradin', and he wanted to buy some rugs from me one day, and I was so busy, I didn't have time to go sell him any rugs, and he went back in, he said, "If you ever need a job, come and see me. I've never seen anybody work a crowd out of a store like you did there. If you need a job, you come and see me." But I never needed a job, so I never went to see him. But he was impressed with the way I handled the customers. So he thought, "Hey, maybe I got me a trader here," but it never did happen. 

Underhill: When did you become a member of the United Indian Traders Association? 

Foutz: Well, that was along with Jay and Russell and them. I think we joined after I came out there. But the United Indian [Traders] Association was available probably in the late thirties, when it was started. I think it was started over in <Gallup> with Springers. I can't remember just the names--prominent traders over there, I might say, who were trading over on that.... We traders on this side of <Gallup>, we felt like we weren't recognized as much as those over around <Gallup>, for some reason. I guess that was kind of the highway, [Route] 66. May have had a lot to do with the jewelry and rugs--the things that the traders could take to <Gallup> and dispose of, sell. I think that's probably what caused them to start this Association, and then they made it available to everybody. But we traders on this side thought we was downed a little bit by them, because they all had the president's job and this, that, and the other. But it turned around, and it worked out all right. We finally got our recognition, and everybody was very happy with everything that went on. We had a good time, we'd go over and dance and have a big meal and spend the night and act like we were somebody. You know, you spent the time on the reservation, had a good time, wives all dressed up in their best, their jewelry and all this, and we had a good time--and the Association paid for it, because it was a meeting time, and we all looked forward to it, once a year, go over there, and hey, boy, we hobnobbed with the best! (laughter) It was fun. 

Underhill: How many people would usually come to the dance and dinner? 

Foutz: Oh, golly, they had a pretty good number-- I'd say forty and fifty maybe--double that, with your wives. The meeting sometimes wasn't as important as the meal and the dance and the party. We had bankers, they even belonged to the Association, and they let them have [membership]. So they would come, and they'd bring their wives. So it wasn't just us as traders, there were others. They had just jewelry shops and different things, that belonged to the Association. At times, they'd dwindle out, they wouldn't pay their dues, and so it would dwindle out, and more would come on, and it'd take on new.... But it wasn't just the same ones all the time--there were others. The Babbitts were there all the time, Bruce Babbitt--you know, well-known people were there. Like I say, you hob[nobbed] with some pretty good brass, you know, at times, so it made you feel good. They had 'em in <Flagstaff>, they had 'em different areas.... They just had 'em in <Gallup> for years, but they did relinquish a little and start havin' 'em in different areas. They did have some in <Flagstaff>. That was a long ways for us, but we enjoyed 'em, had a good time. 

Underhill: What were some of the big issues for the Association, that you recall? 

Foutz: Well, election was probably the biggest thing that they brought out there. And sometimes some of the traders would have an issue, problems that they might have with the tribe or wherever. And they would maybe discuss it and try to help 'em to either go to <Window Rock> and go to bat for 'em, or find out what it was about, and they solved a lot of problems--I think the Association did. And I think they had a lot of pull with the tribe. I mean, they invited the tribe to their parties, and members of the tribe. They always had somebody there representing the tribe, to the parties and meetings or whatever they wanted to attend. Mostly the social was most of the time that they [attended]. A lot of times they didn't stay for the meetings and stuff, but they were there for the social and enjoyed themselves. Everybody made 'em feel good. It made us feel good hob[nobbin'] with 'em, knowing who they were, and got acquainted. It's good to know who your bosses are sometimes. (laughter) 

Underhill: Speaking of which, how much were you impacted, during these almost fifty years, by tribal politics? 

Foutz: Oh, everyone has a little different. Every one has had its own. They'd always ask me which one would I vote for, and I'd tell 'em, "Well, that's politics, I wouldn't want to get into that." But I might sometimes tell 'em that I liked such-and-such a man, I like the way he presents himself, or knowledge.

MacDonald was a good one for a long time. I still think he was a good man, but he just got off doing the wrong things. I think he couldn't get back out of it, once he started, and it was hard. He made some mistakes. That's easy--more especially after you're there as long as he was, why, you make mistakes. That was some of the mistakes he made. But I think he's a good man. I kind of wish they'd open the door and (

Underhill: Let him out.) 

Foutz: let him out. I think he's served long enough for what he's done. And those other people, the ones that were in the riot, I know all of 'em. I know practically every one of those that were in that riot. They're not mean, they're not that kind of people. They just thought they were doin' a good job. In their own minds, they were doin' what they thought was right. And hey, justice said seven years, or whatever it said. I think they ought to be returned home, I really do. The people would (with emotion) heal better. The whole thing might just go away. And I think the tribe knows that too. They just can't seem to get it to click. But I feel bad about it. I knew.... Good friends. (with emotion) I hated to see that happen. Excuse me. 'Scuse the emotions, but that's the way I felt about it. I'm not too much of a politician either, but I felt bad about that part of it. I know MacDonald and his wife Wanda. ______ his family here. I knew his mother. Didn't know his dad, but I knew his mother. Good people. It happens, but I think he's paid.

Let's go to something else. 

Underhill: How do you think trading, from your perspective, has changed over time? 

Foutz: Oh, there's no comparison. I think the only reason we haven't changed is because we haven't changed hands. That's the only reason this store has stayed like it has, is because it hasn't changed hands. If it changes hands, it's gonna change. People will sell this out or that out, they'll close this out, they'll close that out, they'll find out that it's not payin', it's not the popular thing or something, they'll close it out. And yet we get people coming in every day, "Oh! this is like an old store!" Even white people come in, "Hey, I haven't seen something like this since I was a kid! You have everything in here!" And I say, "Yeah. Not everything, but we try." So I don't think there's anybody that'd ever go back to the old system. Wal-Mart's and them have got it all, and they can buy it cheaper, and people have the money to go spend there. It's changed. They don't have just the livestock to live on anymore, and welfare. A lot of 'em are working, they can draw on their Social Security. There's a lot of other ways that they live now, than they used to. They didn't used to have all that. They didn't have anything, they didn't get a check every month. When I first came out here, all they lived on was what they could make out of their own hands--they didn't have the government. The government didn't take care of 'em, didn't do anything for 'em, didn't give 'em a dime. That's all changed. So there's no comparison to what it was back in those days--no comparison. They couldn't compare it. Those people I guess deserve whatever they're gettin'. If they're gettin' somethin', they deserve it, because they didn't get it. And I think welfare has ruined 'em. I've talked to Indians, the Navajos, and all of 'em. They came out here, they built their schools, educated 'em, but they didn't do one thing to get 'em a job. An education without a job, whatcha got? Nothin'. You got a bum. I shouldn't say bum, but they've got a lot of smarts but they don't know what to do with it. They can't do anything with it, they don't have a job, and so they turn to liquor and other things to pass time. And that causes people to not want to do anything. They don't want.... It gets [to be] a way of life with them, they don't want anything any better. They don't want to go out, they don't want to leave home, and that's bad. They're even smart people, they're qualified, they can do good jobs, they have the talents and the trades, but a lot of it, if they leave here, they go get drunk. The systems just didn't work together: BIA didn't.... They thought the education might do it, but they didn't realize that that wasn't the only thing. And I kept telling some of the politicians in my area, "Yeah, you built these schools out here, but how about the jobs? Have you seen any jobs comin' from 'em?" "No." "Well," I said, "you watch. Their livestock permits and stuff are going to come to a day when it won't feed very many of your family." And all this. I tried to give 'em a little wisdom that I thought I had, but (laughs) nobody asked me about it, and Washington didn't come and ask me about it. They should have, I could have probably helped 'em a lot. I could have probably saved a lot of lives and probably saved a lot of money. These people would be self-sufficient, and it wouldn't have cost the taxpayers a dollar extra, because the money that they issued [through] welfare is still going on, and it's gonna have to go on, because they still haven't built up industry to help these people find jobs and have jobs. That's a problem. That's a terrible, terrible thing. 

Underhill: And where do you think it's headed? 

Foutz: That's what I'm scared to even think about, where it's headed, because they don't own the land, they can't do anything without that bureaucrat over there. They're as bad as I am. I'm tryin' to get a new lease. These people are as bad as I am, they can't do anything either. They give a ninety-nine-year homesite lease. Well, ninety-nine years, on their own land, they've lived there all their lives. Hey, what good is that? It gives 'em a plot of ground that they can call their own for ninety-nine years. That's still not right. I mean, you own the house, you own it. You buy a house, you own it. These people don't, they never will. It's a reservation. That's what they're not thinkin' about, I guess, is where [will] they go and what's gonna happen? They're doin' it easy to pacify year to year to year. They're tryin' to pacify a big problem.

And that was the same way with the [stock] reduction back in John Collier's day. They came out and tried to reduce their livestock down so that the sheep could eat, the range would hold everything. But that just caused 'em to starve a little more, and they didn't make any efforts to right that wrong, of tryin' to help 'em get self-sufficient. That's what they need. They gotta be self-sufficient, and they're not. And they never will be unless.... That's bad. They get the education, they're still educatin' 'em, and they're spendin' all this money on schools, but there's no way for 'em.... Industry and stuff--there's none. 

Underhill: And how is your livestock business these days? 

Foutz: Well, cattle, it's gone from sheep to cows. We buy quite a few cows now. They don't have any sheepherders, the sheepherders have gone to school. They don't want to go back and herd sheep. Hey, that's not fun, herding sheep every day, seven days a week. The old-timers are having to do that--the guys eighty, ninety years old; the grandmas eighty, ninety years old. They're the sheepherders now. They're the ones holding the glue together. When they're gone, what's happening? The kids are fighting over these permits and cattle and the livestock and stuff, which is a drop in the bucket. It wouldn't sustain 'em. If they tried to live on it all by itself, it wouldn't sustain 'em.

I'm blowin' off my mouth, but it's the truth. That's what's happening, and it's bad. It's bad for BIA to dump 'em like they do, and with the budget that they got, and the school systems and stuff, it's bad. It's bad. They need to refocus their whole outfit. They got public schools, go for it! Put the public schools in, withdraw all the BIA. Use that money to encourage industry to come, give these people the way of life that they deserve, because they're beautiful people, they're smart, they're intelligent, they can do anything. 

Underhill: We were talking this morning about a proposal to bring liquor on the reservation. What do you think of that? 

Foutz: They can't handle liquor. I mean, that's a known fact. I hate to see 'em go off and do it off the reservation, but what.... I'd hate to see it out here. I mean, I really would. In some ways, they're talking about the revenues and stuff that it would save the tribe with these people. But that's like gambling. Neither one of 'em are any good. So they got two problems here. I mean, they're wantin' to go gamblin'. The Utes up there, they're probably makin' a lot of money, but what else do those Utes know? I mean, what else do they do? One of these days they're going to have money. Hey, money's not everything--it'll ruin ya'. It'd ruin me! If I had money, I probably wouldn't be here! (laughter) I wouldn't be here workin'. I'd probably be off havin' a good time, or traveling or something. But money's not the only thing. You can't take it with you. Your friends, hey.... They're gonna miss you and you're gonna miss them, probably. That's all we get out of this. That's why I guess I like to stay. I'm seventy-two years old, still goin' strong. I probably hope for another ten years or whatever.

I love these people. If I wanted to get a petition, I could probably take a bookful of it over to <Window Rock>. I tell my chapter over here, I do more for these people than you guys do, or <Window Rock> does for these people. Why am I havin' a hard time gettin' a lease? For my hard work, what am I.... Shoot, I oughta leave! I do more for 'em than you guys do, and they [<Window Rock>] does. I see that they got daily food and their everyday things are taken care of, their problems are taken care of. They don't come bother you. Who do they come to? Me! Hey, I'd better go, I'm tired of it. (chuckles) But that's the truth, layin' it out. That's the situation. There's no more traders. That's why they come from <Kayenta>, they come from all over the Rez--<Grand Canyon> and all over up here--to visit and ask me about cow prices. They may not bring me any, but they ask about it. And sheep, cattle, wool prices-- because I'm about the only one left here, and they know I talk Navajo. They like to talk [to me], so I like to talk to them. So that's about where it's at, I guess. If I went home and talked to white people, I'd miss it. I guess that's why I don't go--'cause I can't afford to go, really. I don't have that much money. But money's not it. 

Underhill: What are some of your favorite memories from over the years? 

Foutz: Oh, gee, I guess this guy Tom John, he had a fiftieth wedding anniversary. This has been probably ten or fifteen years ago or something, and he came in and the family invited my wife and I to go to that. We were living in <Cortez>, so we got up real early one morning and went to that. And I could tell early on that if anybody could make you feel like a king and a queen, why, they can when you go to somethin' like that, 'cause they put you right up with them, in front, set you right there. Weddings, we've been to weddings where they put us right on the spot, right there, nobody any better. You're there, you're their friends. And so that's it, I think. They invited us to that anniversary, and we spent the whole day--I mean, from morning--we got home after dark. The whole celebration, whatever they did, we were there with the family. We knew all the family too, or most of 'em, and the people who came to visit, the people who were invited. But it was just a little ol' happy family is what it was, and I mean they couldn't thank us enough for coming, and we couldn't thank them enough for inviting us. So you know, it was just one of those....

And early on, at the old store there, they used to invite me to their peyote meetings and stuff. They thought that was just an okay thing, that peyote meeting. And so they wanted me (chuckles) to come to that. I probably would have gone if I'd been by myself, a single man or something. I probably would have gone. But a family man, I didn't feel like I had any business goin' off and spendin' the night over _______. I don't know what-all they do, they eat the peyote, they illusionize, and they do all these things-- like I wanted to try that! (laughter) But I don't think it would have been good, so I never did. Jay and I got some buttons one time and tried 'em, and I don't know how they eat it. They're bitter as all out! I mean, you'd have to.... I don't know how they eat it. What little bit I nibbled off that, it didn't do anything. I didn't eat enough of it, I just tried it. But that little ol' button is hard. But anyway, I never did go, and I never have gone. But I was invited, and I think they would have probably treated me just like they did at the fiftieth wedding anniversary. I would have been right there. 

Underhill: Did you go to dances? 

Foutz: We went to the squaw dances quite a bit. Russell and Helen and Bernie, right after we went to <Teec Nos Pos>, we went to a squaw dance one night. Nothing but wagons, we were the only car there. And my wife will tell you to this day, she was scared to death over that. (laughter) And I can understand--the drums and the people mingling, and not knowing what was going on, not understanding a word, this, that, and the other thing. But just watching, and seein' 'em dance and do their things. She was scared to death! She said, "I was petrified." I didn't know that, really, 'til after we got back home that night, 'cause I'd been to the dances, and knew all the Indians there--or quite a few. But it was pretty new to me, too, that right there, because I didn't know all of them.

When we were kids, we'd cross that <San Juan River>. We lived right across, and the reservation's on the other side. We used to, as kids, hear about a squaw dance being over at such-and-such a place. Why, we'd wander over there and spend half or three-quarters of the night watching them. And they were good to us, put up with us. We weren't really all that naughty, but probably naughtier than we should have been. But they did put up with us, 'cause they liked us. 

Underhill: Were you involved with burials at all? 

Foutz: I buried two. I sure did. That was a terrible situation. In fact, I hadn't been at <Teec Nos Pos>.... Russell got in on one, so he sent the next one to me. But Russell had to bury one of 'em. I don't know whether he told you in his deal that he did, but he went over and buried one over at <Sweetwater>, in that area. Mine was an old fellow by the name of Frank Pete. The boys were all gone on the railroad, and there was one boy at home. His name was John Pete. He came rappin' on my window about four o'clock in the morning and said his dad was dying. So I tried to send him over to Russell. Russell was living there in the store part--we were living in this little apartment. So I tried to send him over there, and he went over there, and Russell didn't get up or wouldn't get up, or he didn't know which window to rap on, I guess.

Anyway, I got up and got around, and by the time Russell got up and around, he appointed me to do that. We kept a little good lumber, some good pine lumber, some two-by-fours and stuff, 'cause that's all you had to make a box out of to bury 'em in. We got it ready and we set off, it must have been nine o'clock in the morning, summertime, hot, dry, hadn't rained all summer. We drove over to his place, and we couldn't get up this mountainside to his house. We got about half-way up that, and the trail gave out. It was just a wagon trail, and the trail had been washed out and I couldn't get any farther with that pickup, because I was afraid of rollin' it off. So he said, "Well, stop right here, and I'll walk to the camp, see if I can find some horses or somethin'." So I thought he'd abandoned me, he was gone so long. He finally came back with a burro. I said, "What are we gonna do with that burro?!" "Horses are all gone, there's no wagon." I did have a little wire on that pickup, so we put that lumber all together, we wired it up and we stuck it in the ground and we led the donkey under it, and we put a blanket on him so that the boards wouldn't rub his back too hard and make him buck. We put that blanket on there, and I walked along and balanced the lumber. It was about three miles, after we got on top of that hill, to the camp where the old man had died. We finally got the lumber there. It was gettin' almost noon then. And so I asked him, "Where are you going to bury him?" "You're here, you know about this. You're the guy." I said, "No, not me! I'm not gonna pick the spot. If we get him in that box, who's gonna carry him over to the grave? We gotta get close to the hogan here, I can't carry that box with that man in it for a mile or two."

So we went back over just a little hump there from the hogan and there was a little spot that I thought looked like it was soft, but boy, you got about that far down and you hit that hard caliche and everything. But him and I dug on that 'til _______ grave. We got it down pretty deep, probably five foot deep. The bad part of the whole thing was that we didn't measure the box and the grave. And so we thought we had plenty of room--in the top, we did. The first four foot down, we had plenty of room. But we didn't know this until after he and I.... And we didn't have any other help to get that box in there. And how are you gonna get a box.... These morticians have all this equipment to lower them down into that grave. And so we got it, oh, about four foot down below maybe the top--or three foot--and it wouldn't go no more. We jumped on that box, we did everything to get it to go on down, but it just wouldn't go. I said, "Hey, we can't get it out, and it's gettin' dark. I got to get home." I'd had nothing to eat all day, barely a drink of water. "I gotta go." He said, "Okay." So we shoveled it up. He brought the saddle and killed the old horse right there. Before I got up over the hill, he set the hogan on fire, burned everything up, anything that belonged to the old man was all history right there. But I buried him.

And then I buried one other guy down by the <San Juan River>, down close to the Four Corners. The same thing happened there. But that's the same thing happened there. His bro--this one man was helping. I think we did a little better job then, I had a little experience. (laughter) I think I did a little better job the second time. I had lots of offers, but about that time, they started using the mortuaries. Thank the Lord that they started using other sources, instead of the trader. So it did help, and I'm glad they did, because that wasn't my favorite part of the trading business. (laughter) But I got some experience. 

Underhill: Are there any humorous episodes that you'd like to share? 

Foutz: Oh, golly, I don't know as there's any of those. Well, this one Indian was being interviewed for his welfare check, and he was about eighty-five or almost ninety years old. Great big tall Indian. He showed his age, he was ________, he was drawn up. He wore dark glasses, or you could have seen plumb through him--his eyes were set back in his head so far that if he hadn't worn the dark glasses, you'd have been able to see all the way through. But this welfare lady was interviewing him one day, and he had all these little kids out there and she was asking him about this kid and that kid. "Yours?" "Yes." Standing there, and she said, "I don't believe this, but if you say so, we're writin' 'em down." And he was claiming these kids. "At your age!" (laughter) So that was kind of humorous. I really thought that was kind of funny. She was really having a big time out of that, those little kids. The woman was claiming he's the dad. "If you say so, that's all right." 

Underhill: He's in the Guiness Book now, huh? 

Foutz: I'm sure of that. He was old. 

Underhill: Well, if there's anything that you could go back and change, would you? Is there anything you would do differently? 

Foutz: Oh, I can't think of anything really right off hand that would really change my life that much. I've enjoyed life. I haven't done much, or I haven't earned much, or I don't have much, but who needs it? Material things don't make you happy all the time. I mean, you know, you can have all those things. But I'm glad of my health. I'm really glad I've got good health. Doin’ all this, I don't know whether bein' a trader.... The Indians ask me what I eat, what I drink, to keep me so young. (chuckles) I tell 'em, "I couldn't tell you that--I'd give my secret up." (Underhill laughs) No, I don't think it's.... It's time to retire, but I just can't find a place. That's the problem. I'm kinda ready, and yet I'm not. We have some friends there in <Cortez>. We have a little home, what we call the [Hyde?] family home evening group. Every Monday night we meet, and all of us have a little refreshment and we study the scriptures and talk and just have a good time. And they're all about our age. My wife and I look about twenty years younger than they do, so they're kinda jealous of us. (laughter) In fact, one of 'em just the other day asked my wife, "When are you gonna start colorin' your hair?" Bernie said, "When I get good and ready! When I feel like I need to. Right now I don't feel like I want to look that old. I get compliments on how I look. I'm goin' with the compliments. I don't want 'em to say, 'that old lady over there....'" She wants 'em to say "that young lady over there."

So I don't know, I have good health. I have a lot better health than my brother. He has arthritis and stuff, and he hangs in there. I'd like to get him out of here more than anything, but I don't know what I'd do without him, and he doesn't know what he'd do without me. But it's been good, trading. We're proud of what we've done, I guess. About all we've got, I guess, is all we can say, is it's been good to us in a lot of ways, but we don't have a lot of material things. But we're happy with what we've got. Well, our friends--lots of friends. I mean, they've moved off, and they're still our friends. They see you in the grocery store or in town, hey, boy, they want a hug. And if they saw you yesterday, they're so glad to see you in town, or see you in the store, recognize you. You recognize them, they're just as happy as I am to see them, I guess. Even though I don't want the competition to know that, but I'm happy to see 'em, wherever. 

Underhill: Well, I'd like to thank you very much for taking time out of your day to chat with us. 

Foutz: Well, it's been fun to visit with you. I've been wantin' to tell this. My grandson wants to do this, and maybe now that I've done it once, maybe I'll know how. 

Underhill: Do some more, you bet! (laughs) 

Foutz: Maybe you might have to listen to that. I might tell things there that you don't know. 

Underhill: Absolutely. Thank you. 

Foutz: Might tell some secrets. 

Underhill: We'd like that, too! 



