Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

Ken Sleight Interview

Interview number: 53.45



Hello. This is Brad Dimock. This is a tape of Ken Sleight talking over dinner on March 29, 1993 at Brad’s house in <Flagstaff AZ>. Present are Ken Sleight, myself, Jeri Ledbetter, R.J. Johnson, Achim Gottwald, and Coby Sandlian. There’s some lead-in testing clutter on the front and then the tape clicks into the middle of a story about Ed Abbey. 

Sleight: [recording breaks in] Abbey and I both [recording breaks up] No, it'd be like Wolfe, you know, Thomas Wolfe. 

Johnson: Oh, yeah. 

Sleight: You know, "I can't go back home again," was it "I can't go back to <Pocatello>?" [laughter] 

Johnson: I can't either. 

?: He didn't say that! [laughter] 

Sleight: Well, I can't go back to <Pocatello>. And... he was always busy. I was always on trips. We could never get our act together. He bought some property up above, that he wanted to put a house in a gravely hill. He always did those type of things. He wanted a gravely hill. I think he still owns it. The estate. He couldn't take it with him, but, he's still got it... I think. Right above Willow Bend. But it was a great time. And Willow Bend is featured in Monkey Wrench Gang. And puttin' the houseboat there. All that kinda stuff. We had all these visions of... Willow Bend, I guess, is one of the few times that Ed and I had an argument. 

Dimock: Oh yeah? 

Sleight: Ay! You know, all the fence line had this rabbit brush just growin' up willy-nilly and because of the fires and what-not, you would burn down the fence posts. So I started grubbin' out all the... the rabbit brush. And Ed come up there and he was just pissed off. "What're ya doin' all that for? That's supposed to be there." And I says, "Well, Ed..." That time I called him Abbey. "Abbey." Ninety percent of the time I called him Abbey. I says, "Hey, you know, a fire catches here and it catches off. It's gonna' take all that whole fence out and we're gonna' have to put that fence right back in. Keep these goddamn cows out." And, he grumbled a while and then he took off for a writing assignment and I didn't see him again for a long time... a few months. But that was the first confrontation I think I ever had with Ed. I was grubbing out the natural terrain. And I was a farmer and of course he was too. He kept income from farm country in <Pennsylvania>. And I came from the farm country of <Idaho> and <Utah> and what-not. And it was kind of a conjoint thing that we were sayin'. That "we go back to the earth again" type of thing. Because, farming is really beautiful. Farming is really beautiful... if you've got the time to do it and enjoy it and what-not. But we were both caught up in this huge Indian writing thing and I was in my tripping thing. And I'd come back. And I really enjoyed it because when I got back to Green River, I'd just hang out. You know how it is after a trip. 

Dimock: Mmhmm! 

Sleight: It takes me two or three days to get my senses back because it's such a... a trip is so overpowering to myself. It is to all of us, I'm sure. You can't just come off a trip and then go on another one completely, without really suffering. You have to have a let down period. I do. Just let me be by myself. Whatever I want to do. I really need that. That's why I put the boatmen on. [laughter] 

Johnson: I was gonna' say! 

Sleight: Well they help alot... these damn boatmen. 

Dimock: I had one day off all summer when I worked for him and he put me on a one-day for Moki. "I'll need somebody to paddle from Nefertiti down." I was nearly killed, too. A Western boatman ran over me at the dam and pinned me into the tree. 

Sleight: Is that right? 

Dimock: Mmhmm. 

Sleight: When was that? 

Dimock: 1978. 

Sleight: Pinned you into a tree where? 

Dimock: On the dam, that old snag that used to be hung up... 

Sleight: Oh yeah, up there. 

Dimock: Yeah, I was paddling some of those little assault boats that the Quists had. We had about 15 of 'em out there. Richard was paddling one. And just before he went over the dam, 'cause he'd go just left of that tree... Just before I went over it, this Western snout rig came along, three J-tubes tied together towing another one. And it was high water so everybody's running into town. And I was just lined up. I was all set to go off it and they come roaring by me and they yell something ...oh the gos...the dam...the waves...sk-lookout. Go past me and they got sideways. Went over the dam sideways. Got caught in the reversal. And so did the boat they were towin'. But they never turned off their motor. And they motored right in front of me. And I couldn't stop. I came over. I ran in to 'em. And my boat just sort of buckled up against it. And just caught in that thing. I was in the back with my paddle under the boat, prying up off the water trying not to go completely under him. And then we went all the way through that tree. And all the way to the right side. Slammed into the right abutment and we all bounced out. But I thought we were all dead. "If I don't drown they're gonna' cut me up with their motor." 'Cause it was still full cob... Richard had some words with them. [laughter] 

Sleight: I was on that trip wasn't I? 

Dimock: I don't think so. You might've been. 

Sleight: I remember Western, if it was Western. 

Dimock: I don't think that's the only time they did that. 

Sleight: I don't remember. There was another time that we... no, it was probably another trip... jus' headin' into the rapid and here comes this big motor outfit. And outdoes us and gets in there just before. Cuts off one of our boats. And I was really pissed. I mean, I was really angry. [laughter] I was really angry. And it'd 've been so easy for them to just hold up. 'Cause we was rowing, you know. But here's a case in point, I really got angry, with... one of them. I don't remember who it was, jus' been so long. I guess that was when... just as the formation of strings of more people, more outfits, more of this. And you were jealous of your territory. It's changed so much since then. I really have to say. I really have to say, Brad, you're still with it. That's so good. 

Dimock: I get despondent now and then too. I just go, "I've had it with this business." But, I can't seem to quit. 

Sleight: No, that's just it. 

Dimock: I was tryin' to again tonight, but they wouldn't let me. 

Sleight: Man, nobody's gonna' allow ya'. Well, what... the thing is, you stay with it so long, you're in it. You can't get out of it. No matter how you try, you're still a part of this thing. And that's the way it is. There's levels, and all. I came on just as a transition period... 

Dimock: When did you start? 

Sleight: I started in 19... I took my first river trip in '51. I was invited on the trip. It was a bunch of private people. And happened to be the private people were Moki Mac Ellingson, Quist, Al Quist. You ever know him? 

Dimock: I never knew Al or Moki. 

Sleight: You knew Moki. No? But both those were on that trip and they invited me on. It was for another fellow, Jim Dean. Jim Dean was on a trip in southern <Utah> and northern <Arizona>, goin' in an old broken down car, to these different places. And on that trip, Jim Dean who knew Bert Loper, and Blane Busenbarque was on that trip. 

Dimock: Blane Busenbarque. 

Sleight: Blane Busenbarque was a nephew of Bert Loper. 

Dimock: Never heard that! 

Sleight: Yeah? Yeah, Blane Busenbarque. [laughter] 

?: Everybody knows that! 

Dimock: You're makin' that up! 

Sleight: Unuh. It's right. He's the nephew of Bert Loper. And both Jim and Blane, of course, knew old Bert. So on this trip, they told me all about Bert Loper and the whole river thing, you know. And got me excited. They says "Oh we're gonna' go on a...", that's in 1951, "we're goin' on a little trip down through <Dinosaur>, <Gates of Lodore>. We'll start at <Gates of Lodore>... Gates of Lodore Canyon and down the Green. Would you like to come along?" "Yeah, I would like to come along." "We're gonna' have ta share the expense. It's gonna' be fifteen dollars." [laughter] "Well, that's a lot of money, fifteen bucks. But I'll see what I can do." Go to ask daddy if he got fifteen bucks. [laughter] So I turned down there, I came up with fifteen dollars and decided I'll go on this trip. I didn't know any of 'em, though I knew Jim Dean. He was on that trip with me. That's the Univerity <Utah> kid, you know. And so went down to the Red Feather building where the boats are stored. Old Moki... Al Quist... happened to be the administrator of the Red Feather. That used to be the United Fund, that they give to all organizations of Boy Scouts and what-not. I was very active in the Boy Scouts at the time. And so it was just a natural. I went down there and saw all their boats and helped 'em get ready. And helped 'em put the boats on the trucks and what-not. It was a scout endeavor in a way and yet the Moki Mac and Al Quist put in their boats. That was mostly their own money. Another one workin' at that same time was John Cross. And he was taking a lot of scout groups too. But I took this private trip and it wasn't an organized trip. It was just a plain everybody sharing the expense. And went down to <Lodore>.

When I got up there at the <Gates of Lodore>, they gave me a paddle. First time I'd ever... "What is this?", type of thing. And started down the river. Rained like hell. When we got down to <Upper Disaster Falls>, why we stopped to look at it. And everybody scrambled out of the boats. And I thought I better scramble out of the boats too. And you go out and stand on a rock and look. That's what they usually do. Get out of the boat and you go down and look and you urinate a little bit and then you get back in. [laughter] I said "Well, this is pretty good stuff!" Went down and looked at it and there it is. It was decided well, Moki Mac would go through first. He was the leader of the trip. ...Al Quist, I don't remember, I think it was Moki Mac, his boat. And while they were goin' through, the rest of us stood and watched them come through. And they come down, roaring down through there. And first thing I saw is a perfect flip-over, [laughter] everybody in the river. Rained like heck, you know. It was really rainin', rainin', rainin'. And then it was somebody else's turn. I watched them go through and they did real well. They went through the right place and all that stuff. And then, I think it was us next. Jim Dean was the tiller. It was a paddle boat thing. I thought well, that's the way they do it. And they put me up there on the front, on the right. And this guy back here, Jim Dean..., tell me how to do it. Paddle on the right, paddle on the left. But we came through. And we went through that big thing and we made it. We didn't flip or nothin', we jus' went 'n sailed so good. Boy, I thought we were really great stuff. [laughter] You know when you're a kid like that, the competitiveness, you know. "Hey, we made it. What's a matter with you guys?" I think it was the competitiveness about it. 

Dimock: Oh yeah. 

Sleight: In a way, you know. 

Dimock: Always. 

Sleight: Most of the competitiveness, I think, is against yourself. Once you get ingrained into it, we all [think]... "Can I do it better? Can I really do it?" And it's such a... you make a good run. You guy's know, you make a great run, it's so good. In yourself, you know. You accept it after a while. You don't have to get up and take the bows. It's such a beautiful feeling to make a great run over and over and over and again. And then you know you've come. When you feel like you've mastered it. And then you always know there's those times. [laughs] You can really get hit. You know, you just know it. [laughs] And that's what's so fun is that you're never sure. When you get... when you start acquiring expertise and talent, which you do, then that talent is so good. But the river... you always know that you can't always, no matter how good you are. It's just somethin' or another happens or somethin' may not, whatever. 

Dimock: It's when you're sure you can do it, that's when you get thumped. 

Sleight: That's when you... yeah. It really brings a lot of self confidence, because you know you're good and you can do it. But you always know, that it might be your Waterloo. It just could. 'Cause you know that all your buddies, some of your buddies has gone that way. And there's always that fear, of protection of the people you got with you. It's a great feeling though, a great feeling to have that responsibility in a way. I feel that it's worth it. 

Dimock: Mmhmm. 

Sleight: You can't keep comin' down these rivers... If I get ready to sit down and tell 'em exactly what in the hell'd happen they may not come [laughter]. So I only tell 'em half the truth. They might die. I used to call my old trips... I used to take a number of trips I'd never been on before. They're called exploratory trips. " Come with me. We'll go up to this... I've never been there before, blah, blah, blah..." And they really... "Let's go to <Utah>, never been before." I can't afford to go up there by myself to scout it out. So I'd take a group with me. I can't afford to go to <Mexico> by myself, so "Come on with me we'll test this thing out." And I took a lot of gambles that way and not knowing the terrain or anything. I read a lot. Did what I could. But until them exploratory trips, I'd never been there. "You might die, but come with me anyway." [laughs] Hell if they didn't come! I think it was death wishes. Thank god for guys and people like Edna Fridly. She was down with me on forty trips. 

Dimock: Think I did a trip with her. 

Sleight: With Edna? 

Dimock: Yup. 

Sleight: I think so. 

Dimock: <San Juan>. 

Sleight: She's a beautiful woman. She was some Hungarian type. But Edna Fridly came with me... She probably come on several trips with you. 

Dimock: I think so. I couldn't swear to the name. 

Sleight: Her husband worked up at the defense base up there in <Brigham City>. <Brigham City Utah>. Used to get her... She comes on my trips so he gets rid of her for a week or two. He signs the checks and everything, [laughs] ...sends 'em to me. This is for Edna, trip number so-and-so. She was with me over forty trips. 

?: That's incredible. 

Sleight: Sam Carter was a man with me over twenty-three-something trips. But the reason is that I kept takin' new trips. It wasn't only river trips. It was up on the Kaipairowits with horses and all this stuff. They walk, I carried their stuff. And down the Escalante. And after I moved to Escalante well, it was a great opening to so many canyons down there, so many beautiful canyons, that they kept comin' back with me. They put up with my goofs and delays. Nothin' goes on schedule in the wilderness. Just furgit it. It's not supposed to. If it did it wouldn't be fun. And it was fun. Honest to God. If you had the best boats in the world, it wouldn't be as fun as those old ten-man that blows up. Leaky boats. Don't really know if you're gonna get to shore or not. That type of thing, you know. That new stuff is always the most intriguing thing. If everything was so secure, so everything, you knew your boatmen, you knew this, knew that, and everything was a stereotype--that's what I've had to tell the Park Service "Don't stereotype us"--it wouldn't be fun. And that's part of the reason I got out of it for a while, was that everything seemed to be the same. Now, Park Service gives you gold stars if you take badminton sets down the river and volleyball sets, and things like this. They give you a gold star. It's good on your evaluation sheet. [laughter] And if you have... take folding deals down to sit on. I love 'em myself. But I'm just sayin', I don't like 'em if everybody else is doin' it. Just like I don't like lycra because everybody's doin' it. Except I like to look at the little ladies. But it's a problem watching all the men try to do this stuff, lycra stuff. I was goin' to, one of these days... I'd take my horses in the parade. I was figurin' this. I was thinkin' I was down to the reservation, I wanted ta put my horses in the parade-- <Shiprock>, <Window Rock>, and <Bluff>. I was goin' ta dress myself up as a lycra, ride my horse. You know the deal. They got that lycra so that it's really sharp lookin'. I mean, color all over the place, sharp lookin' stuff. You know what that is. 

Dimock: Yeah. 

Sleight: [unclear] Do you have that over there? 

Dimock: Yeah. 

Sleight: Yeah, I thought so. [laughter] But I was also gonna' put it on my horses. Wouldn't that be jazzy? I was thinkin' well, maybe not the reservation but the <Moab> parade. Where there'd have to be all those bikers comin' down. And have it durin' a bike deal. And I puts a set of lycra on. I have somethin' against lycra, you know. Lycra's gotta go. [laughter] 'Cause I see it all the time on those bicycles. And I said oh yeah, the Latter Day Saint cowboys come down to <Salt Lake> riding their bikes all dressed up in lycra."

But anyway, we were up there on <Lodore>, [laughter] comin' down to <Lodore Canyon> and the first trip I was on, it was Moki Mac. We got down to <Inglesby Rapids>. All this area was going to be dammed up, you know. At that time there was a great big fight on damming up <Dinosaur>. And also <Glen Canyon>. But old Moki Mac, he... You got to know him. He is really the greatest guy. He looks just like his picture, the Moki Mac symbol. Comin' through <Inglesby> and <Inglesby> was just a great big rock. Swerve off this side, and miss it. But the water stage is just right, where Mac hit the rock. And flipped it again, the second time he flipped. And I... This is great stuff. [laughter] We zoomed around it, you know, the professionals we were. That was the first trip and I couldn't get it out of my mind. Already signed up for <Korea>. I was with the army and I had to fulfill that obligation. But after I got back, well, back to the river, type of thing. Graduated. But that was the first time and Quist, you know the Quist boys. 

Dimock: The boys must have been pretty young. 

Sleight: Oh they were squirts, real, real... It's always easier to hire out to somebody else than your own dad, type of thing. So I took em' on a few trips. Introduced 'em to some wrong things and all that stuff. [laughter] Both Claire and Bob. And then they went to <Vietnam> and all these other things and come back. Moki was getting older, so the Quist boys, they took over their dad's place. He died. But it was a great family, great family. Moki Mac was great. I thought well, this is the way the river running's s'posed to be.

I cut my teeth on boy scouts. Moki was chargin' 'em thirty-five dollars a week. Or fifty. Doesn't want to ever negotiate. Thirty-five to fifty dollars. So I went out and did the same thing. Went out and showed some slides to some of the scout groups. Assumin' I was a river guide. I didn't know much about it. And I says " Come on down". I bought those ten-man boats that were fifty dollars each, fifty bucks each. I could get three without too much problem but after that I didn't have that much money. So I got three boats and started a river company down in <Glen Canyon> and also <Dinosaur>. Those three boats and all those paddles that came with 'em. You know, the packet. It all comes as a [dutch?] You got the boat, you got the paddles. I don't know how many paddles, four or five maybe. I don't remember. You had plugs that screwed in the bullet holes as they came into Normandy beach. [laughter] Well they had those squirrely things. I kept those 'round for quite a while. I never had occasion to use 'em. 

Dimock: We used one on one of your trips. 

Sleight: Did ya? 

Dimock: Yeah. Trip you broke your jaw on. 

Sleight: Oh yeah. Were you on that trip? You brought us through safely. 

Dimock: No, I survived too. We sliced a boat and Bob Quist pulled out one of those bullet patchers. And he said, " This'll fix it." 

Sleight: I was carryin' a bullet patch? I mean, one of those bullet things? 

Dimock: Well, it was in Bob's boat and he was on that Moki trip running parallel. You trained him to carry 'em. 

Sleight: I kept wonderin' what am I gonna do with this? And yet you have to know me because I don't throw very many things away. I just keep 'em. I horde things. Got papers from way back. One time I got discouraged and I threw a lot of stuff away. Mark and my other kids they went to the dump one time and they used their own volition and throw a lot of stuff away in Green River. 'Cause it was really crappy stuff. And Moki was the same way. His trailer was just filled right to the top. With all of his stuff, memorabilia, you know. "Maybe I'll use this some day", and packrat type of stuff. Where was I? 

Dimock: Boy scouts. 

Sleight: Oh yeah, the boy scouts, fifty dollar deal. We were [A.G. takes a flash picture of Ken] That's gonna cost ya a hell of a lot, to repair that camera. ag: How much? 

Sleight: I don't know. ag: It just went off by accident. 

Sleight: I have to tell they really charge for those cameras now. To repair them. It's easier to just throw 'em away and go get a new one. That's the way they do it nowadays. You can't repair anything. You just gotta throw it away and go buy a new one. Isn't that true? 

Dimock: Yeah, it's cheaper. 

Sleight: A computer... Honest to God, I've never seen anything like it. You go get a computer and I say "Well what's the trade in?" And there isn't any. I got some old typewriters. 

Dimock: They're [computers are] garbage the second you buy 'em. 

Sleight: It's amazing! I never seen anything like it. All these beautiful- This nice typewriter, it went peculiar or I don't remember what it was, or I was trading it. "How much trade in?" And I'm expectin', you know, it cost me about two or three hundred dollars. It was really expensive stuff. I thought a three hundred dollar typewriter, wow, IBM, deal. Course IBM is not worth much either. 

Dimock: No. 

Sleight: But now, it's amazin' when I wanted to trade that in, they wouldn't give me anything. Wouldn't give me anything. 

Johnson: How you doin', there? 

Sleight: Boy I, [unclear] doin' wonderful. This whole thing just blows my mind. But back on the river. 

Dimock: Meanwhile, back on the river... ?: Fifty-dollar boats. 

Sleight: But I took a lot of these boy scouts down. I was really heavy into the boy scouts at that time. So I took 'em for a couple years and kept goin' in debt and I couldn't understand it. I was takin' kids down for fifty dollars each for six days through <Glen Canyon>. I says I can't keep this up. I'm just goin' broke. So I says, well, scouting has gotta go. I tried to get more money out of 'em but there was this Socatua outfit. I don't know if you ever heard of them or not. S.o.c... , they were a Mormon outfit out of <Salt Lake City>, and they catered to all these scout groups. 

?: In <Glen Canyon>? 

Sleight: Yeah. In <Glen Canyon>. Socatua. It had a tragic ending because they had about twenty-three, twenty-five deaths during their period of operation. A tremendous amount. And that's another story. But, it was just a non-profit outfit. Just said "Come on." and they all paddled. If you've gone down once, you can be a leader on the next trip, or somethin' like that. It wasn't really organized or anything. There was no rules and so forth. But I was takin' all these scout groups and I just got to a point where I couldn't take 'em anymore. I says, "Okay, I'll raise my price to a hundred dollars, a hundred and twenty-five and take adults for a week." So I did that and I started making a little money. At least my wife wasn't gonna' divorce me right quick. I started makin' a little money. Then I raised it a little more and I was takin' adults from then on. I couldn't make it with young kids. I just couldn't do it. But Moki Mac, he could do it. He took twenty-five, thirty, or thirty-five kids. He had the knack. Old Moki, he could do it on a shoe-string. And I couldn't. I didn't have the personality for that. Moki had a tremendous rapport with kids.

I have to tell you [about] one time, just to show you. I used to have him comin' down to help me out on my trips after I got goin' on the adults. To show you his personality... we were camped there on a bank and it was on a slickrock. It was a nice little campsite up there at <Labyrinth Canyon>. At that time I used to usually get an old rustic type of... just put two logs close together and put a fire in between 'em and then put the pots in on the logs you know, boy scout way. It was good. At that time we had a lot of wood. Wasn't a lot of people goin' down the river. But somehow this one gal, [from] <China Lake California>, she said "I want to help." And Ol' Moki says "Oh, yeah, get in there and stir that deal." Well, she started stirrin' that deal... a big pot of stew. I didn't make great meals, just stew and all this stuff. I like much like Georgie. You're there to see the canyon, you're not there to enjoy the meal. Fact is, if you didn't enjoy the meal, you'd see more of the canyon, right? [laughter] I had no salads, there was nothing, just a big pot of stew. She was stirring that vigorously and very happy. And Moki was there and urges her on. I guess she was too exuberant and she spilled the damn thing. Went right on and spilled the whole pot right on the slickrock. She started cryin'. That's one way out, cry. She loved to have an edge [unclear]. She was cryin' and Moki came up and put his arms around her. Says, "Ah this is great! okay folks. Come on around. Bring your spoon." [laughter] First thing... Moki, he got down on his knees and took a spoon. Started eatin' it right off the slickrock [laughs]. And others got down and it got to be the most comical thing. Eatin' that meal off of that... Some of the people that wasn't quite acclimated to eatin' off the rock. They took their plate and scooped it into the plate. And ate it off the plate like civilized people do. Moki, he saved the day! Obviously, he got everybody to love it, because everybody was really roughin' it. And I pulled out a few carrots and other things that they could eat and what-not, that type. And it turned off real well because of Moki's personality. And I was ready to clobber the gal. But I learned a lot from Moki, because he... nothin' is that serious. Honest to God. It really isn't. Sometime I get that way. I say "Hey". I'm from the old english school, Victorian age. My granddad used [to say]... "Got to do it this way." All the boatmen I had are much more liberal minded than I was. When I set up a camp for instance--this you'd never know--it had to be just so-so--parallel to the river. They would throw it any old way. In my mind I... never mind, it was great. 

Dimock: I did that on purpose just to [unclear, laughter] with ya'. 

Sleight: But it was cocked this way; I would go and straighten it out. I don't know if you ever remember that or not. 

Dimock: I do! 

Sleight: Oh sure, it was a little strange. [laughter] 

Dimock: All I remember is settin' it up on purpose, crooked, just to see what you did. 

Sleight: But the thing is, it was in a transition thing that I saw that there's others that can do it better than I can do it. And once you learn that, you can let go. You start lettin' go. And it's so good. Did you ever know Peggy? Peggy Midas. She was one of my girlfriends from <New York>. 

Dimock: I met her. 

Sleight: Yeah, from <New York>. She taught me a lot of things. But liberal. Let yourself go. Life's not that threatening. You don't have to have it exactly this way. It works good this way as well as that way. And I found that out. I especially found that out through Moki. Because he did it really... and the Quists. All my boatmen had their own ways. I think that Kim was pretty structured. In fact more than I was, I think. I couldn't quite understand putting the tarps under for ants. I was... I... I... that's okay. That's the environmental thing. It took me a long time. And also it was hard for me to acclimate myself to separating the charcoal in those buckets. That was hard. And the ants. Puttin' things under the table to catch the crumbs. That was tough. But it was an evolution. When I first started runnin'... And I know, the tape's goin'. When I first started runnin', I did like the ol' cowboy. Go down and camp on the river bank. Open a can. That's what I did, cans you know. Nalley beef stew. Open it up, swish, swish, pour it in. And what do you do with the can? You're right next to the crick, right? I mean the river. You're right next to the river; throw it in, great big heave. See how far you can throw it out in. And open the next one, and out it goes in the river. Another one, out into the river. And that's how we got rid of our stuff. There's evolution down the way. We started cleanin' up our act. I took a few Sierra Club groups down. And they said "You shouldn't do that!" One or two was brave enough to come and tell me "You shouldn't do that." I said "Well, it's just goin' down to the bottom of the crick, the bottom of the river and so forth so it's okay" I kept doin' it because it didn't have that much criticism. So I still [unclear]. Well then I started... it was when I started runnin' <Grand Canyon> that I started looking. And after a lot of criticism, I decided well, I won't do that no more... in sight. [laughter] So what I would do is, after everybody had gone to bed--I'd save all the cans and so on--then I'd go to the end of the boat and dump 'em in after everybody's in bed. And they would go on down the crick. It was okay. But down in <Grand Canyon>--what is it, <Deer Creek>. At <Deer Creek>, everybody takes the loop around and goes up on top. I didn't go that day. Somebody else led the group up there. I stayed down on the boat. Everybody was out of sight, so I took--after everybody was gone--I cleaned up the night-before thing easy, and so forth. Nobody around. So I went out to the back of the boat and dumped all those tin cans and all the garbage and so forth into the river. I didn't know that those guys were up there lookin' down. [laughter] You know, 'cause they go up there and then they look down. And they see all your boats and everything. Right at that time, I don't know why I did it. But I was just cleanin' up cans. And when they got back, I heard about it. But that was the last time I've ever thrown anything in the river. Honest to God. Because they were so correct. I sure learned my lesson. It's so much easier to take out.

When I was goin' down the Escalante once--it was a Sierra Club group--this little lady was behind me and was walkin' down the Escalante. I always carry a lot of candy in my pockets and so forth. Take it out. Unwrap and take the paper wad and throw it in the crick, the <Escalante River>. And after a little while, this gal said "Hey, don't do that!". And I says, "How come?" "Well, it's not the thing to do, you know." She was from <San Francisco>... somewhere back in <California>. When we had a chance to sit down and rest, we talked about it again because she embarrassed me. I couldn't get it off my mind. She called my attention throwin' this wad of little paper in the <Escalante River>. When we had a chance to sit down, I says, "That little paper that's goin' down the river is gonna' be covered over. Look at all that stuff goin' down the river, all this debris. Great big logs, ma'am. You oughta' see dead cows comin' down here. All the time. And all these logs and you're worried about a little piece of paper! Little piece of paper. And I says, well, if you just knew what was comin' down here during the big floods and so forth." And she started tellin' me everything that was wrong with it. And she was right. You take that same thing and put it in a smaller stream and it means a lot, in a little crick. The Thoreau type of cricks that they got there, it means a lot... 

[end tape 1 side 1] 

I was very defensive about that time 'cause I was caught red-handed throwin' the stuff [chuckles] in the crick. And when she said I wasn't too environmentally oriented, I got defensive. I asked her where she was when the <Glen Canyon Dam> was built. I said "Did you write a letter against the <Glen Canyon Dam> ma'am?" "Naw, I didn't write a [letter]." "Well, did you know that this <Glen Canyon Dam> is gonna cover all this stuff?" I was really layin' it on. Because I was right, a little piece of wad of paper makin' a great big mountain out of a molehill type of thing. I said "Let's get on somethin' that's really important." All these environmentalists were [unclear] for <Glen Canyon Dam>. Now let's get it in perspective. At the time [unclear] the Sierra Club was campaignin' for preserving the <Dinosaur> part. And they sold off <Glen Canyon>. It was one of those places that they say that they never knew.

That was my cop-out. I was tryin' to justify my throwin' a little piece of paper in the crick. And yet here was this... I brought up the mighty <Glen Canyon Dam>. But I was wrong in sayin' all [that]. She had sensitiveness about throwin' paper into a crick. And I really had a rough time. I wish I hadn't said it because she was right. When you take it from where she comes from, her perspective, she was right. But I was lookin' through my perspective and I thought I was right. Especially when I throw tin cans in the creek. [laughter] But then they come up later on sayin' well you got to take your crud out, your excrement and all that stuff. And then they says well we couldn't have fire and we couldn't do this and do that. And it was always traumatic one time or another. Things have changed and sometimes we've been able to adapt to it. And I guess... do they have fires down there now? 

Dimock: Sometimes we do. 

Sleight: Yeah. I says "Okay, you're not goin' to allow me to... [unclear, false start] saying I can't do anything in <Grand Gulch> anymore. I can't build a fire." I said " Well, this is the epitome. I gotta have a fire, 'cause I can't see my people I'm talkin' to." It's not near as fun in the dark as it is when you can see [laughs]. I mean, God, you gotta' have the light. A little bit anyway, I mean, a little glimmer... So you can see the, you know, when the boatmen are tellin' stories and what-not, you want to be able to see their face. It's really enjoyable. I cannot understand how you can have a camp program without a fire. I really still can't. I really have a rough time with it. Sittin' there in the dark. After the hours I think that's fine. But during the campfire. [It's] very hard to talk to a group. I had to have it so I started takin' down fire logs of my own. We started out with fire logs. Somehow that bag of fire logs's always a full bag, by the time we got back... [laughter]. But there are certain places that you don't have fires or you don't pick up wood because there's none. We started in on stoppin' way above in order to get wood. They still maybe do, I don't know. But we stopped way above and got wood and loaded it in the boat and go on down to camp. We didn't depend upon wood from the immediate area. I thought that was fine. In the old days, well, there never was days [unclear] there was <Glen Canyon>... they... great big thing, heaped up driftwood. Boatmen go out there and just set it afire just for the hell of it. Just to see a big fire. 'Cause there was so much driftwood when they first started running. And the driftwood replenished itself year after year after year. So it was hard for me to visualize why, no wood burning. 'Cause there's so much of it. But there are certain areas in <Grand Canyon> that got to be a problem because you'd end up at camp without any wood. So you go out and start breaking off some branches, this and that. That's what precipitated this whole no fire thing. But still_ And then while we hav*******days." So what, you know. The sun comes glaring down and it's innocuous after a while. You didn't even know it was there. The rain comes down and pushes it off the rock. And it's true, but getting to a point where... So we started carrying it out. But I was talking [about] throwin' things in the river. I was just doing exactly what we did back on the farm. We just throw all of our stuff in the gully, nearby gully, or somethin'. And out on the range we'd just throw our tin cans out. And that was the ol' cowboy way. It'll eventually go. Which it did. But we're still seein' a lot of the ol' cowboy stuff, you know, it's still... It wasn't the right thing to do. And yet they're collector's items now. 

Dimock: Yeah. 

Sleight: You find an old cowboy camp and old cans of... evaporated milk can. They're collectors items. That's what I throw out. Collectin' my old cans. [laughter] When I was a kid that's what we did. We'd just leave the cans out. And just threw 'em off away from the camp. But now, I feel like why not bring everything out? It's just so natural. No reason to leave it there. 

Dimock: It's all different now. 

Sleight: It is. 

Dimock: More people and a heavily compromised wilderness, incapacitated wilderness that can't recover so well. 

Sleight: But you know, Brad, another hard thing is for me, just racin' for campsites. Or hopin' you get a certain camp. The one you really like and what-not... you get there, it's taken. At first, I started when there started bein' all that down there, you'd come along another group and you'd say "Hey, where you camping?" Well they'd say " We're goin' to camp down at so-and-so." Well they said where they were going to camp. And maybe that's where I was gonna' camp. So maybe I would go somewhere else, because I knew that they were goin' there. But after you get so many, pretty soon you stop and go over to 'em and say " I'm camping over at so-and-so, where are camping?" "I'm going to camp at so-and-so, where are you going to camp?" Well you've already told 'em where you're goin' to camp. And that's exactly what precipitated this. And pretty soon you don't even talk. I remember back in <Glen Canyon>, Harry Aleson was runnin' a lot. And I really got to like the guy. And he ran with Georgie White a lot in the early days. It was Harry that you'd meet on the river and we'd float along for a while, both groups, you know, his and mine. And we'd exchange pleasantries and so forth and then Harry'd say "Hey, why don't ya camp with us tonight?" How many groups did that then. "Let's camp together." "Okay" We'd camp together a lot of times, a mile above <Forbidding Canyon> where you go up to <Rainbow Bridge>. And it was the most delightful thing. Listening to ol' Harry tell his stories. It was delight..."Well, let's get together." It was a comraderie in those early days that you wanted to, 'cause you only saw maybe one or two parties on the whole trip. Harry was a very special person because he could really tell stories. And I learned a lot. Main thing about Harry, everywhere I went, down this Glen country and elsewhere, I'd see his name, his initials: HLA, carved in the rock, HLA. Sometimes there was another one. Georgie, I never saw Georgie's name on the rock. HLA though, but I knew Georgie and Harry was together. One time I took a group up on the Fifty-mile Mountain, Kaipairowits Plateau, out of Escalante. And by the time I got up there and got the food cooked and all, everybody started bein' bedded down. After it was all over, I went over to try to find a... Peggy and I, and try to find a cave, 'cause it threatened to rain. And we went over to this one outcropping and there was this little cave that we went into and got out of the rain. It rained some that night. The next morning, opened my eyes and look up at the ceiling of the cave. Right up above me HLA. Harry had beat me. 

Dimock: Was he with Peggy that time? [laughter] 

Sleight: He wasn't with Peggy. 

Dimock: You sure? 

Sleight: Georgie was. That was the trip that Georgie and Harry was out there on the Kaipairowits. They had this signal that they were givin' to some people in Escalante. But they were gonna' put a big fire or somethin'. They built a great big damn fire up there on the edge to signal the folks in Escalante to come and get 'em. So they built this great big fire. And somehow the folks in Escalante didn't see it, the signal to come get 'em [from] the Hole-in-the-Rock area. So nobody came that next morning. So they started hoofing it. And they walked about forty miles towards Escalante before they decided, well, they better come and check. They had a lot of experiences together ol' Georgie and Harry. Even down in <Grand Gulch> I ran into a lot of Harry's HLA's. Didn't mind puttin' his HLA on the rocks. I used to take a lot of trips with Harry, in <Glen Canyon>. After Harry was doin' it on his own, Georgie was doin' her own thing. And Harry was really... it was after he got married on the river there. We started taking conjoint trips. Harry was really having a rough time with his stomach. He got poisoned, you know, in the war. And he was suffering like hell. And so we advertised together in Desert Magazine. We got quite a number of people. Enough for two groups. Harry took a set of boats. I took a set of boats. Harry's way, he camped off to the side. I camped off to the other side. He fed his people. I fed my people. He had folding tables. He set his people down. Then he folded the tables and got the seats and everthing. Put a table cloth. He's very [unclear] you got to know Harry. He's great. And there they would sit. He would sit them and there they sit until the meal was over. And he would serve them. [unclear] And I was a hundred yards down the way and had my dutch oven and pots and pans. Cookin' off the ground. Beef stew, Nalley beef stew. [laughter] And it was such a contrast. Harry went through all the different courses. It wasn't as great as we do today. It was much more simple. But yet, he went through the motions. He was a great English type, you know, that just enjoyed doin' that type of thing.

But after he took care of his group, I took care of my group, we'd all come together in one great big deal. And sit there and I would let him tell the stories. I egged him on, "Tell more stories." Never forget one night. Here I get rattlin' on. But one night at near the mouth of <Forbidding Canyon>... about twelve, fifteen of us... He had his group. I had mine. But we all just joined. We saw each other every day, and hiked together some of the time. And he started tellin' this story. I guess about Everett Reuss or somebody else, but doesn't matter. And it started sprinkling. And people says... they was started being concerned about their bedrolls out there wherever they'd bedded down. And Harry kept talking. He hadn't finished his story. It'd be impolite to leave without Harry giving the word that they ought to go. Evening's over with. So Harry kept talking. And the story went on and on. And if you know Harry, he closes his eyes and keeps goin' just a rambling deal. And the people got up. Everyone started standin' up when it was rainin' a little harder. And a little harder. And Harry kept talking. Well somebody in the outer ring,.. they always start going to the outside. Then they slip off. [unclear] 'Cause they don't want to be too noticeable. Go out and cover up their bedroll or just stay away, you know. They stay there after they get back. They get in bed. And one by one, left. And Harry kept talking. And by the time finally the last person... (I think he did this on purpose. I really couldn't believe it.) He kept talking. And it was rainin' and we was all gettin' wet. And everybody was gone. And finally the last one went. And Harry was still talking. And pretty soon he opened his eyes and just Harry and I was there... [laughter] "I guess we better get to bed." He was that type. He was that type. I think he just wanted to see how long those folks would stay. I really- I don't know. Because he kept his eyes closed and he kept talking. How he knew everybody was gone besides just he and I... I was about to go myself. 

Johnson: I'll be goddamned. 

Sleight: I was too damned curious. I wanted to see what was gonna happen. 'Cause I kinda liked the guy, I really did. He came to stay with us. He and Dottie stayed at our house for quite a while. He had cancer of the stomach. He was up in the veteran's hospital. She stayed with us in <Bountiful>. It was a delightful time to have Dottie and see Harry quite a bit. And then he got better, somewhat better. I think they even did a number of things together, went out on trips. I think he even took another trip. Then they put him back in the hospital in <Prescott> and that's where he died. I was there about two days before he died. He was so weak then that Dottie just stood right with him all the time. That lasted a while. He was so thin when I saw him last. I guess I was closer to him than any other boatman ever. He and Moki, I guess, I was closest to. Over a long period of time. 

Dimock: You went to his wedding didn't you? 

Sleight: Yeah. I went to his wedding and that was another big story. Taking the... Startin' out from Hite. My job was to meet Bill Wells down at the wedding site at Lost Eden. I was gonna' meet Bill Wells at Hall's Crossing. But I got stopped by Woody Edgell at Hite and we had a few drinks and I didn't get away from there 'til midnight. Me and my dog. It went all night long. I didn't get down to the place to pick up Bill. That's when Dock Marston- when they pulled out the whiskey, Bert Loper's whiskey. Drank it all. And ended up none for me. I knew as soon as I got there that night... I think it was a night and then a day. I'd been exploring that day before, then I met them. I knew I should have gone down to the wedding place. But, I , well... "I'll just wait for Bill Wells here." He's the flying bishop from <Hanksville>. So I waited for Bill. But while I was doin' that, they were down there on the bank drinkin' Bert's whiskey, that they got out of the boat in <Grand Canyon>. I don't think that's been written up, of Bert's whiskey. But it was really an instrumental thing. And it meant a lot to Harry. It was under his Dodge station wagon seat for a long time. When we went up ta' Yukon River he stopped there in <Bountiful>. And uh, that's when he told me that he was goin' to have it for a special occasion one of these days. Took his PowerWagon up there. He had it for a long time. That's when we stopped in to see Edna Fridley. The same time we was goin' up to Yukon. Harry had a separate trip than I did on the Yukon. We's both up there at the same time. He's the one that kinda got me interested in the Yukon anyway. I decided to take a trip up there so I advertised all this "Come on with me, I never been there. I don't know a damn thing about it." I got some of those little flyers, you know. I looked at some of them. And so, oh wow, I look at those and why would anybody ever come? When anybody puts out that type of simplistic stuff. But they did. It was really amazing. And I think the type of people that went in those days... entirely different than today. Not all of them, of course. But I think there was a real urge, a real gut feeling to know the canyon, canyons in those days. If you ever go, you've done it, I'm sure Brad. Look through some of the old Desert Magazines. Way back. The first ones. There's a certain spirit about that magazine. It was controlled circulation of course. We were advertised in it, Harry and I, and a few other outfitters. It was the best medium that we had. But you got a people that really wanted the outdoors. They weren't there to eat and they weren't there to socialize. They just wanted to see the canyon. They were most all were individualist type. Not the lycra set. [laughter] They could tell me to go to hell, just like Edna. She used to say, "This is a piss-poor camp you set up." I'd say "Yeah Edna, it's not the best." And it was okay. I enjoyed the criticism from Edna. It was really a lot of fun to get balled out by Edna. You knew you had her attention. Edna's a beautiful woman. 

Dimock: She still alive? 

Sleight: Uhhuh. Just hanging on though, I think. I stopped in about a year ago. And we had 'em down the ranch two or three times. But she won't get out anymore, if it's gonna rain. This little gal went down <Grand Gulch>. She knew I was goin' down so she wanted to go down there early. So she backpacked [unclear] a certain amount, a light backpack. Went down there and I was gonna pass her up. Then she was gonna walk out with us. But we went on down... Vaughn Short was with me. We went on down to the mouth of the canyon. And it started rainin', rainin' like hell. Here come some of the little floods. And Vaughn he was... he was such a great guy. He went down to find Edna. And he found Edna a number of miles down. By that time, the water's coming up. They're wadin' back and forth across the cricks to bring her back up to our camp. And we got up there, and there we sit for four days. It kept raining and flooding and all these things. It didn't rain all the time but you know it takes a long time for the water to run off. It seems like well, the water's just about down, I guess we can just about go. We'll probably leave tomorrow morning. And here comes another big rain. Okay, nullifies what our plans were and there we sit. It was a six day trip. More than we'd planned on. Four days we were sitting there. So we decided, well, we can't go down. So we went back out. Same way we came in. And that took a whole day. Lots of quicksand and things. They got back up. Edna, I remember her churnin' down... She followed us, churnin' down that old mucky road down the Moqui Dugway and that stuff. I told the group there that "Well, you didn't get your money's worth, I guess. You still have two days comin'. Take it out of the next trip." That type of thing. We drank Edna's whiskey and everybody else's whiskey. Nichols was on that trip, you know Nichols. 

Dimock: I don't think I do. 

Sleight: Huh? 

Dimock: I don't think I do. 

Sleight: Oh. He was a tremendous man. Vaughn Short was really good on that. Cause he really brought a certain element of you know... performed every night. Wrote really good poetry. Tad Nichols. 

Dimock: He'll be up here this weekend. 

Sleight: Tad Nichols was on that trip. Tad Nichols. Said he kept lookin' up. Just a lot of [unclear]. We were camped. Had our horses there in a limited area. And we camped up there in the ruin. That's a no-no now you know. But we didn't give a damn, I guess, because... survival, right? It wasn't a regulation at that time so it was okay in a way. We didn't do anything. But those four days you get up and guide people up and down this cliff. Same cliff for four days. You look at the same petroglyphs, the same ruin. It gets pretty old after a while. [laughter] Yet, I'd never seen such... I'll have to talk to Dan about that. It was great because we did drink our whiskey and pass the time. And yet everybody really was good spirited that whole time. Four days in one place, couldn't move, except in the immediate area. We had Tad tell his story about giving Everett Reuss a ride in his little pickup, with his burro. Good stuff. I guess everybody would pick everybody's mind. I just wish I'd written everything down. That was a shame, of all these years I just got scraps of paper. But spurred my memory of what went on. That's really bad, because, like I was sayin' earlier, I was a transition. That was really a transition time. Knowin' some of the older timers and that was living and what-not. And then meeting the new age. The new age is when they... What is the new age? I guess the new age... I think the new age is when I quit. I mean, not quit, but really got out. You had to race for camp. You had to... You were always seein' somebody on the river. And your camp is taken. That always bothered me that I couldn't just float and camp anywhere I wanted. In Desolation it wasn't so bad because I could camp anyhere, you know. Okay... I think..."Pull over here." That type of thing. In <Grand Canyon>, you know, you can't. Really, on some of those places, you just can't do it. Unless you want to be on a lot of talus or a rock, which I've been on before. Customers don't like it. [chuckles] 

Dimock: That's why I run in October and April. You can still pretend it's not like that. 

Sleight: I know it. I know it. You take your time. 

Dimock: Strategic. Strategic hits now. Have your little campfire, nobody knows the better. 

Sleight: Up in <Grand Gulch> they now say I can't take trips to the lower Canyon in <Grand Gulch>. Can't take anymore up in Bullwhip. So that means more or less that the trips I know, everything's stereotyped. Real short trips. They're gonna let more outfitters in there. And then they have all in a certain camp that they designate along with the hiker groups. And it's just getting so that they stop the fun that you used to feel. And I told 'em I'll take my groups out, if they start environmental planning. They just found that there's not gonna be anymore horse trips, then I'll take my group out. I have no problem with that. But I don't feel like they ought to fill up the canyon with oodles of other outfitters. They bring sheep back in. And put sheep out. Now they're bringing those sheep back in. They call 'em those- they call 'em llamas. [laughter] 

Johnson: What do you call them? 

Sleight: They're sheep. Took us a long time, us cattle people, to get those sheep out. And now they're bringing 'em back, those llamas. So they want to put them down in the canyon. But what's terrible is they shit in every stream they cross. Course, I don't say that my horses don't either. But that gets into a competitive thing. The old cowboys doesn't want the sheep to come in. I don't want the llamas to come in. This is the way to do it. Even though there's a better way, I'm gonna resist. 

Dimock: You got to! 

Sleight: There's a certain type of thing. What do they call it? Not an ego, but you feel so, this is the way, this is the old cowboy way. I'm gonna do this. This is the only way. And it's hard to change. I can see the old cowboy and their beef and here comes all the damned old sheep. I can see the reason for that's not only cause they desecrate the land, it's because they feel threatened. In a way, I feel threatened by those goddamned llamas. 

[Break to Side 3, 043 to 084] 

Dimock: It's kinda like there's Born Again boatmen, you know. 

Sleight: That's true. 

Dimock: You get in it for a while and you get out of it. And you do somethin' else and all of a sudden somethin' comes flyin' through the air and... 

Sleight: It's always us sayin' hey, to hell with it. I'm gonna' do something else. Just gonna fade away, like McArthur did. Like old soldiers, never die. After <Glen Canyon Dam>, you know, I was thinkin' well to hell with it. They can have their river. It's all shot anyway. They've ruined everything because of the dam. I went up on the Yukon and explored all that area. When I say explored, not just the river but... I was plannin' on makin' a cabin up there, in British Columbia or somewhere up there, you know. I had visions of ... I'm getting the hell out of here. I'm gonna go where it's really wilderness, 'cause they ruined it all down here. I went up there, down the Yukon. And I was thinkin', maybe I'll go to Dawson. I could build a nice little business here, takin' people on the river. It always had to equate the wilderness with... that's what you like to feel. You know you feel real wilderness type. And you wonder how you can capitalize on it. A guide service, ah yeah a guide service. I enjoy takin' people out. So I went up there for quite a while and looked around. First thing I knew there was all the damned mosquitoes. [laughter] Mosquitoes, mosquitoes, mosquitoes, in early July. And then later July, it was colder than hell and the days were short. I enjoyed the time that I was way up there, and you see the sun come down, and it never did set. It went back up again. That was something so exciting. But I found the Yukon and up there, it's great for just a little while. Just a little while and then it didn't hold my interest. When it got cold. Indians up there asked me if I want to go out on a... Eagle City... if I wanna go out on a trapping deal. And come back up in the winter. I was really tempted. If it wasn't... I spent my childhood, you know, it snowed clear up to here. And it was cold, we were at Bear Lake. And I just... not my cup of tea, going out on a dogsled and colder than all get out. So I never did go up. I wished I had now. It's interesting. 

[Break to side 3, 315 to 340] 

Dimock: [Speaking of Dock Marston] gather more information than anybody in the world, and then put these wild Freudian twists to it, you know, like Nevills committed suicide because I made him do it. And Powell was a momma's boy. And boy, that was so tragic because he was such a great historian other than that. 

Sleight: Yeah, that's what irritated everybody is in the history... I talked to all these historians at the state here in <Utah> and they feel the same way. The ego was just a little too much. He had a great ego. [laughter] My dog didn't even like him. 

Dimock: You know Vaughn tells a great story about your dog and Dock Marston. 

Sleight: He just hated him. My dog just didn't like Dock. And I had to keep him tied up the whole time. Because he wouldn't let him out of the boat. The whole trip. Boy, that was on the wedding party. He wouldn't let Dock on. It was from the very beginning, he saw Dock, didn't like him at all. I got along with Dock real well. [unclear] -mad with him but he just screwed things up in his mind. He always come out with conclusions that was not... he just jumped at conclusions. 

[Break to side 3, 380 to 457] 

Johnson: You were talking about him having that bottle of whiskey out of Bert Loper's boat before. What was the story on that. 

Dimock: Harry Aleson had it. 

Sleight: Harry Aleson. They pulled the boat over and he took the whiskey out of the bottom of the boat. Not much is said about it. All I know is what Harry Aleson told me and it's getting further out all the time. But I know that Harry told this story to me a number of times about Bert's whiskey. But I thought I saw that bottle [unclear... under the seat of Harry’s?] PowerWagon. 

Dimock: Was it a home brew or was it a bottle of whiskey from the store. 

Sleight: It was a bottle of whiskey, I don't know the kind. 

Dimock: Just some bottle of whiskey from somewhere. 

Sleight: I can't remember. But I know that bottle... he says "You know this bottle?" In the PowerWagon, that was in <Brigham City> when I was stopped to see Edna. And that's the last it. 'Cause I went up to <Brigham City> with Harry. And Harry stopped to collect a little money for a past trip or something, to help him on his way. That's where I got aquainted with Edna. That was the time that I really got part of the story about the Bert Loper thing. And another thing that he did- Harry was strange. Not strange-strange, but had idiosyncracies. He stopped there, exploring around there at the mouth of North Wash just above there. And there was a little cave where Powell and his men stopped to do a lot of work repairing their boats. When Harry was lookin' around, trying to retrace their tracks, which he liked to do. He was a historian [unclear] man, really nice. Found this strip of ... apparently it was an old boat. It must have been stripped off from another one and he had some good ideas that it was part of the Powell boat so he did the same damn thing. He took that strip of part of the boat. It's so nebulous in my mind right now, I know it was a strip of... and he says "I took that and I cut it into little pieces" with a band saw... All that deal. There's about fifty-some sections that he cut. And he says "I'm giving this, a little piece of this to all my friends." And who he gave those pieces of Powell's boat to... It must have been the Canonita. It was tough to repair one of those boats. Time has kind of... I really can't pinpoint. I know it was there just above North Wash that he found this strip of wood. And he took it and he cut it in pieces. But he says "Okay, I'm going to give this to all of my friends." And I kept saying to myself "Well, when's my piece of wood coming?" [laughter] 

Dimock: Did he ever send you one? 

Sleight: I never got a piece of the wood. But I was gonna ask Dottie about that. I don't know if Dottie's still living or not. She's from Oceanside, <Carlsbad California>. 

Dimock: Did she take his name? 

Sleight: Oh yeah. 

Dimock: She went by the name of Aleson? 

Sleight: Dorothy Aleson. 

[Brad, does it end here?]<

