STEIGER: This is videotape original number two we’re going on here.  How do we segue into this?  You want to talk about Mike...?

WILSON:  I’d like to specifically talk about Mike.  Mike Castelli and I worked together.  Our training involved one or two of the same people that I had together, but at different times.  And Mike is the person who has me in this position of sitting in front of this camera right now, and I have to really thank him for doing that.  But if it were to have been done right we’d use a wide angle lens and have Mike and I sitting next to each other.  Because we did quite a little bit of stuff together.  We did a lot of trips where they were simultaneous single boat trips.  We both really really seemed to--I really loved a single boat trip over a two boat or a three boat trip, and he seemed to too.  So we managed to pass each other on the river all the time, just have a little bit of fun right along as we would go.  So, you know Mike is an important person in my life in that respect, and I’ve kept in touch with him.  He’s always helped me.  He got me my first computer, told me what to buy and gave me a good deal on it.  So now I’m stuck with an incredibly good Macintosh computer, and it’s just amazing.  [laughs]  Well I’d been thinking of him but I didn’t know how to fit it in, so here we are.  Now, where’d we leave off?  I’ve already forgotten.  God, I hate that.

STEIGER:  Yeah, me too.  What were we talking about?  What was my name again?  [laughter]  Well I think we had been talking about the flows and how low it was.  You were talking about weaving around through the rocks.  How exciting that was, and then certain rapids that were tough...

WILSON:  I have to tell a low water <Crystal> story.  My first year-- we actually had some incredibly low flows the first year.  In October they did clamp the water down on the dam.  In ’69.  That was the trip that my mother and dad came on.  We had been running...

STEIGER:  So you got them there right away?

WILSON:  I got them as quick as I could.  My dad was getting older.  When I was born he was fifty-six.  So here I am, I’m twenty.  So he was seventy-six years old.  My mom was quite a few years younger than him, but he was a very live-wire character, and was doing quite well.  So he wasn’t somebody to worry about, but you never know, you know?  So they came on the trip.  We had some really really low water, but none of the really low stuff where you had to make a right hand run in <Horn Creek> or something like that.  But when we camped, we camped... I don’t know now where we did camp above <Crystal>, but we wound up getting to <Crystal> and never seeing it as low as it was there.  So Hugh and I, we start walking down to take a look at this thing, and you know, it’s a long walk if you’re going to go all the way to the bottom of <Crystal>.  We got down where the island is, and we were looking at the island and I go "Gosh," you know, "We don’t want to walk all the way down there."  Hugh says,  "Let’s just go run it.  We’ll figure out something."  [laughter]  Here we are with these two motor rigs, and we figured out that we had to run... you know the hole where the hole ordinarily was at that time was a rock sticking out of the water.  So we wound up, we cut around there and then we headed back over to the left side of the river.  That’s where the main channel really was, was over there.  But we could see, as we got further down, that the channel was more or less blocked and we were just trying to weave our way through... but it was hard to do, you know, unless you tried to back all the way down, and that wasn’t a viable option.  So both of us got stuck on rocks below the island on the left side, really pretty close to the shore.  We wound up using those old oars that we had, trying to pry the boats off.  We were close together.  Finally Hugh, he got his boat unstuck and motored around below me and we off-loaded all the people except for three or four guys, and we just got in the water and started lifting my boat up and shoving it through this little pile of rocks that were probably only two or three feet high, you know.  It wasn’t bad, but it was some work.  So we shoved the boat and got it going again... but that was my first real experience of getting hung-up big time, you know, with a motor rig.  That was a pretty interesting thing.  And then the whole idea "We’ll figure it out..."  you know?  I always laugh about that.  We didn’t want to walk down there and look.  There really wasn’t a way.  Once we were in there it was obvious that that’s what it was gonna be.  It wasn’t going to be an easy trip.  Yeah, so... then, you know Dubendorf was interesting in those lower flows because there was a little table-rock that was, when you enter over on the left and over on the right side of the tongue and... downstream of the boulder jam, it’s kind over on the right side of the rapid, there was this flat table-rock and when it was out of the water we would go down and cut into the eddy below that rock, which is just a little tiny eddy, and it was very easy to miss it... and we ordinarily did a backwards run after that, because it would spin you around, bring you  to a stop, and it would position you perfectly for making the run down the right side.  But to make the cut across there with our boats, and be able to actually get into the right side was pretty hard to do with those things. The motors really weren’t strong enough to make that pretty good distance across there and that little table-rock worked great because it was always there and if we had been on the river a lot, we could make the run in there without having to stop and look at it.

STEIGER:   So you would just go...?

WILSON: We tried to avoid hitting the rock, because it had a tendency to bounce you over to the left side of the river, if you did that.  So we would run down and catch the little backwater right below that table-rock.  Spin on it.

STEIGER:  Are you talking about the one... we used to call it the "marker" rock?  Kind of a round, black...

WILSON:  Flat.  And light-colored.  That’s my recollection of it.  Maybe it’s gone now.

STEIGER:  Must be a different one.  It was probably lower then.  We haven’t seen it below five... for quite some time.

WILSON:  I can’t remember what five thousand would’ve been, in that... those numbers kind of, I’ve lost that, I think.  But it was a nice, good sized rock, actually.  Pretty flat, and it was big enough to create a nice little backwater for us to stick our nose into and spin us around; and that’s what we needed in order to get through there.  <Lava> was the same old stuff, over and over again.  <Granite> was always a heck of a lot of fun because we just brushed the wall down the right side.  We did that with the... I suppose everybody does that, you know, when we were rowing the snout boats in there we’d do that too.

STEIGER:  Now rowing the snout boats, when you started, did they have a rowing division?  How did that...?  Did you even see any rowboats down there?

WILSON:  Yeah, umm, Moki Mac.  We saw a fair amount of Moki Mac those days.  Not much though.  You know what was really interesting to me, was, at <Diamond Creek>, there were a set of wooden oar-boats sitting there, that were from Staveley’s operation.  The Cataract boats were parked there.  They were parked there for months, until finally...

STEIGER:  Oh! Because in 1969 they did that Powell Centennial deal!

WILSON:  Yeah, and they never took them out.  They left them there for months.  So every time we’d go by, there they were, you know.  And finally they came and got them.  But we didn’t see them on the river.  Who we did see on the river... it was interesting was, in sixty... were you talking about the trip that Shoemaker was on, where they did the photography stuff?

STEIGER:  I don’t think so.  OK, I talked to Cam Staveley , did an interview with him and he was telling me about... I heard from him that Gaylord put together this re-create the Powell trip deal that year.  Actually Martin [Litton] was on one too.  ‘Cause Kenton [Grua] saw him all duded-up acting like John Wesley Powell.  [laughter]  That was Kenton’s first recollection anyway.

WILSON:  A lot of that stuff probably happened before July, which is when I showed up.  I guess quite a little bit of that probably happened before that.  Because [Gene] Shoemaker with a group of people went down in ’68 and did a photography rematch trip.  I have that book here at the house somewhere, which is a pretty cool thing.  Yeah.  Let’s see where was I going with all that?  I get sidetracked so danged easy.  [STEIGER:  Me too.]  We were talking about water flows and stuff, got off onto that.

STEIGER:  It struck me looking at your album... it was really neat to see these old black and white photos of the early AZRA/ARTA rigs... just how different they were then than what they are now.

WILSON:  And they were different than what everybody else had down there too.

STEIGER:  It was neat to see those pictures and just neat to see camp life, and here you guys are cooking on fires.  And I don’t even know... did you guys have a table?

WILSON:  Oh yeah, we had a table.  We had good tables, we had five-course meals.  The food was good, actually. [STEIGER: But here you are cooking on wood.]  Right, we're cooking on wood.  Took a lot of wood, too.  Ha-ha.  Which was good, because there was a lot of wood.  We burned it up.  I’m not proud of that, but we did.  We burned it up, you know.  And you know, what we did, you had to have a fire grate and the fire grates were a big, big problem because they’d just warp and burn up, you know, on those hot fires.  And so we found out that you could steal a... nowadays the bread-racks are plastic, but back in those days the bread racks were metal--the real thin wire, with a nice little rim around them.  And we could throw that in on top of one of our food boxes, and we used those all until we quit using fires.

STEIGER:  So you stole those from the guys who were delivering bread to you?  [laughs]

WILSON:  Well, it was an appropriation progam.  We never brought them back.  But actually those things would last for two or three trips, and then you had to throw it away, go get another one.  Yeah, but the wood fire, actually that was another really neat thing.  You know one side of the coin I feel really fortunate that I was there before the Park Service realized that they had to start making a lot of environmental regulations.  We were already practicing a lot of stuff, with the exception of what to do with the human waste, and that was a really big problem.  And once we quit doing the fires... actually, in 1970... let me look here.  In 1970 I think Mike Castelli went to Lou and asked if he could put together a river clean up trip, with one of ARTA’s boats.  So in September, October, they went down on a private trip and took all the equipment for screening the sand on the beaches.  By the time they got to <Phantom Ranch> they had a thousand pounds of charcoal, and they took the sand and dumped it in the river.  But they got rid of all the charcoal, and put it in bags...

STEIGER:  And actually carried it all the way out?

WILSON:  Well no,  the ranger told them that they could take it to <Phantom Ranch> and they’d get rid of it down there.  Well they had all these mule trips of charcoal... a thousand pounds is a considerable amount.  And the ranger was a little discouraged when... the local ranger didn’t even know that that promise had been made.  But they made some phone calls and they unloaded the charcoal and the mule guys had to haul it out.  [laughter] (STEIGER: There had to be a few swear words said over that.)  I’m sure there were.  Yeah.  But, to my knowledge that was probably one of the very first... "the" very first clean-up trip ever.  And it was a brilliant idea that Castelli had.  But unless you... I don’t know that much, actually about the history in that department, but it was really early done.  You know they cleaned up a beach that was just incredibly horrible, was at one-sixty eight.  Big, what is that, Fern Glen?  There was an area on the downstream side of that beach, you just couldn’t get away from charcoal anywhere on the beach.  It was everywhere.  And I remember going back the next spring and camping there, it was pristine.  I was not on the clean up trip, no.  I wish I had.  But I had something else I had to do, so I couldn’t even be there.  But it was really cool, you know?  You’ve got to hand it to Castelli.  He tried to do some pretty cool things like that.

STEIGER:  So what was his story?  He started the year after you, or later that same season?

WILSON:  If I don’t get my numbers off, I think he did a couple of trips in 1967.  Then he went back and worked for ARTA on the Stanislaus for a couple of years, and then he came back in 1970 and started doing full seasons there and we wound up working together a lot during that time.  We ran a lot of two-boat trips and we also did a lot of single boat trips putting on at the same time.  We both really enjoyed having the ability to just do our own thing, rather than having to deal with double the number of people and double the number of boatmen... it was just, single boat trips are really neat.  So we did a lot of those.  ...and being close by, because I had a tendency to break motors every now and then (laughter) I mean that’s about all Mike can talk about, is my engine damage!  (more laughter)  But the one he didn’t know about, or he’d forgotten about, which was a really good one--I was letting the assistant hold the boat while I got it tied up one day at <Nankoweap>, but it was up... you know where the big rock is on the upper end of <Nankoweap Rapids>, just downstream on the left side, kind of, big boulder there that creates a wave?  Above that was a little beach that I loved to camp at, not above the rapid, but downstream, below the beginning of the rapid but above that hole there was a nice little camp, and so it was kind of a rocky shoreline there and he backed over a rock and broke the lower unit off and so I had to walk downstream--Mike was camped way down below and I had to walk downstream and bum his spare motor, and I carried it back!  And that’s the reason I remembered it... my spare did not work.  So had to bum a motor from him and... I wish I’d never told him that, because he’d forgotten about that.  (laughter)  Long walk.  And I remember that.  (more laughter)  But, yeah.  Oh let’s see what I’ve got here.  I talked to Mike and... you know, if we’re going chronological order, I’m not exactly sure what to do there you know.

STEIGER:  Well just in terms of structure, it’s kind of the easiest way to keep track of all this... I know I certainly want to hear about the Life Magazine shot and all that, the boat tipping over...

WILSON:  Well that was during that time period too.  Yeah.  1969, or was it ’70?  What was the date on that?  Do you remember?  I think Tim Allen came the next summer and worked, so that would have been 70.  Well let’s see, the <Lava> flip, the Life Magazine photo prominently displayed at Marble Canyon Lodge (chuckles) you know, later we found out that the flow was around 30,000 but I also learned that for a flow to be a full 30,000, it has to run 30,000 for a couple of days without any fluctuation in order for it to be really an accurate measurement, because you’re going to lose quite a bit before you get... but nonetheless, the thing about <Lava> at that time was the big wave at the bottom, right next to the big rock, was this surging wave that surged maybe eight to ten feet.  It would just go down, and then it would come way up.  Then down.  It was pretty interesting.  Mike [Castelli] made... when you’re standing on the black rock, which I was that day, that hole was right by my feet.  You know, the backside of that hole was, that’s where the hole is, is right next to that rock, and that’s where it flipped.

STEIGER:  So at 30,000 the black rock wasn’t covered up?

WILSON:  It wasn’t covered up and there was enough... I could jump.  I had to literally just jump from shore to get onto that rock.  I should have never done the jump, actually.  And if I had stayed on shore I would’ve actually been in that picture!  (laughter)  Hindsight, huh?!  My mouth would’ve been open too!  (more laughter)  But I had to go jump on that rock!  Well, anyway, that wave had that incredible surge.  I don’t know what Mike did, but Mike, he ran it... we drew straws, because we knew this was going to be like the epic thing for us.  We’d never seen water like that before.  We knew it was going to be big.  We’d been running on low water, and we were pretty jittery about this whole thing.  Nobody thought we were going to have a boat go upside down, but... you know I can’t remember if we thought about the left.  I think a trip prior to that I’d tried to run more left and I wound up... when we’d looked at the run there, there was no really good entrance for a motor rig on the left side at that time, so I ran the hole, and I came out of that, the ledge hole, with this great insight that you don’t want to do that!  That was a fold-the-boat-in-two job, man.  And the people on the front, because we had all those ropes strung out for them to hold onto, you know... we had people that were-- everbody was shoved right up against the load.  They’d lost their hand-holds and it was quite an experience.  Nobody got hurt, thankfully.  So the next trip we realized you couldn’t do that kind of a run and so we just had to run basically down the right side.  Mike went through and the surge was down.  When I went through, the surge was coming up and I hit that surge, and it stopped my boat dead in the water and it dropped down and, you could feel it happening you know,  and I just went on out.  But because the current was so strong in there I wound up getting my boat pulled ashore on the right side, quite some distance downstream.  Mike, he pulled over to the left side and parked his boat there, the typical little spot when you??re doing photography stuff.  (STEIGER: So it was a guy on his boat that shot that..?)  Exactly.  And then... so my people... we were spread out basically.  My boat was way downstream and I had all my people up there, and so when that boat went over I leaped off that rock like it was nothing and everybody... we started hustling people down and I helped people who needed help, and we just got down there, you know.  But it was quite a little bit of time that went by before I was able to get along.  But the fortunate thing about that was... it was sort of a stupid thing for me to have unloaded my boat there with all the people like that, but on the other side of the coin, the time it took, to get them back, which really wasn’t that much time, it made it so that I was able to go over to the spring, on the left side of the river and pick up two people that were... that made it to shore right at the spring.  There were people on the shore just down through little <Lava> that I picked up.  And then I started collecting stuff off the boat, all the way along the river, and caught up with Mike... I don’t remember the exact mileage, but we went a mile and a half or so downstream, probably, or maybe a little  bit more than that, where he got the boat to shore and then we disassembled it and put it back together again.  But it was interesting... and I’d forgotten about this point, but Mike mentioned that he and Richard, I think, one of the assistants, motored across the river and walked back up to take a look for more debris and stuff and as a result of that they saw a helicopter flying by... well we all saw the helicopter, but the helicopter flew... one of those little piston-jobs, you know, they waved it down and that guy came back and landed on a sandbar just downstream from where our boat was, and went back and talked to them and asked them if they would please contact Jim Elliott and they gave them a phone number in <Flagstaff> for Jim... tell him that we were going to be a day late.  So he did, and being a day late we were able to continue on and do our trip as a normal trip, and nobody seemed to care, which was the good part, because I talked to them about that.  So it worked out good.  Nobody was hurt.  There were two older ladies on the boat that were just scared shitless.  I mean they were really really scared.  Everybody was pretty scared.  A couple of things happened.  We camped that night down at, is it <Whitmore>?  Where the horses would come down?  We camped at <Whitmore> and everybody pulled their booze, and we had an incredible... everybody got pretty drunk.  Which was a good thing.  And the next morning the two ladies came on my boat, and I just had to treat them with kid gloves, you know, and it was just a sales pitch the whole way to get them to get on, you know.  I just had to make sure that I didn’t get any water on them the rest of the trip, which was pretty easy to do, basically.  Treat em gently.  The next day or the day after they were pretty much back to normal.  But, aww those poor girls, I felt really sorry for them.  Everybody else thought it was pretty exciting.

STEIGER:  Who was running that boat?

WILSON:  Tim Allen was running it, and the assistant was... I can’t remember his assistant’s name, which is really who you see in the picture... you can see he’s falling out of the boat and Tim is back behind him a little bit.  He’s more engulfed.  And the guy looking, falling out is the assistant, there.  Oh shit!  (laughter)  But what I really think happened there, he probably broached just a little bit, but he looked like, had a straight on run, but he probably broached a little bit as that surge came up and it just went like that, you know, as that surge came up...

STEIGER:  Caught his upstream edge.  Sucked it down.  So you didn’t have an inkling during the upper part of the run... when did it occur to you that this might not turn out so good?

WILSON:  His entry and everything looked good.  I mean there was no inkling that it was going to be that until it happened, from my perspective there.  It looked good to me.  (chuckles) We didn’t know about the bubble-line run at that time.  I mean if we’d’ve run the bubble-line it would’ve been a different story.  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Well that must be... well no, Shorty Burton had turned one over in <Upset>...

WILSON:  Just two years prior to me being there, I think.

STEIGER:  So it wasn’t like it was unheard of that you could tip them over, huh?

WILSON: No but he was running one of those with no side tubes.  Then Henry Falany of course had the classic... was "I’m going to paint ARTA on the bottom of all my boats!"  (laughter)  I thought that was a really good one.  (more laughter)  Yeah, let’s see, I heard that Sanderson... the ranger told me that, he was pretty sure that Sanderson flipped a rig prior to me, prior to us.  He wasn’t certain.  He said "I found out about it, but they tried to really hush it up and not let it be known."  He says "You guys are lucky, because you’ve got a big picture..."  (laughter)

STEIGER:  No, I remember... I should talk to... there was more than one flip.  I think Sanderson flipped two or three times, big boats, in <Lava>.  I’m pretty sure, because I remember this guy Jet, do you remember Jet?  Did you ever know him?  He was involved somehow, not his boat.  I know it was more than one... which would tend to make you nervous if you went through that more than once.

WILSON:  It would be like <Upset> was with me.  God, I hated to run <Upset>.  I just hated it.  I did.  I always had... I was really pretty happy with my runs in <Upset> but I did... it was one that always bugged me, for a couple of years.  (STEIGER: Were you turning around?  Running right?)  The right run is what we did.  Usually did a backward run, but I’d try to do either a forward or a backward run.  It just kind of depended on how my entry was.  If I’d made an entry that made it so I had to back down, then I would back down.  We’d also do that backward run in <Crystal> a lot, too.  Yeah,  Did you do that?

STEIGER:  Oh yeah.  Especially when it was low.  I mean I remember being pretty proud of myself... one time we’d gone down there and it was really low... I remember it used to be, you know, if you’d just wait a little while, the water would come up.  It was so up and down, really high and really low, and if you’d wait... so we’d try to get down there somewhere, just at the head of the gorge, you know.  Somewhere from say, <Unkar> to <Hance>.  If you camped in there, then it’d be up in the morning, you could have high water all the way through... but then we figured out, we started getting kinda cocky and we figured out "Oh fuck let’s just go on down there."  And if you got down to <Grapevine> or <Granite>, or somewhere in there, you’d get up and it’d be low.  And if you took off on that in your motorboat... you’d stay kind of ahead of the high and you could run low water.  I remember doing that on purpose.

WILSON:  Well we did that all the time, as a matter of fact.  Lots of camps at <Granite>.  Lots at what is it? 94 mile Creek?  On the right?  I think.  It was below <Horn Creek>, a little bit.  Next good camp below <Horn Creek>.  You can... I motored all the way back upstream one day.  Actually that’s an interesting thing.  Did you ever meet Vern Taylor?  Geology Professor at Prescott?    (STEIGER:  I’ve heard some stories.... [two not transcribed.])

WILSON: Well that’s interesting, you know, and I ran into Vern a lot because he was running these oar trips with all these kids, you know.  And it was neat.  Prescott College.  They had several Army ten-mans, probably Army ten-mans... doing these trips.  So I had the opportunity to talk to them a lot and sometimes I’d see them for two trips and talk to them.  And I always enjoyed just talking to them for a few minutes and then going on.  Well, one time.... Gosh, I have no idea what the flow was, but it was probably 10 or 15 thousand... I can’t remember if I saw him two different years, now, or just this one trip, but I saw him so many times I’m confusing it with numbers of years, but anyway we came across him, he was at <Horn Creek>, standing there on the right side looking at the rapid and they had... you know these little rubber duckies you could buy them at K-Mart?  They weren’t plastic, they were Taiwanese rubber with a little screw-valve.  They were yellow.  Yeah.  They had a little floor in them and they were pretty small.  Well, he would take two of those and tie them together and he and another guy were paddling this thing down the river.  And they carried a spare, you know it was small enough they could carry a spare; and they had freeze-dried food and stuff with them.  So when we got to <Horn Creek>... yeah, they were doing a whole trip with these... you know I never owned a camera down there and it kills me because that would’ve been a perfect picture.  Anyway, I see him there, so we stopped at <Horn Creek>.  I already had run into him earlier somewhere on this trip... you know I walked down, looking at the rapid, and talked to him.  I said  "Well, you want us to wait around for you, see how you do?"  He says "Aww no, it’ll be allright."  But I could tell he was pretty nervous about it.  So we went ahead and ran down, and I got down to 94 Mile Creek, or above it a little bit there, and I’m thinking "You know, I should never have motored away from him..."  So I turned around and motored back upstream, got right up to the base of the rapid just as they flipped, and one guy was drifting downstream and I picked him up.  And Vern was stuck in the eddy on the left side.  You know, I mean that’s a tiny little spot, beating against that rock cliff there, and his boat was in there and he was standing on shore, it was upside down, it was just a catastrophe.  So I was able to motor acros the river, and I just plowed across and smashed into that little tiny eddy and a couple of my passengers got off and helped him get all his stuff up in there.  I had to keep the motor running full power, because I was going to leave, you know.  Got all the stuff on the boat, and we crashed out of there.  (laughs)  Literally crashed out of there and went downstream.  He spent a couple of days, two or three days with us.  (laughs)  Didn’t want to get off that big boat, yeah.  We had good food, too!  And he had a little bit of, oh, Southern Comfort, which I later, a year or two later, got really sick on.  So he would share his little flask of Southern Comfort with us as we were going down the river that afternoon.  (more laughter)

Yeah, I’m really glad I went back.  I felt so bad about not doing it at the beginning but I just sort of took him literally when he said he didn’t need any help, which wasn’t the thing to do.  But anyway... so I got to know Vern a little bit because of that, which was really pretty neat.  He told me a lot of pretty interesting stories about how he got involved with the Hopis and, apparently... he was talking about how he found the Sipapu and led them to it, and some things like that.  He claimed to me that he found it for the tribe.  They didn’t know where it was, it was lost in their legends.  I’m sure he told me that.  And that they made him a blood-brother, they mixed their bloods on account of that.

STEIGER:  Well I guess that has a ring because he definitely spent a lot of time down there... now was he a geologist?

WILSON:  That was my understanding.  But he seemed to have a varied amount of interests, you know.  I don’t know if he’s still alive, or not.  I have no concept of how old he was...  he was certainly older than me.  Actually more adventuresome than I was. (laughs)

STEIGER:  Pretty balls-out guy.  Little tiny rubber duckies.  So he stayed with you guys for several days?

WILSON:  I can’t remember if we turned loose of him... I think we took him all the way to his take-out!  (laughter)  Yeah, so that was my Vern Taylor story.  I always thought that was pretty interesting.

Gosh, Bob Melville, I’ve got to tell you, I only did two trips with Bob.  Both of them were fun.  Bob was a character.  The last trip I did was when Marilyn and I were working together and we were all parked at Matkatameba and half the trip was laying around on the ledges up there sound asleep and nobody was thinking about Melville and what in the hell he was doing, but all of a sudden here comes this guy, jumping up on top of one of those boulders up there, you know, we were on the ledges and those boulders over there downstream, sort of... no clothes on and a great big log and he was growling and grunting and just beating this log onto a rock and shit was flying all over the place and then he just jumped off the rock and went away!  Some people just went "What was that?!"  (laughter)  A lot of people couldn’t figure out it was Bob.  (STEIGER:  And he was just clowning around?)  He was just clowning around, yeah.  Naked!

STEIGER:  Now Marilyn, what was her last name?

WILSON:  Marilyn Sayer.  Yeah.  She was really the first woman to work commercially on the river, after Georgie, yeah.  Actually, I guess I could talk about Marilyn now.  I’d been on the river for three years when we got together and I met her on one of our commercial trips.  Her and a friend came down there and she stubbed her toe one night on the ledges, and I doctored her toe for her, and we kind of got together on that trip.  Then I went and visited her in the Bay Area, and eventually, she decided... she was a, she had a top-secret clearance from the Air Force; worked as a programmer for General Electric.  It occurs to me at this point in time it was all having to do with rockets and launching facilities off of aircraft, you know, that type of stuff.  Munitions.  Programming and software to make these things work, I guess.  But it was really top-secret.  I was around a lot of her friends all the time, and mostly they got drunk and got stoned... (STEIGER:  Her military friends?)  No, her friends at General Electric, the programmers.  (laughter)  I’ve got to tell you, this is so funny... actually this is funny.  Not too many people ever see this, but, some of her friends were real... I mean they just were stoned out of their minds almost all the time.  They were smoking dope on the way to work, you know, stuff like that.  It wasn’t more than five or six years later, there was a big article in the San Francisco Examiner about this huge scandal going on, that programmers for the military were getting stoned and doing a bunch of stuff, you know, this wasn’t really cool for top-secret type stuff to be happening with, you know.  I happened to just know some of them.  (laughter)  So she took a leave of absence, which they gave her for a year, and  (STEIGER: Not having to do with any of that...?)  No.  Just so she could come down.  She had hooked up with me and decided that she wanted to give it a try: living with me and working on the river.  I mean a capable, capable person.  The first deal was, that nobody would hire her as a guide.  She could be my assistant all she wanted, but she could never run a boat.  This is from the ARTA office.  It  probably was Lou [Elliott] and David Kay.  David Kay was office manager, and he sort of ran the day to day operations of the company out of <Oakland>. And Lou was there, and of course they had to make a decision, and they didn’t feel comfortable having somebody do that... so what we wound up doing, that one winter I called companies up in <Utah>, trying to see if we could get a job working together up there where she had her own boat, because she already had snout experience.  We’d done several trips where she was rowing a snout; and we had another trip where she would run the motor rig the whole trip and I’d just sit there and talk to the people.  (STEIGER: So her snout experience, she got that from working with you?)  Working with me on private trips; and she worked with me on the U.S. Geological Survey trips, which were all snout trips.  So as I got working more with the U.S.G.S., that went from a one-boat snout trip, to a two-boat snout trip, to a three-boat snout trip, and then Marilyn was usually running one of those three boats.  So she had a good amount of experience, was very very skilled with her river-running... I mean she was just good.  She understood how the water flowed.  She also understood how to keep an engine from getting broken all to pieces, and she just knew how to do it,you know, and talk about a back-packer!  Her and I could back-pack at the same rate, you know, like hiking out of the canyon.  It was a match, you know.  It was pretty cool.  She was very, very good at all that stuff.  Very personable.  People loved her.  She was a neat person.  She finally got to work down there.  They hired a guy, I believe his name was Mike Wells, and we had just moved to Parks, like for the first year... because prior to, when Marylin first came there we were out on Highway 180;  I think it’s called Doney Park, or something out there.  The lady had a horse ranch out there, but she had no horses anymore and this big barn, so we set up in her barn and got a phone line in there and she became our area manager.  So that’s when Marylin came into the picture, was there.  Then we wound up moving out to Parks, and the first area manager there was this Wells guy, and so, you know, we went to him and said "Hey, could Marylin--would you let her run a boat?"  "Well sure!"  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Lou Elliott and those guys had already said "No way.  We can’t hire women to be boatmen."?

WILSON:  Yeah.  So he put her on.  She’d already done a bunch of trips, you know, running her own oar boat, especially, and these were snouts we were running then.  So she just got in there and started doing it.  I don’t know what more to say.  That was it.

STEIGER:  I guess we ought to... what year was that exactly?  

WILSON:  I’m thinking it must be ’72.  I basically ran three years of motor rigs with some snout boat experience in there...  so and they didn’t want me... that was the other thing that happened.  I couldn’t get a job working on the snout boats.  Because I was too small.  They were bringing guys down from <Idaho>.  A bunch of big, muscular characters, you know... John Seppi is a good example, if you ever ran into John... Those kind of guys, you know, that were pretty much doing it.  Peter Winn was doing it and he was small, but that didn’t count.  I didn’t know how to row, period.  So what happened was I just decided "Well screw it.  I’m going to build my own snout boats."    So I went to <Las Vegas>--to Buck’s War Surplus in <Las Vegas>--and bought two tubes that were brand new, they still had the powder on them.  They were really--that was neat.  I came out to <Oregon>, here to <Gold Beach> where my brother was, and he worked for a machine shop and got me a bunch of steel for 20 bucks or something, and then in my dad’s tire shop we welded it all together and I loaded it on this trailer--it was an old trailer house, and we just cut the trailer house part off, and I hooked it onto the back of my El Camino and I went to <Flagstaff> with my new boat!  (laughter)  I had to do a lot of work on it once I got there.  I got it welded in <Gold Beach> then I went to <Flagstaff> and bored the holes in it and put the plywood on it and painted it and all that stuff and then I did two private trips.  Probably 19... Oh, I can tell you.  Hang on a second...

STEIGER:  And this is cause you were wanting to row and they weren’t going to let you row?

WILSON:  They weren’t going to let me row, yeah.  So I set up this private trip and it’s interesting... David Kay, at the ARTA office, he thought that it was something I should do.  So he helped me get some clients for my first private trip.  So I was doing a Peter Winn... I was doing commercial trips in the <Grand Canyon> and trying to make a little bit of money at it.  So, October of ’71 is when I did my first U.S.G.S. trip.  So I did two private trips in that summer, of ’71.  They were sort of back to back.  What I did is, I didn’t think I could carry the load and five people--there were six of us on the boat each time--all the way down for three weeks, so I, on a motor trip I took a bunch of old ARTA boxes that nobody was using anymore and I put supplies in there and hid them in the rocks up above a few places.  One was at <Deubendorff> up on the left side of the river, up in a kind of little rocky brushy pile there, and another was in the inner gorge above <Phantom Ranch> someplace, I have no idea where that was anymore, but anyway... you know, we’d re-supply and I did these two three-week trips.  Prior to that I was trying to get people to come on the river who had experience with geology.  I wanted to get some people who had a lot of experience with photography, and then the natural history, like the Indians...  I was really particularly interested in the Hopis and what was going on in the Canyon, and I wanted to get some people to do that.  So the first thing was the geology.  I was primarily intersted in that.  So I went over to NAU that summer and went into the geology department and I see a bunch of guys in a room there so I walk in and I just said "Is anybody interested in going down the <Grand Canyon>?"  and they just all "Yeah!!!"  (laughter)  "What you got going?"  And I said  "Well, I got this boat and I want to take some people who understand the geology of the <Grand Canyon> because I want to learn about it."  So they’re all going "Well, god, you know..."  and they just went around the room and said "You know, none of us can do it.  Nope, none of us can go."  It turns out that all of them were writing their thesis.  So one of the fellows was John Hendricks.  At the end of the summer, it was like, the first part of September or something, I was in El Rancho, it was late at night and there’s John Hendricks.  I’d forgotten about him, but he comes running up to me and he says "I’ve got the perfect guy for you to go on a river trip with!  He wants to go now."  You know?  So it was Don Elston.  So he takes me over to Don’s house the next day and introduces me to Don and Shirley, and that was the beginning of a long and very interesting and fun experience, working in the <Grand Canyon> for Elston.  They did some things that a lot of people complained about.  One of them was boring holes in... because they were taking core samples and doing paleo-mag... for a variety of things they were trying to find out.  But one of them was to set up a paleo-magnetic age dating process.  So we drilled thousands upon thousands of feet of red rocks in the <Grand Canyon>.  We got to see some places that have probably only been seen by a few people, you know, because of places we had to go to get the red rocks.  It was just a pretty neat experience.  There were some problems, like Don one time wanted to bore holes in the bedrock up there at upper <Deer Creek>, and I mean everybody threw a fit, and finally convinced him on that trip to go downstream and find a spot downstream, well he picked Pancho’s patio to bore his holes.  It used to be that you could see them.  They did go back and plug them much later.  But that was probably the most negative thing I’ve got to say about Don.  Everything else was really good, you know.  Quite a character.  And I got to know Ivo Luchitta on that trip too.  The first trip I did with him, Ivo was on it.



