Allen Wilson

29 October 2007

Sound file:  "Allen Wilson 5.mp3" 63:09 min.

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



STEIGER:  Okay, this is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is camera original Tape #5.  This is an interview with Allen Wilson, we’re in <Gold Beach Oregon>.  It’s October 29, 2007.  This is Lew Steiger.

Okay, here we go.  We were just talkin’, when we turned the camera off, Allen was sayin’ that he might just be the guy that invented the snout rig and made the first one ever, so we’re gonna elaborate on that.  So did you think of that design yourself?  Let’s just go over how that transpired.

WILSON:  Well, you know, I’m doin’ the commercial trips, I’d come across Dick McCallum down there, with Grand Canyon Youth.  His boat was a snout boat, but it was set up really, really differently.  It had quite an extensive frame with rowing positions for, like, I don’t know, it was like four rowing positions, and I think it was one kid on each oar is how they did it.  And then he used a rudder and they powered, and he probably yelled commands at 'em, I don’t know.  But I think their whole trip was just to row, row, row.  Well, I got to thinkin’, why couldn’t I build a boat out of that, just one person would row it.  So I went to Buck’s War Surplus in 1970 in <Las Vegas> and I bought a set of tubes.  It turned out they were brand new snouts, they still had the powder on 'em, and took 'em back to <Flagstaff> and wound up--and I may have already mentioned that I came to <Oregon> and my brother had a cheap access to metal, and bought a bunch of angle iron and channels and welded it all together and took it back to Flag and put it together, and then I did these two private trips.  Well, I’d never rowed before, and the reason I did all this was because ARTA wouldn’t let me row because I was too small.

STEIGER:  So what was ARTA rowin’?

WILSON:  ARTA was running those shorty pontoons.

STEIGER:  Twenty-twos?

WILSON:  Twenty-twos, yeah.  That’s all they had, was the 22s.

STEIGER:  Which they wouldn’t let you row because you were too small for that!  So you made a snout rig!  (laughter)  Okay.

WILSON:  I just didn’t see the thing there.  And I was young, nothing could stop me.  So anyway, I put this boat together.  I bought a bunch of black bags from somebody, and I bought a bunch of oars from some other place, and I just got all these wooden things, all this stuff together, and with David Kay’s help, did a couple of private trips, single-boat snout trips; then wound up doin’ that USGS trip at the end of 1971.  I know that when I took it for the very first trip I did, I took the boat up to Lee’s Ferry and was puttin’ it together, and people would come down, they’d go, "God!  How’s that gonna work?  Is it gonna stay right-side up?  Is it gonna flip?"  I mean, there was always this conversation that revolved around how stable it was going to be, because it was big tubes.  I think the tubes were three feet apart, and I had these twelve-foot wooden oars I was using.  People were just--it was new, and nobody had seen anything quite like this before.  The other boats were all army surplus ten-mans and things like that.  So as a result, I learned to row pretty much on the first trip; and then the second trip I figured out I had it down pretty good.

STEIGER:  Just to reiterate, your first trip you rowed this brand new boat that you had sort of made up by yourself, and there were some ten-mans around, but really those guys were rowin’ twenty-two-foot bridge pontoons, or twenty-eight-foot boats, so the snout might have looked a little bit small?

WILSON:  I never saw twenty-eight-foot ones down there.  Were there twenty-eights down there?

STEIGER:  Well, let’s just say Hatch was rowin’ the thirty-threes.

WILSON:  That’s right, they were.

STEIGER:  I mean, you’d see two guys rowin’ a thirty-three?

WILSON:  Exactly, yeah.

STEIGER:  And there you are in your little bitty snout rig?

WILSON:  That’s right.

STEIGER:  And you went all by yourself on a one-boater, the first time, to learn?

WILSON:  Uh-huh.  You know, I had fifteen motor trips under my belt.

STEIGER:  Well hell yeah!

WILSON:  And I took these two groups of people--that some of 'em I’m still friends with--on those trips.  And then as a result, at the end of that summer, I took the USGS trip, and some of the people that were on that I’m still friends with.  So that was pretty cool.  That’s, of course, how it works, I guess.  But in the process, many years later, I talked to Jack ... what’s his name?

STEIGER:  Jack Kloepfer?

WILSON:  Okay.  I never could pronounce it.

STEIGER:  Who made the Paco Pad, who has this business, Jack’s Plastic Welding.  And Jack Kloepfer was Dave Kloepfer’s little brother, "Paco."  (spells Kloepfer)  Anyway, Jack Kloepfer’s a prominent figure in river runnin’ these days, because we all sleep on his pads and use his bags and use his boats and all kinds of stuff.

WILSON:  All kinds of stuff, yeah.  Well, I got to know him because I started this little company here out of <Gold Beach> for running low-water Chetco River trips, which required a special inflatable kayak design, because I was taking nonpaddlers down a low Class 3 river that was pretty low water, lots of rock dodging and stuff, and really narrow little channels, so I needed a flexible narrow boat.  Well, he was the guy that I was talking to about doing this.  Well, I wound up not getting any boats like that from him, but I wound up getting these little pack cats, which are just cool little boats, and we use those for our cargo boats on these trips.  Well, in the process, I got to talking to him about this snout boat that I had put together in 1970, and he’s goin’, "God!"  At that time, I thought I was probably the first person to do it, so I told him, "I don’t know for sure, but it appears from everything I could ever tell, that I was the first person to ever put one of these together."  I was on the river a lot, never saw another one, other than the one Dick McCallum was doing, but he was utilizing it in a whole different fashion.  And I built it specifically for one person to row.  So I got the idea from him, put it together, did the trips.  And then later, I get a cell phone call from Jack here, just a few years ago, and he’s travelin’ across country.  He said, "You know, I’m tryin’ to do a history on the snout boat, and find out how the concept came about and how it was developed.  I’m going back to you, because you seem to be the person who put it on the <Grand Canyon> first.  I’ve talked to several people at" this river convention that he went to, "and several people have mentioned that you may be the first one to do that."  And so Jack’s got a website now, and he tells what his research has been, and he does mention that.

STEIGER:  Why is he doin’ the snout rig?  Just because that ties-into the boats that he’s makin’?

WILSON:  The catarafts, basically, where you’ve got....

STEIGER:  And he’s callin’ the snout rig the precursor of the cataraft--two tubes with a frame?

WILSON:  Yeah.  That’s how I gathered it.  So I don’t know how much research he did, and I really haven’t talked to him, other than I did look on his website here a year or two ago, and saw that he did mention me in that fashion there.  I’m reasonably sure, unless there’s somebody who’s snuck down the river sometime when I wasn’t looking, back in those days, that it was probably the first try at that sort of thing.

STEIGER:  Well, now, okay, so let me get this just straight in my mind here.  They wouldn’t let you row the twenty-twos, so you kind of invent this one oarsman snout boat.  So then how did it transpire that ARTA decided, "let’s go with snout boats"?

WILSON:  I think a big part of it was that Lou had bought a truckload, a huge load of snouts, and some of 'em were really, really good; some of 'em needed a lot of patch work done.  We were converting the motor rigs over.  We had all those baloney pontoons on the sides of our motor rigs, and we were basically, in the spring, a bunch of us would get together and we’d start patchin’ these old snout tubes that he’d bought, and puttin’ 'em on our motor rigs.  So he had an excess of rubber, with nothing, really, for it to be doing.  And Peter Winn got involved in that and set out to design a frame.  And so Peter put together the snout frame that probably is the most standard frame used on the river, where you’ve got a sloped front board with a little metal bar across the front, and then it comes back and it hinges right in front of the oar box--a platform, just a floor.

STEIGER:  I hate to break this to you, Allen--it’s been a long time since I’ve seen anybody rowin’ a snout rig on the river.  Nobody’s doin’ that anymore.  They’re motorin’ 'em every now and again...

WILSON:  Well, the bastards!

STEIGER:  Sorry, man.  (laughter)

WILSON:  Well!  They probably still build the motor rigs the same way.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Just that slant board... those are gone.

WILSON:  They don’t have that in there.  (laughter)  Okay, well, I give, what can I say?  Yeah, I hate to say it, but Peter also deviated from my frame design.  I did two frames, with a gap in the middle.

STEIGER:  So you had like a little flex point?

WILSON:  I had a flex point in the center.  And to cover that flex point up, I built this big lunch box that was accessible during the day, and I think I talked about that earlier.  It was a fair-sized box, and we really put a lot of stuff in that, and it made it so that we could make a three-way trip, without having to resupply anywhere.  The first two trips I did, we resupplied, but I learned I didn’t have to do that.  And on the first USGS trip I did, which was the same summer, same time frame, I bought all the food and just packed it all in, and we went down without having to do any resupplying.  So yeah, my whole thing was designed for really long trips, to have maximum number of people.  At that time, the park had no regulations on how many you could put on a boat--on those boats anyway.  They didn’t even see 'em, they never even knew they existed.

STEIGER:  Hence, you could get eight people on one.

WILSON:  Hence I had nine on!  (laughter)  And so there you go.

STEIGER:  My God!  So your first USGS trip, a one-boat trip with nine people--eight people plus you?

WILSON:  Eight people plus me, yeah.

STEIGER:  And that water was....  How did that go, how were your runs?

WILSON:  Actually, I did fine in <Hance>, I just made a nice left-hand....  Actually, I went between the two rocks on the left side of <Hance>, and slid through there and went on down.

STEIGER:  Just right of the big red rock?

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Just barely right of that?

WILSON:  Yeah.  Yeah, there’s a slot in there that a snout boat will fit through real nicely.

STEIGER:  Did you figure that out, that run?  Had anybody else ever done that?

WILSON:  Oh, I’m sure that the ARTA guys were doin’ it with their boats.

STEIGER:  With the twenty-twos?

WILSON:  Yeah.  But you know I had to go there and figure that out.  I was a motorboatman, I didn’t know anything about rowing.  But I knew that I couldn’t row a big heavy boat like that and do anything other than straight-down stuff, pretty much.  When I started rowing for ARTA, after they found out I could actually get a boat down the river like that, then I learned what you call the "bounce and shift" method.  You ram a rock, and it kicks you across the river, to get to where you want to go.

STEIGER:  That was a good snout rig technique, huh?

WILSON:  Yeah, for me!  But, you know, <Hance> was all right, and all those rapids in there were good.  And I already had talked to some of the guys and found out that you could run left at <Upset>.  Where did I have trouble, though?  You know, the one I had trouble in was <House Rock>.  I could never make it work in <House Rock>.  I just basically ran the hole in <House Rock>.

STEIGER:  Just get down there and go straight, get it straight?

WILSON:  Yeah, get it straight.  I would actually try to make a pull to the right and do it, but I’d make sure I got turned around straight and just run it.  <Crystal>, I ran the hole in <Crystal> all the time.

STEIGER:  With those eight people?  It was just gonna be, "Okay, we’re goin’ down the middle, we’re gonna keep it straight, hang on everybody."

WILSON:  Well, you know how we did it with the motor rigs during that time?  There was a cushion coming off of a rock right above the hole.  It was right....

STEIGER:  So you were a little bit left of the big hole?

WILSON:  Well, you know, I’m just talkin’ about the motor rigs right now.  Just to the left of the big hole, there’s the cliff, and then there was a little jut of rocks stickin’ out there, and the water would come up and cushion off that.  And then it’d fall into this deep hole.  Well, I would just power into that cushion, and the boat would just go right down into the hole.  It was an incredible ride, and I think a lot of motorboatmen were doin’ that.  But <Crystal> changed.  Like two years later, <Crystal> changed, and man, what a shock when I ran it like that one trip, and it was damned-near a disaster.

STEIGER:  Too sharp to be doin’ that anymore.

WILSON:  Too sharp to be doin’ that, and the cushion kinda went away.  (laughs)  It was in the spring, and I was just too cocky, and I didn’t even look at the rapid, I just ran it, and I should have been paying more attention to what I was doing.  But you learn as you go, I guess.

	So where was I here?

STEIGER:  I spun you out.

WILSON:  That’s all right.  Oh, well, I basically....  I guess that was about it for the snout thing.

STEIGER:  Just that maybe you were the first one that did it?

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And then Peter Winn did it different.  And by that time they decided maybe....  Oh yeah, and so then you were goin’ both ways.  Or when you went, did you still do motor trips and rowin’ trips?  Or did they have two divisions or something?

WILSON:  No, they were doing them together.  It wasn’t too long after that, though, that....  That was about the time when RELCO came into the picture, and Lou contracted his motor trips out to RELCO.  And so the motor trips went away, and I wound up workin’ on the oar trips then.  So no, I never did any more commercial motor trips after that.

STEIGER:  When you crossed over, yeah.

WILSON:  When I left the motors, I left for good, yeah.  I think I had around forty motor trips in by that point, and that was it for that.

So what more here?  I talked about the survey trip, didn’t I?  Yeah, I did, where the people jumped off his boat.  Yeah.  That was always funny.  I don’t think Dennis thought it was funny.

Hugh Wingfield is a guy--and I think I talked quite a bit about Hugh--but he’s the guy who really taught me how to run the river, and helped me get excited about the natural history of the canyon, and all that stuff, and caused me to--he didn’t cause me--but through my excitement about it, I started buyin’ a lot of books that pertained to all that stuff for the <Grand Canyon>, and tried really hard to educate the passengers that went down the river.  As a matter of fact, as a side note, I have to say that I bought a hundred copies of this, of these two books.  And I did one private trip....  These are BYU [Brigham Young University] books.

STEIGER:  Hamblin and Rigby, yeah.  Pewe had a geology book, too--that’s the name--I’m pretty sure, some kind of guide book. 

WILSON:  But just as a side note, because I wanted to learn the geology so bad, I wound up buying those books and trying to read 'em as I went down the river, but I never could, because I was too busy.

STEIGER:  But you bought that many copies ...

WILSON:  But I bought a hundred copies ...

STEIGER:  ... to pass out?

WILSON:  ... and I passed 'em out, hoping people would pay me the two bucks apiece for 'em or whatever it was.  But most people didn’t have any money, and some people would remember to give 'em [back] to me.  Anyway, after about two years--actually, about a summer and a half--I wound up runnin’ out of all of those.  I never bought any more.  But I was really into it, and people used 'em.  It was really cool, they really, really did use 'em.  And I was always sad that they didn’t make those waterproof, actually, because the mile-by-mile thing was pretty slick in that.

	Anyway, I forgot--oh! Hugh Wingfield!  So he kind of got me turned on to all this stuff, and helped me learn to run the river and everything.  But Hugh and I, a lot of our trips were low-water trips--you know, 5,000 to 10,000.

STEIGER:  And less, too, huh?

WILSON:  And less.  We had a number of trips that were--from everything I can understand, it was like leakage up to whatever one generator would produce, which I think was around 5,000 [cfs], something in that range.

And then of course the story about <Grand Canyon> Expeditions and us parking our boats down below the Paria, and all that, where everything was stuck, stuck, stuck.  Hugh and I did this trip, he came from <Alaska>, he’d quit runnin’ the river, and he went up and worked in <Alaska> on the Pipeline.  But I’d been talkin’ to him, and he was comin’ to <Arizona>.  I said, "Well, why don’t you do a trip?"  He said, "Okay, I’ll do it."  So he came and we got together on this trip, and took two boats down on one of these low-water trips.  I mean, just really, really low.  Went through 75 Mile, there were big rocks stickin’ clear out of the water.  There’s a little weave through there that you had to do to get down it.  We got out of there, and I pulled over by Hugh and I said, "Hey, you want to stop and look at <Hance>, or you just want to run it?"  He said, "Eh, let’s just run it."  (laughter)  And so as we’re motorin’ up to <Hance>, we were over on the right side of the river, and as we’re motorin’ up to <Hance>, there’s a Fort Lee boat parked above <Hance>, and it’s obvious that they’re camping, and this is like at eleven or twelve o’clock in the day, and why are people camping?  And then I’m realizing, "Well, the water’s low, and they’re not willing to run it."  And so....  It’s weird, I just didn’t think too much about it.  I mean here we’re just gonna run it, we want to go do our trip.  So I’m getting in position to make my right-hand run, and the people on shore--I noticed one time that people on shore were just jumping up and down and waving their arms, and they were taking these ponchos and flyin’ 'em like this, and yelling at us.  We couldn’t hear what they were saying.  And then they saw we weren’t gonna stop, and then as I’m looking over the rapid, I’m looking down on the left, and here’s two Henry Falany boats parked down below.

STEIGER:  Not stuck in the rapid, but parked.

WILSON:  They’re just parked along the left shore there.  And so I made my run, and fortunately I didn’t hit any rocks.  I didn’t wreck any motors, and I made a straight-through run.

STEIGER:  Did you drop the little mini-tongue?  You know there’s two tongues over there:  there’s a big one on the far right, which is where I used to go.  I used to go far right, sideways, and then turn around and back down after the duck pond.  But now there’s a rowin’ run, there’s this little mini-tongue, the next one over.

WILSON:  Exactly.

STEIGER:  Is that where you would go?

WILSON:  No, that’s not what I did.

STEIGER:  You started far right and then made that turn?

WILSON:  I made the turn, yeah.

STEIGER:  Oh my God, right there, makin’ that turn!  (whistles "whew!")

WILSON:  But, see, I made the cut early.  I was really lucky.  There was a rock there, and I brushed the rock, put me into the eddy immediately, that little pool, and I swung around, but I was able to keep my boat straight, and I may have actually thrown it in reverse for a little bit to try to cut the speed there--I don’t really remember exactly what I did, but for some reason or other I had my senses about me and was able to pull it off--mostly luck, probably.  But, if you’re talkin’ about luck, Hugh did the same thing, just came through smooth.  So I pulled down, thinkin’ maybe I could do something for these Henry Falany guys, but it was stupid, I should have never stopped.  I pulled up by one of their boats, and they were workin’ on a motor.  They’d broken somethin’ pretty bad, and I was very familiar with that problem because I did a lot of it.  I said, "Is there anything I can do to help you guys?"  And they said, "Get the fuck outta here!"

STEIGER:  Do you know who it was?

WILSON:  No, I don’t.

STEIGER:  It wasn’t Gloeckler, though?

WILSON:  No, no, no, it wasn’t Gloeckler.  "Get the fuck outta here!"

STEIGER:  "Ass hole!  We’re in here fixin’ our boat, you’re sittin’ there, just...."  Okay, sore subject.

WILSON:  Yeah.  So that was about my only claim to fame in the river running department.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  You made it in the midst of all these other guys.

WILSON:  I made it.  Let’s see, then there’s....  There were some fly-out trips.  David....  I wish I could remember some of the other boatmen, but David Lowry was the head boatman, and then I was one of the boatmen on an oar trip, along with two others.  And there was this single woman who came along, and we didn’t know anything about her, she was just another passenger, but we discovered right away, the first day, that if you didn’t just basically hang onto her, she would disappear.  So if you stopped for a pee stop, she’d go, and we had to go searchin’ for her.  And she was really messin’ up our....  You know, I mean, we’d spend twenty, thirty minutes findin’ this woman, and then getting her to come back to the boat.  And she wasn’t violent or anything, she was just....  She wanted to be led, sort of.  The first morning out, after we’d camped one night, she had put her sleeping gear up on a knoll above the camp, and I noticed that she was just puttering around, not doing anything, and so I went up and I said, "Is there anything I can do to help you, or pack your bags?"  She said, "Yeah."  And so I packed her stuff up for her and carried it down.  And then by the time we got down to....  David wanted to stop and hike up, oh, what is it, 75 Mile Canyon?

STEIGER:  Uh-huh.

WILSON:  So we stopped there.  And we came back, and she was on the boat--there was quite a little bit of charcoal layin’ on the beach--in charcoal she had written on a cliff and a bunch of rocks at the mouth of the canyon, "Fuck you!  This is fucked!" and just on and on, all this.  And David went down and confronted her, and he really confronted her, and he said, "If you can’t straighten up what you’re doing:  when we call everybody, get to the boat in a reasonable time; and not deface the canyon and all that; I won’t fly you out at <Phantom Ranch>.  But if you keep it up, between now and <Phantom>, you’re goin’ out."  So before <Phantom Ranch>, I don’t know whose boat she was on, but David came over--as we went along downriver, he was goin’, "Okay, you guys, when we get there, hang onto her.  We’ve got to physically hold onto her."  So we held onto her and took her up to the ranger station and told this ranger what the story was, and he said, "Okay, we’ll get a helicopter down here and fly her out."  And we told him over and over--David was really specific about it, he said, "Do not let her go.  You’ve got to physically hang onto her.  She’ll disappear."  Well, by the time the helicopter got there, she was long gone, we heard later.

STEIGER:  You left her with the ranger, and they lost her.

WILSON:  They lost her, yeah.  They did get her back, but it was kind of a fiasco for a while.  They had to get some people out searching for her to get her back.  And we found out that her psychiatrist from the San Francisco Bay told her that she should just--in order to try to get her head straightened out, she should go on a <Grand Canyon> trip.  And we’re goin’, "Oh, man, now we’re gettin’ this kind of stuff."  So that was the end of that story, we flew her out.

	Another time--and this is another single thing--this is a high school kid who had saved his money to do a <Grand Canyon> oar trip, and he was on our trip.  And just a great kid, everybody loved him.  But it was interesting, he was by himself.  We got to the ledges, and it was hot, and the rocks were really hot, and in the middle of the night--this is a trip that Castelli and I were on--somebody came and got me off the boat and said, "You know, this kid is laying in a pool of blood."  "Oh shit!"  So I get Castelli and we go up and we take a look at this kid, and he’s sound asleep there, layin’ in this big pool of blood on those rocks.  We woke him up, and he was really, really groggy.  I mean, he’d lost enough blood that he was very, very weak.  It was hard for him to walk, and he was in trouble.  Mike and I decided right away that we had to fly him out.

STEIGER:  Where did the blood come from?

WILSON:  Out of his nose.  I mean, he just....

STEIGER:  Sprung a leak?

WILSON:  Sprung a leak, yeah.  I mean, it wasn’t bleeding when we got to him, but he sprung a leak and pushed a lot out.  He was completely in a pool of blood just surroundin’ him, and he was a mess, as far as blood was concerned.  But anyway, we took off and went down to <Havasu Canyon>, and Castelli and I ran--and we thought it was quite a feat, but I hear now that a lot of people do it--we ran to the village, forty-five minutes for us to the village, which I thought was pretty good.

STEIGER:  That is a feat!

WILSON:  Is it a feat?  Okay.

STEIGER:  That’s thirteen miles isn’t it?  Or what is it, eleven?  That’s pretty good.

WILSON:  I think it must be eleven miles, I don’t know.  The last part was tough, when we got up there on that sandy trail.  Seems like it was sandy trail up through there.  That was a hard part of it.  But, you know, we got there, made the phone call, and in the meantime there’s a helicopter that’s shuttling workers out of the village, up to the rim, and back and forth.  This guy was just flyin’ these people in and out of there all time.  And the landing spot was right there where the little store was back in those days, and just probably fifty yards from it or something.  It was pretty close, there was a little fence there.  And so Mike and I had nothing to do, because we’re waiting for this guy to get done shuttling these people, then he’s gonna fly us down to the river.

STEIGER:  Getting a ride back.

WILSON:  We’re gettin’ our ride back, and he’s gonna haul the kid out.  Well, in the meantime, we were noticing with this little helicopter--it was one of those little piston jobs, the little bubble rig--that there’s a weight.  When he had people in it, he had to have the weight in the back, and when there weren???t people in it, he had to have the weight up between the seats.  And every time he’d fire that thing up, he’d lift it off the ground, he’d go, "Oh, shit!"  You could just see him, he’s goin’, "Aw, shit!"

STEIGER:  Forgot to move the weight.

WILSON:  And he’d get out and go get the weight and put it on.  (laughs)  And I’m thinking to myself, and I’m sure Mike was too, "God, this guy is havin’ kind of a hard time."  And so we’re sittin’ there waiting and watching people and stuff, and we hear this incredible rumbling sound coming up the canyon.  In full view, here comes one of these old helicopters that used to fly the pipe across the canyon, big ol’ thing, and it was clattering and banging.  I mean, really, the engine in it, it had to have been there were a lot of metal parts on the body that were flapping.  It was just....  It was really making a lot of excessive noise.  And they came in and they set that thing down right there, we were about thirty feet from it.  When it set down on the ground, the whole body and everything just sort of sagged down to a stop, and the rotor blades quit churnin’ and snatchin’ around, and these two guys crawled out the window and jumped down on the ground.  They were obviously characters.  But they were workin’ for the same company that was gonna fly us out, so we got up and went over and said, "Well, what would be the chances of you flyin’ down to the river and pickin’ this kid up and haulin’ us down there too, and flyin’ him back to <Grand Canyon>?"  Well, they said, "Yeah, we could do it.  Let me call and check with the boss."  So he makes a phone call and then he tells us "The boss says, well, you can do it, but you’ve got to sign a release sayin’ that if you die, you aren’t gonna hold us responsible."  And we thought, "Well, maybe we’ll just wait for the other guy."  (laughter)  So I don’t know, they went and got a soda pop, I think, was all they were doin’, stoppin’ for a drink of water.  And they got back in that thing and I’ll never forget, the starter was [making a high-pitch whine, followed by a boom] and a great big cloud of smoke would engulf this thing, and then it’d [make the high-pitched whine again, followed by a boom].  Finally, on one of those blasts, it actually started to run, and it got goin’.  All of a sudden all of that sagging that it did, it all straightened up and started lookin’ like a normal little helicopter, and took off and flew away.  (laughs)

	When we got in with this guy, and we fly him down the canyon, he was pretty good.  He said, "You know, what’s really fun is watchin’ all the girls down there."  (laughs)  <Mooney Falls>.  And so he did a little circle over the pool at <Mooney Falls>, and we flew on down the canyon.  He was doin’ things right, he was flyin’ on the right side of the canyon so if he had to make a turn, or if he had to set it down, he was in that talus slope above there, which it was possible to crash a helicopter into that and maybe survive it.  Then I got to talkin’ to him, I said, "You know, what do you do at night at <Grand Canyon Village>?"  And he goes, "You know, I drink myself to sleep every night."  I’m goin’, "Shit."  He was just out of <Vietnam> and this was his first job in civilian life, and I think he was havin?? a tough time of it.  But anyway, he landed on the ledges, just downstream of the creek and picked the kid up and flew him away.

STEIGER:  So you just made an arrangement with him, and he took him to <Flagstaff>, or to the South Rim?

WILSON:  South Rim.

STEIGER:  To the clinic there?

WILSON:  Yeah, up to the clinic there.  And the people on that trip pooled their money, and that kid got several hundred dollars.  They made sure he had the helicopter ride paid for out of there, and a little spending cash.

STEIGER:  Did the park have any kind of thing goin’ in?  I mean, would they have helicoptered him out?

WILSON:  They didn’t have a helicopter.

STEIGER:  They didn’t?!

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  So this was real early, this was like Year One?

WILSON:  I said oar trip--it was a motor trip that we were doing then.  But yeah, it was real early, there was no park service helicopter.  No...  No, actually they did have one... they were leasing a Jet Ranger from a company in <Phoenix>.

	Allen Deubner had a good story that they had some rush thing that they had to do, where they flew up from the river, and they had to borrow a car, and they had it worked out with the company there at <Tusayan>, where they were based.  At that time, those helicopters were parked on a little platform, and so they landed on the platform, and Deubner got out and ran, because it was gettin’ late, and the pilot didn’t want to fly after dark, and they went and did the stuff they had to do, and got back in.  And the pilot didn’t bother to warm it up, he just started it up, because it was only just a few minutes.  And the engine quit after they lifted off, and it landed on the ground, just fell down and squished down on the ground.  Deubner always thought that was kind of an interesting little thing.  (laughs)

	One other thing that was also kind of interesting was that there was a little bit of poison ivy or poison oak at Vasey’s Paradise, and there was a mother and son who came on the trip, and it was like a ten- or eleven-year-old kid, and she had special concerns about this boy and poison oak and poison ivy.  He was incredibly allergic to it, and it would be major problems.  And so the first day he gets off the boat, and Mike made a special point of talking to the mom and the kid, "There’s poison oak here, just stay on the boat."  And the next thing Mike knows, the kid’s off the boat, over there, in the poison oak.  And so it was a panic situation, and that kid just started to puff up.  We flew him out at <Phantom Ranch>.  But that was a close call.

STEIGER:  Did you have to race down to <Phantom>?

WILSON:  No, we didn’t have to race to <Phantom>, but I did have to race to <Phantom> on another helicopter rescue up in the upper canyon, and it was one of those trips where the canyon was really engulfed in heavy overcast, and there was just no air traffic at all, and especially up around Mile 30 and in that area.

STEIGER:  Did you guys have a ground-to-air radio, or would it have been a signal mirror or something?

WILSON:  There were no radios.  We did at one time carry some of those radios, and we may have had one then, I’m not sure, because we were getting into those pretty early in the game.  But there was no aircraft, period.

STEIGER:  Nobody to radio.

WILSON:  Yeah.  So a lady that night had a heart attack, as we were unloading the boats.  And this is our first night out, there above Stanton’s Cave.

STEIGER:  South Canyon.

WILSON:  South Canyon, yeah.  So we had, luckily, a cardiologist on that trip, and one of the assistants I was always getting stuck with, that was brand new, was fresh out of Colorado’s Outward Bound School, and he brought his complete first aid kit, which included an oxygen tank.  And so as luck would have it, the heart attack wasn’t bad enough that she was dying from it, but she was in an incredible amount of pain.  And so this cardiologist administered oxygen to her and did whatever he could to help her.  And the next morning, early, I mean it was like three o’clock in the morning, I got up, and we’d already talked to the passengers about who was going to ride down with me to <Phantom Ranch> and call out and get help, and who was gonna take the longer trip on downriver.  And so I took my small group and headed off downriver, and got to <Phantom Ranch> about noon, and made the phone call, and they had her out by two o’clock.  She lived.  At the end of that trip, we went up to the South Rim and heard she was in the hospital, and talked to her for a little while.  She made it.

STEIGER:  That’s a pretty good time you made to get down there.

WILSON:  It was a really good time, and man, I didn’t dilly dally.

STEIGER:  You hauled ass.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And we had decent water, like at <Hance>, and I didn’t have to stop there.  I’d been runnin’ it every week and a half or so, every two weeks, and so I didn’t stop and look at it.  Did a scout from the high spot in the boat, and just kept on going.  But yeah, that went good.  I was glad that that worked out for her and everybody.

STEIGER:  You were really kind of more on your own.  Nowadays, everybody has a satellite phone, which is great.

WILSON:  I know.

STEIGER:  Not really 9-1-1, but there’s a number you call, and it’s all good.

WILSON:  Yeah, that really is good.

STEIGER:  Takes a lot of the heat off, for sure.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And we didn’t have anything....  I mean, there were no other first aid classes, other than advanced first aid, of course, and you probably went through the same thing.  Every three years you got your first aid card, or every two years.

STEIGER:  I did for a while, and then the first time I saw--pretty early on I saw a guy fall and split his head wide open, and we had to deal with it.  But there were a couple nurses and a doctor along, and that was good.  But that kind of made me think I’d better get some more training if I’m gonna keep doing this.  So I got an EMT back then.  But it didn’t really pertain--especially back then, even the EMT was sort of like, well, here’s the ambulance and here’s all the equipment in the ambulance.  And basically we were just supposed to pick 'em up and throw 'em in there and get your ass over to the hospital, which didn’t make much sense for the river.  Now they have this other-- Wilderness First Responder, and these other kind of protocols that are a lot more useful.

WILSON:  Yeah, I did the Wilderness First Responder here quite a few years ago now.

STEIGER:  That’s a good one.  But back then, it seemed like if there was any doubt, we would just helicopter 'em out.  But the helicopter didn’t cost that much.  The helicopter was 300 bucks an hour, and the trip was only a few hundred bucks.  Now, the helicopter is astronomical, and the trips are astronomical.  So it’s good that we’re gettin’ it figured out more, because you’d hate to fly somebody out that didn’t have to go out, after they spent all that money.

WILSON:  Exactly.

STEIGER:  So it’s nice that we have a little more to work with in terms of helping us make that decision.

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s true.  It is, that’s right.  You know, speaking of trips costs, the first year I worked in ’69, ARTA’s trips were $280 a person for nine days.  The next year, they were $300, it really went up.

	Let’s see, is it all right if I just look at a list once in a while?

STEIGER:  Sure!  I should be asking you more intelligent questions, but sometimes it seems like it’s better for me to just keep my mouth shut.

WILSON:  Oh, the crazy woman, yeah, we talked about her.  The survey trip.  We did the donkey poo.  Oh! my God!  Motor trip, and I don’t remember the year anymore, but it was early on.  We had two boats and our schedule was set up so we planned on campin’ at <Phantom Ranch>.  And we actually got to <Phantom> reasonably early, and there was like one other motor trip parked there.  And it was spring break, all the college students were out hiking.  The river companies were pretty full up.  And there was like--I have no idea anymore--but there probably were ten motor companies parked there, plus all these people hikin’ off the rim.  You were just basically stacked all over the place.  People were sleeping on the trail and anywhere there was a spot that it was possible to sleep on.  And the kitchens for all these different companies were just--there was a little bit of trouble figuring out which kitchen to go to.

STEIGER:  This is at <Phantom Ranch>?

WILSON:  At <Phantom Ranch>, yeah.  The park service made an estimate of 3,000 people being there that day.

STEIGER:  At the ranch?

WILSON:  At the ranch, yeah:  out on the beach, down there where the boats are parked, and they camped up the creek.  I mean, the place was just packed with people.  I mean, it was horrible, literally horrible.  People were supposed to use the toilets, but the river companies had no toilets.  We weren’t carrying toilets then.  So that’s when the rules came as to what was gonna happen at <Phantom Ranch>.  That’s when they made the regulations about numbers of people camping at <Phantom>....

STEIGER:  Now, you can’t camp [at <Phantom>].

WILSON:  And they outlawed river trips from camping there, period, at that point in time.  And so I was one of those people that made the foolish mistake of stopping there.

STEIGER:  Looked like a good party, huh?

WILSON:  Well, we were like one of the first ones to land there.  We happened to be earlier in the day, and as the day went on, more and more boats stacked up, and what are you gonna do?  It baffles me that more people didn’t bypass that and go on downriver.  But anyway....

	The other thing that was pretty cool was the swimming pool at <Phantom Ranch>.  We used to allow a little more time there, and go up and get a lemonade and leave a little room for people to go take a dip in the pool.  It was really neat--really, really kind of a neat experience if you wanted to have a little civilization in the middle of a fairly good wilderness experience at the same time.  But, <Coconino County> did some testing on the pool and found out that it wasn’t up to the standards that it needed to be for health purposes, and they condemned it.  And Fred Harvey decided not to put the money into it.  And during the construction of the pipeline, they had a little cat, like a D-2 or something.  It was a little cat that they were using, putting the trail back together, and doing a lot of just general cat work in that whole construction process.  And it was down at <Phantom Ranch>, and they were using it to dig out things and do some stuff around there. When they were all done the construction company gave it to Fred Harvey, but it was pretty well wore out, so they put it in the swimming pool and covered it all up.  So there’s a cat in the bottom of that hole.

STEIGER:  I never did see the swimming pool.

WILSON:  Oh, you didn’t?  Oh.  It wasn’t there very long.  They got rid of it fairly soon.  Were you there when they were still flyin’ pipe over the canyon?

STEIGER:  Uh-uh, no.  You must have seen 'em--they got it across and they were puttin’ it up on the South Rim side, huh?

WILSON:  Well, they were flying pipe from the South Rim over to the North Rim.

STEIGER:  I might have seen some of that.  For the pipeline.

WILSON:  For the pipeline, yeah.  They were actually flyin’ pipe.  I mean, just trip after trip after trip that would fly over there.  They were flyin’ it somewhere up on the north side, they were puttin’ the pipe in.

STEIGER:  I didn’t start workin’ until ’72, but I kind of vaguely remember that was....  Would that have been over by then?

WILSON:  It was pretty close to over, I think.

STEIGER:  I vaguely remember a lot of activity there.

WILSON:  There may have still been a lot of helicopter traffic.  I know the first two years I worked down there, it was heavy, heavy helicopter traffic with pipes hangin’ off the bottoms of 'em.

STEIGER:  I wonder about you comin’ to the decision to leave the river.  All this time that you were doin’ it, did you think about the future?  We talked about this when the tape wasn’t rollin’, a little bit.  I don’t know if there’s anything that we need to record there.

WILSON:  Well, I could....  You know, my third year on the river, when I met Marilyn, I was thinking about quitting.  But I met Marilyn, and I did not want to quit.  She gave me a whole new enthusiasm about working on the river some more.  And so we worked together on the river for three years, and after we broke up I worked at least another couple years after that.  I don’t know, I’d have to really think about the timeline there.  But I think I spent three years with her, and I’m pretty sure three years on the river prior to her, and then whatever amount I did after that.  But yeah, I did want to get off the river.  And finally, toward the end, I was just thinkin’ of anything I could do to amuse myself with the passengers.  And it was mostly for shock value, just doing things like the dress.  You know, just to mock the concept of the macho boatman thing.  It was all these convoluted things that I would think of to do.  And it was this amusement thing.  I still worked with the people, but what I did in my own mind, I made up my mind that I was going to put my full attention into the people for the first two-thirds of the trip, but once I hit Lava, I was going to allow myself a little breathing room from 'em.  And so after Lava, I detached myself from 'em pretty much.  And I don’t think that was very good.  I mean, it’s not like I was....  I just didn’t carry on much of a conversation anymore.  If I had personal problems, I’d sit there and think about personal problems.  I never wore glasses, and glasses are really, really hard on me--dark glasses.  Everybody wore dark glasses but me.  They distorted the river in a way that I just had to be able to see where I was putting the boat.  But when I was with the people and I was in that frame of mind down there, I learned that people could look at my eyes and see what was goin’ on, and I didn’t want that to happen during that period...  So I put these mirrored sunglasses on, so they couldn’t see my eyes.   So I was ready to get out of there.  I was ready, really... the last two years is when I was really ready.  And I finally made the break from the canyon  with Peter Winn, and he was ready too.  And Peter was gettin’ involved with Cindy then, and Marilyn and I weren’t together any longer, and I had no idea what I was going to do, but I had fallen into the <Grand Canyon> thing, and I figured, well, maybe I can fall into something else.  I sort of did and didn’t there for a long time.  My diabetes was the other part of it.  I think actually, if I hadn’t had diabetes, I may have been able to have done it.  Because the diabetes did affect me and how I thought, and the longer I worked there, the less control I had of my diabetes, the less control I had.  And so I didn’t feel good a lot of the time.  But I’ll tell you what, as a diabetic, you can just feel lousy for days on end--I mean real lousy.  And that is a factor, of course.  That has always been, in my mind, what precipitated that whole sequence of events that caused me to get away from it.  And Hugh Wingfield helped Peter and I do that--remarkably so, as a matter of fact.  Hugh wound up coming back to <Flagstaff> for a little while.  I mean, he liked to live in <Flagstaff> when he was away from other places, and so he’d come there and hang out.  So he was talkin’ to me, he’s goin’, "Peter’s gotta make some money in order to survive this winter while he’s goin’ to school and Cindy’s goin’ to school and all that, so he should start cuttin’ wood, he can sell firewood."  So Hugh went and bought this chain saw and went over and gave it to Peter and said, "Peter, here’s a chain saw for you to use."  And so Peter and I went out and cut wood for a little while, and later on Peter and Cindy went out and cut wood.  And so he made a little bit of money sellin’ firewood.  Hugh--it was just one of those things, you know, that helps....  He was really good.  I mean, he was really, really good about....  He was six or seven years older than I was, he was an old man and had the wisdom.  And in a way, he did have the wisdom to try to deal with those things that were troubling in life.  It was pretty cool.

STEIGER:  I got a couple things.  We only got seven minutes left on this tape.  There was one thing that we mentioned to talk about was the George Billingsley....  The diabetes made me think of that.

WILSON:  Oh yeah.  On my first private trip, you gotta remember now, I felt lucky to be able to pull into Havasu.

STEIGER:  You mean just to get ’er done?

WILSON:  What do you mean?

STEIGER:  Why lucky?

WILSON:  Well, I pulled my snout boat....

STEIGER:  To get it in there?

WILSON:  To get it in there, yeah.  I felt lucky that I was able to make the pull and get in there, you know.

STEIGER:  Oh, your first time rowin’ a snout boat?

WILSON:  My first time rowing ever.  I’d never rowed before.

STEIGER:  Little did you know that it was going to be harder to get out!

WILSON:  Well, see, and that’s where George Billingsley comes in.

STEIGER:  Ah-ha!  (laughter)

WILSON:  And he still shakes his head to this day.  That’s the only reason he remembers who I am.  (laughs)  But I had been eyeballing this little tiny channel, and I’d seen the ARTA boats do this--those shorty pontoons do this--because they were pretty ungainly critters to get down the river.  And right along the rock wall there, if you pull out of the creek, and right along the cliff, there’s a little channel there that if you had enough water you could just shoot down through there.  And so we get there, and we get out and we spend quite a little bit of time up Havasu, and I don’t remember what-all we did.  We may have even spent the night there, I can’t remember.  One of those trips we hiked up to the falls and camped out and came back and did some stuff like that, and that could be the trip we did that.  Anyway, we got back down there, and George was there.  I’m goin’, "You know, I wonder, George, if you think there’s enough water I can get my boat down through there."  And he says, "Well, I don’t think you could."  And I said, "Well, I don’t think I can pull across the river.  I just don’t think I can do that."  And he said, "Well, I don’t think you can get it down through there."  And I said, "Well...."  I didn’t really tell him what I thought I was gonna do, but I just, when we got everything all on board, I just put the boat down in there and immediately got stuck.

STEIGER:  On the left?

WILSON:  On the left side, yeah.  But, it was right against the cliff.  And then George came over, and I think he helped, and helped shove us.  We were all kind of just pushin’ off rocks, and I was down on the cliff and pullin’ and pushin’ and shovin’.  I don’t know, it probably took a half-hour to get down through there.  But George still remembers that.

STEIGER:  He told you you couldn’t do it!  You went ahead and did it anyway.

WILSON:  But it was a near miss, I’d say.  Well, if the rocks had been sticking clear out of the water in there, and it was a dry channel, I wouldn’t have done it.  But it wasn’t a dry channel, and there was water in there, so I went down there.

	Another thing that was pretty exciting was a Fort Lee boat on a motor trip--I was doin’ a two-boat motor trip, Fort Lee was doin’ a one-boat trip, and we get to <Bedrock>, and there the Fort Lee boat is, upside-down on <Bedrock>.  And it was high enough up on <Bedrock> that it was easy to make the run around and come in at the bottom and get in there.  So we pulled in around on the back side of the rock and went over.  And it just kills me, I can’t think of the guy’s name who was the boatman.  He was a small guy....

STEIGER:  Myron Cook.  I went by there that day.

WILSON:  Did you really?!

STEIGER:  Yeah, I was swampin’ on an ARR trip--Ross Garrison and Tom Moody.  Myron Cook was a swamper, and he was drivin’ some other guy’s boat.  And I don’t remember that guy’s name, but I remember Skip Jones was on a one-boater with another Fort Lee trip, and Skip....  I know when we got there, the boat was down below, and they had it right-side up.  You remember Skip Jones?

WILSON:  The name really rings a bell, but unfortunately I can’t put a face to the name.

STEIGER:  He had come along at some point in there, and was tryin’ to deal with it too, and they were all fried.  They wanted to borrow our radio, because they had some people that needed to helicopter out.

WILSON:  I wonder if it’s the same one.

STEIGER:  I bet it was.

WILSON:  Because you know, we got there first, and then Grand Canyon Expeditions with Tim Means got there.  And Tim....  Not many of my passengers, but some of my passengers were actually....  There was a broken arm on that trip, is what it was.  And I had a doctor that helped just a little bit in that department.  But then we were there tryin’ to help push--not really push, but I don’t remember exactly what we did--but I do know that Tim got out there with his boat and got a line out to his boat, and was pullin’ on it from the river.  I think that I had to get out there, and several others of us....

STEIGER:  Right on the top of the <Bedrock>, right on the front.

WILSON:  Yeah, we had to get out there and start pushin’.  And I know that’s what we did, because it was that frame.  See, they had that big frame that stuck up, and upside down it was a piece of shit.  And so they were really penned in there, and it was the metal frame that was causin’ their problem.  But we got out there and started pushin’, and in the meantime, though....  I shouldn’t say this.  The river company that ran by, just openly was laughing as they went through, on out, and down the river.  But anyway, Tim and all of us pushin’, pullin’, and everything, the boat came off.  From what I recall, we put a lot of people on our boat and took 'em on downriver and picked up all the stuff we could pick up and got 'em down there.  Seemed like it was a beach down on the left side there.

STEIGER:  Just below--was it on the left?  I remember 'em on the right, but....

WILSON:  Maybe it was the right side.  There were two flips on <Bedrock>:  one was that USGS boat, and we got them on the left side.  We might have got them over on the right side, I can’t remember now.  But yeah, that was a pretty exciting experience.  It really was pretty exciting.  Kind of traumatic.

STEIGER:  I think it was the same one.  I think we came along later.  I’ll bet that was ’73.

WILSON:  It could have been.

STEIGER:  I’ll betcha it was.

WILSON:  Coulda been, yeah.  Yeah, that’s right.

STEIGER:  We’re about to run out of tape here.

WILSON:  It was an offhanded thing.  There was a lady workin’ up there at the Fort Lee Store, and I went in there one day and....



