DON BRIGGS INTERVIEW NAU.OH.53.84B

River Runners Oral History Project

[BEGIN TAPE 2]

Steiger: Check, Check OK, this is the River Runners oral history project. This is master tape - DAT (??) tape number two. This is an interview with Don Briggs. We're in <Mill Valley California>. Still on February 5, 2003. Tape two comin' up. I better stop a second. .. . OK. So we're back in business. Crazy Al buildin' the boat.

Briggs: Yeah, so beween motor trips, Alan phoned in some dimensions of basically a motor box frame like on the ARTA boats. And he had 'em make two of them. So then he just strapped two snouts to it. And he drove back to <Oregon> and picked up the frames and came back to <Arizona>. And he actually ran two private trips. And I was invited to go on the second one. So he did two single boat snout trips that summer, and I was on the last one. And Alan had never rowed before.

Steiger: Weil now, do you think these were the first snout rigs in the Canyon?

Briggs: Uh, I don't know. First ones I ever saw. I mean I don't know if. ..

Steiger: Oh yeah, had ARIA been usin' them?

Briggs: No, ARTA didn't start usin' them until '72.

Steiger: I wonder where he saw 'em bein' used before.

Briggs: I don't know whether it was Grand Canyon Expeditions, maybe, or Tony or one of those guys. I don't know. Maybe he hadn't seen one. I don't know. (

Steiger: Hmm)

Briggs: So anyway, they survived the first trip, and like I say, Alan had never rowed before. So by the time I got there on the second trip at least he'd rowed one trip (both laugh). But, as it turns out, there's a lot we didn't know, (both laugh louder) Thank god! You know5 we get down to the <House Rock>, and if you don't learn how to run that run, then you go right in that hole.

Steiger: Well how do you ran it in a snout rig, for cryin' out loud?

Briggs: Well, you just get a reverse ferry angle and go right and swing around. Because you certainly can't go down the middle of the tongue and then try and ferry right with a snout rig. (

Steiger: No.) So we went right through that hole, not knowing that you can flip snout rigs (both laugh) in that hole. And I (laughing) saw a number of 'em flip in that hole. But we didn't know the difference. We were on a single boat trip. (

Steiger: Oh man.) Somebody was lookin' out for us. It's like we go to ran <Bedrock> and of course we get pinned on the rock, on the front side of the rock, 'Cause it's hard to make that cut unless you practice if and know that you've gotta do this and that. And the idea that the high side - get on the high side of the boat, which is what you do when a boat is wrapping (??) or stuff like that - we only got on the high side of the boat because the high side was on the rock. And by stepping off, thinking we would step off and push the boat off, we stepped on the high side of the boat and kept it from wrapping. I didn't realize this 'til later. Because it's pretty easy to wrap a snout rig in the front of that rock. If you hit it dead center. But, you know, we just kind of hopped off and the boat came up and we hoppped on and left. Steiger; Was there anybody else with you? Briggs; There were two women and then a guy, So there were five of us on the boat. 22 days. And we did lots of hiking. That was the first time that I jumped across Upper <Deer Creek> (

Steiger: Ohh!) was on that trip.

Steiger: And how did that transpire?

Briggs: I don't know. I was just up there and it seemed like the thing to do,

Steiger: Really, you hadn't heard of anybody? (

Briggs: No) You just said gee, a guy could jump across that. Briggs; I just thought, you know, I think I could do that.

Steiger: Oh my god. (laughs)

Briggs: And it's actually pretty easy when you're goin' across.

Steiger: Just don't miss.

Briggs: Yeah, and there was some loose gravel over there, so you tried to not land on the loose gravel.

Steiger: Did you come back? Did you jump back?

Briggs: No, (

Steiger: Yeah) Because what happens when you get over there ,.,

Steiger: Then you're lookin' up hill.

Briggs: You're right. And even though it's only about 6 inches, it looks like it's about 2 feet (laughs). So I'm lookin' at it and I'm goin' "Ohhh, no." At which point I worked my way back to the upper part on the right side there, which is infinitely more dangerous.

Steiger: Than jumpin' back.

Briggs: Oh, it's totally loose. And thank god there weren't any people around because I was kickin' all kinds of rocks off down in (laughs) (

Steiger: Yeah) So, I did that a couple other times over the years. Was gonna do it one other time when Edwards was there and he just was beside himself. He was sure that if I did it I would die.

Steiger: Would not allow that.

Briggs: A raven come flying through and he says, "It's a sign!!" (laughs) "It's a sign! If you jump you're gonna die!! It's a sign!!" (Laughing) And he was serious. "Don't do it!! Don't do it!!" He talked me out of it He had me so (laughing) nervous (

Steiger: Yeah) that I couldn't do it. Because, you know, it takes a certain amount of concentration (

Steiger: Yeah) and stupidity to do it. But if you kinda lose that edge .. .

Steiger: Remind me, I got a good story about that for ya.

Briggs: So the boating was fairly uneventful, and I did lots of wonderful hikes in 22 days. Hiked a whole bunch of the canyons, and a lot of them down in the lower end. 'Cause I think Alan hiked a lot of the upper ones. We hiked more in the lower end, and some of 'em are not that interesting. Like Cove and <Mohawk>. (

Steiger: Oh yeah.) So then we get back to the warehouse and I'm thinking I'm just gonna get in the car and go back to <Colorado>, and there's all this activity around the warehouse. And in the meantime it was the first year that ARIA rowed boats, '71 was the first time they rowed. And they had these 25-foot shortie pontoons. 30" tubes, 25 feet long.

Steiger: Now you mean ,..

Briggs: The ends were flat...

Steiger: Like a basket - you mean like a donut

Briggs: Just like this.

Steiger: Like a motor rig but shorter ., .

Briggs: Like a motor rig but shorter ,. .

Steiger: With a floor in it. Briggs; No floor.

Steiger: No floor. Briggs; No turned up ends. So all the rubber was flat on the water. (Steiger groans) I think they were seaplane tenders (??). That they could blow a bunch of 'em up and I guess they wanted them flat. Not like the pontoons that they want a little tip up at the edge of the

road bed (??) for whatever reason. Arid they had these frames which had two rowing positions, because they knew that they were heavy.

Steiger: That's the way Hatch (??) was doing it.

Briggs: Yeah, I'm sure Lou and somebody probably saw Hatch or somebody rowing these. I don't know if Hatch had - didn't they used to row with 33s? I know they did up at <Dinosaur>. They'd put these skinny Mormon kids on the 30 foot (laughs) (

Steiger: Yeah. Yeah.) Piled up 20 people and rowed down through <Split Mountain>. (

Steiger: Yeah) So anyway the last oar trip was packing up getting ready to leave. And lo and behold I run into Alan Dubner, who was the 16-year-old cook on the trip I did in 1967, four years before. And he recognized me and we talked and stuff like that. And he said, "Well, why don't you go on this trip? Why don't you go on this oar power trip? It's a training trip. They're puttin' on an extra boat." I'm goin' well, you know, I was thinkin' about it. He wasn't going. He and Peter Winn (??) I think took turns being head boatman. On the oar power trips. And Alan was going back home. He was probably going back to ____________ school or someplace. And so he introduced me to Peter. And I didn't know anybody, but I was able to get on this trip. And I think they only had enough rubber to do one trip at a time. And one four-boat trip. But they had this extra pontoon. And they had some guys coming down from- they were going to expand the next year, the oar power trip, so they brought Kent Erskine down from the Rogue. He was working for ARIA on the Rogue River. And some guys from Cataract (??), Chuck Nakose (??) and Dick Pfieffer (??). And then Eric Carlstrom (??) from <Flagstaff> was there, and then I was there. So that's maybe five trainees. And they just gave us this old rag of a boat and didn't tell us a word. Well the guys from <Oregon> and Cataract had rowed before. But Eric Carlstrom and myself, we had done motor trips on the <Grand Canyon>; we'd never rowed before.

Steiger: You knew where you were goin', though.

Briggs: Well, no, I didn't (laughs). And Eric didn't either. And it was the last trip of the season, and the regular boatmen were a little bit burned out. And they weren't that interested in teaching us anything, so they just set us free. It was pretty loose in those days. I mean we would carry passengers. Bill Breed (??) was on the trip. The first time I met Bill Breed. So, let me see, John Seppi, Jerry Jordan, Peter Winn. Was it Steve Dupuis? Maybe not. But I remember Jerry. And Jerry was from <Montgomery Alabama>. And he was kind of a heavy set guy who had wandered through <Flagstaff> on his motocycle, and he'd ran out of money. And he was over at Pennie's General Store, or whatever that place was. That's where we used to get our stuff. Was that Pennie's? Was that the name of that place? (

Steiger: Yeah,) Down there on 4th? (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.) And I guess he got to talkin to somebody and asked them If they had any work, and they said, "Oh yeah, we're lookin' for somebody to paint boats." So Jerry got a job just painting the boats. And as usual, you know, all of a sudden you come up a boatman short and you're not painting boats anymore, you're a <Grand Canyon> boatman (laughs).

Steiger: No problem!

Briggs: No problem! But he was a character. He was missing part of an index finger. He'd got It cut off in the chain on a motorcycle or something. But he played Incredible banjo. Unbelievable. I mean he used to jam with Nick Reynolds. I don't think he was the first Kingston Trio, but the new Kingston Trio. And he lived down in <Sedona>. I think that's who it was. And so sometimes between trips Jerry would go down and I'd go down with him and they'd sit around and play. So I mean Jerry was a great banjo player, but boy he was a rasty character. And these boats didn't hold air, and I remember we had to pump up the boats in the morning. And of course as trainees we were all hot to trot and be impressive and get up in the morning and get everything done. And I remember we'd jump on Jerry's boat to pump his boat, and he'd be out there sleeping on it. And he'd growl at us! (laughs) And tell us to get out of there. We'd say, "We're just tryin' to pump up your boat." (In a deep growly voice) "I don't care. Get outta here." (Both laugh) And somewhere along the line I ended up being friends with Jerry. But Eric couldn't deal with Jerry.

Steiger: Was he related to Car! Carlstrom?

Briggs: Carl was his brother. (

Steiger: Aahh.) And I worked with Jerry enough later that, I mean he's one of those guys that he doesn't respect you unless you give him as much shit as he gives you.

Steiger: He ... ?

Briggs: Or unless you give it back. And once you learn that lesson you're fine. But Eric never learned that. So (laughs) I remember Eric was trying to cook pancakes one morning and Jerry comes up, and he prides himself on some of his cooking, particularly pancakes. And Eric was bavin' a problem with the first coupla pancakes, you know, until the griddle gets the right (Steiger; , yeah.) And (laughing) Jerry just came up and he just grabbed the spatula out of his hand, and says, "Get outta here!" (laughs) And poor old Eric. Then we were camped at <Grapevine>, and it's Eric's turn to row the boat. So we're on the boat. I can't remember who else. I'm on the boat with Bill Breed. I can't remember who else was on there. And Eric goes right outta camp and doesn't pull out in the middle of the river. And I don't know if he was first boat or whatever, but nobody on the regular crew was watchin' him, and so he went right down the left side of <Grapevine>. And hit that diagonal going straight down the Canyon and not turning to (laughing) to hit it straight. And just rolled this, a pretty gentle roll, just rolled that 25¬foot pontoon over, just like nuthin. (Steiger groans.) One of my dubious firsts.

Steiger: Cause you were in it.

Briggs: I was in it. And it was the first oar power boat that ARTA flipped. I remember I was sitting next to Breed, and I remember it went over and we had this plastic green pitcher, water pitcher, that we used for lunch. We didn't have coolers or anything in those days. I remember rolling out and I saw it in mid-air, and I reached up and grabbed it just as (laughs) just as the boat went over and we went under. Saved the pitcher, And, you know, nobody knew how we were going to turn it over. So we de-rigged the entire thing while it was upside-down. (

Steiger: Oh god.) It never occurred to us to tie ropes on it and pull it over.

Steiger: On no. Did you have a big old load? (

Briggs: Well...) Well you didn't turn over that many of'em. Those were big too. 25-foot.

Briggs: 25-foot. And they didn't really tie the black bags on.

Steiger: They were hangin' down.

Briggs: They just ran one line through all of them and occasionally it would go over to the frame. So it was this big wad of black bags, those old generator bags (

Steiger: Yeah.) hanging down. Nothin' was tied on tight, (laughs) I mean, we were lucky. But, you know, we did OK. And that was just an unbelievable trip. The fact that it was an oar power trip, and Peter Wynn and Kent Erskine to this day are some of my best friends. And, you know, I was startin' to get to be pretty good friends with Peter and then we'd get down around .. .

Steiger: Now did you have passengers? Or this is just boatmen? (

Briggs: Yeah.) This is a regular .

Briggs: This is now a five-boat trip. It's a normal four-boat trip.

Steiger: It's a normal trip, but you just have this one boat....

Briggs: With 24 passengers or whatever, (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.) And then they put on this extra boat. But, you know, we were all mingling with the passengers, and they were riding on this boat, you know, one big happy family,

Steiger: It wasn't like the passengers.,. "Stay away from that. That's the training boat."

Briggs: No (laughs). They probably didn't even know, (

Steiger: Mmm.) So further on in the trip, I remember I was rowing down through the Jewels (??), and I come down on Ruby and (laughs) that great big, you know, it's not really a hole, that great big wave at the bottom? And I'm rowin' from the back position. One of rowing places was in the center, and the other one was on the back. And they had learned that you really didn't have to have two people to row them, but the boats were still designed for that. Which is great. If you ever wanted to get in water fights, you could have one guy rowing and one guy splashing. Which we did a lot of. So I'm comin' down on Ruby and I hit that hole or wave or whatever you call it a little crooked. And because I was sitting in the back of the boat it just catapulted me (laughing) out of the back of the boat, and I went down into river and I came up under the boat. They did have floor boards - suspended floors, just to put stuff in. And I was caught under there, and I thought I was gonna drown. And I kept pushing away. Let's see, is that the time that- man, that's

probably as close as I've come to thinking I was gonna drown. But you never know. But I did start pushing, trying to push off the bottom and try and get away, and I wasn't getting anywhere. And I went from the panic stage, and I kept doing it, and then the thought came in, "This could be it," And then I went a step further and got into the acceptance stage. And then I got one step farther to the point where it felt OK. Like, Eh, so what?

Steiger: Oh well, it's been good.

Briggs: This is It. And the minute I got into that place in my head, I popped out. So I get down to lunch, and you know, I'm pretty . ..

Steiger: What do you attribute that to, just relaxin'?

Briggs: No, just, for all I know I wasn't even close. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: 'Cause another time I flipped and I thought I was drowning again, and when we started talking about, I thought I was under there for a long time and caught under the load and I couldn't get out and couldn't get out. And when we were talkin' about the flip later people were savin' they'd never seen anybody .. .

Steiger: Get out so fast.

Briggs: Get out from under and on top of a boat so fast (laughs). So it's all a matter of perception. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: You never know how close you are.

Steiger: Georgie used to, well (Don laughs), she had a good line about that too.

Briggs: So we get to lunch, and I thought I was gonna die. And so I get into lunch and I go up to Peter, and say, "Peter, jeez, you know, I fell out there, got under the boat, and thought I was gonna drown!" And Peter looks up and says, "When are you motorboatmen gonna learn how to hit holes straight?" I got no sympathy. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: When are you motorboatman gonna leam how to hit, you know. So I go, oh. You know, knowing Peter he was putting me on and not putting me on, (

Steiger: Mm-hmm).

Briggs: I mean I got to be pretty good friends with him later. But the Winn brothers were very good boatmen and some of us were never that good,

Steiger: I remember seein' a movie of I think it was him, or maybe it was Mike, his brother. That's Winn? Is that how you spell it? (

Briggs: Yeah.)

Steiger: I'm writin down all these names. We'll check the spellings, I remember seeing a movie with one of those guys rowin' <Hance>. Rowin' a snout, doin' a right side ran in Hance, and jumpin' up and changin', turnin' around. Like wantin' to row one way and then jumpin' up and turnin' around and rowing the other (laughing) way to make cuts. I mean it was impressive. God.

Briggs: (Laughs) That could've been Michael,

Steiger: Yeah. It was impressive, though. He made the run and everything. I mean it was a big old snout rig.

Briggs: I was with David Winn one time when we had to do the right run in <Hance>. That's really a great story. I'll get to that. And Michael Winn. We called them the Fabulous Flying Winn Brothers. Peter, David and Michael. And Peter was- they're all really good. .. . Peter, you know, kinda of was more steady and did it more like a lifestyle. David did it in the summers while he was going to - I guess he graduated from Yale, did he graduate from Yale? Or was he just going to Yale? And then he'd go back East and go to school. Yeah, he was going to Yale, I guess. And then eventually he went to Harvard Business School. You know, and he was just too smart for his own good. Oh, I should say that. But I like to call David a classic example of a river guide gone bad (both laugh). He ends up being a CEO of IBM for <Europe>, Western <Asia> and all of <Africa>.

Steiger: Oh my god. That's what he's doin' now?

Briggs: Not now. But up until a few years ago that's what he was doing. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: River guide gone bad (laughs).

Steiger: IBM CEO, yeah.

Briggs: Oh man, David Winn stories. I mean he was like a black belt in judo, and he rode a freight train from -- they were from <Woodland>, and he caught the train in <Roseville> and - what I always wanted to do. Hop a freight and go across country.

Steiger: <Woodland Hills California>?

Briggs: No5 <Woodland>, Up here by <Sacramento>. (

Steiger: Uh-huh.)

Briggs: And <Roseville> was a big stop on the train because that's before you go up over the Sierras, so he went over and hopped on a car as it was taking off. And there's this rale of the road, I guess, that you're not supposed to get on somebody else's car. So he got on this car, and this guy came after him. And David was kind of a little guy, with kinda wire rim glasses, and kind of an intellectual looking guy. But he also had a black belt in judo and he threw the guy off the train.

Steiger: Movin' train?

Briggs: He had to. It was self-defense. That David. He speaks eight different languages I think. For a while he was living in <Venice> practicing his Italian, and he wrote Marvel comic books for the Union of South Africa. Was it the black superman? Oh, Tee-gray, Tigre(??). I think it was comic books for the black population in <South Africa>, And he wrote the scripts. (

Steiger: Oh, my god.) He would send them back to <New York>. So he'd write all morning, and then he'd practice his Italian and hang out in <Venice>. And he learned how to do the gondolas. And he ended up getting into gondola racing at a later date (both laugh). Took one out for the weekend and went out on the Adriatic and, I don't know if he did it on purpose or got lost or whatever, and had to tie up to a post out there and spend the night. Amazing guy. Was living in <Berlin>, and was looking for a job, and somebody said, "Well you know something about boats." And he said yeah. He was there practicing his German. And he says, "well we have a job for you." And, you know, "cool," So (laughs) they were dredging World War II bombs out of the lakes (laughing) (

Steiger: Oh no.) David, David, David, Great stories. The silver-tongued devil, we called him. He was the head boatman a lot because nobody else wanted to do it. And so we were drivin' up to the Ferry one day, and we were just speedin' along. He was drivin' the truck. He got pulled over by the Highway Patrol, and he goes out there and he's in the car, and we're sitting there in the track. And we expect him to get back and have a ticket and stuff like that. He gets in and starts up the track and drives away. And we're sayin',"Well, what happened?" He said, "Nuthin'." "Well what do you mean?" And he said, "Oh, I talked him out of it." So from then on we called him the Silver Tongued Devil. Which reminds me of another story. When he was head boatman. This might have been the second year - I was scheduled to be a motor boatman the next summer. It woulda been the summer of '72. But because I'd made friends with Peter, I was gonna be slowly worked in to the oar power crew.

Steiger: Oh, they said, "This guy's OK. We'll take him."

Briggs: Yeah, well, you know, I'm kind of a fun guy, sometimes. So I mean we got along. I kind of provided a lot of comedy relief with my boating and stuff. I made everybody else look good 'cause I was not that good (laughs).

Steiger: OK, so basically you did five trips and weren't runnin' the boat? Did you get to run the boat at all?

Briggs: I didn't ran the boat.

Steiger: When you were motoring?

Briggs: When I was motoring. I ran it a little bit, but Alan was not.. . Steigen It was hard and there weren't guys that were bendin' over to train you or nuthin, ' Brlggs: No, (Steigen Yeah.) In fact he'd get back there to -I mean driving the boat in - he didn't tell me - I didn't know what an eddy was. I knew that it was strange that sometimes the boat was goin' a lot slower and the motor was working a lot harder, but I didn't know why (Steiger laughs). 'Cause I was in the goddamn eddy (laughs). There's that one place up in the twenties where you come down and there's a little drop, and the current goes right straight into the wall. Kind of right into the wall. It's just a little rapid. And then it kinda goes right.

Steiger: Oh, just a little tiny, like a riffle.

Briggs: Yeah, like a little thing, but it goes right straight into a wall.

Steiger: Like around Bishop Camp or Martha's Camp - like somewhere down there? (

Briggs: Well.. .) Below 36 mile or something?

Briggs: No, no, this is up ...

Steiger: Oh, in the twenties.

Briggs: Up in the twenties. So I remember going down there, and so I got the front of the motorboat was kind of in the eddy. So I kept trying to do a hard left turn to pull the front of the boat to the left, but I was making absolutely no headway, I was making just enough to think that I might be able to make it, and I just couldn't make it and I ended up running right into that wall full boar. (Laughs) (

Steiger: Oowee.) And Alan jumped up, and he laughed so hard. I mean he was slappin' his legs. He thought that was the funniest thing that happened all day. And I'm going. "How the hell do you run these things?" Nobody ever told me, you know? (Laughs) So, the next year- I get these trips messed up, but one time David Winn was giving the head boatman talk, and we had -I' m not sure - we had some snout rigs, but we were still using these 25-foot shorties. And he's up there at the Ferry. There weren't very many trips up there. And he was giving the head boatman talk, and we were standing around. And right while he was giving the head boatman talk, you heard this (poppping sound), this little explosion. And you look over there, and these boats were so rotten that the morning sun (laughs) had caused a patch to give way or something. And everybody looks around and see one of their boats going flat right on the beach (laughs). And David, being the Silver Tongued Devil, never reacts, just keeps goin' on with the talk. And we're all - the boatmen are kinda lookin' at each other, and the people are kinda lookin' at each other, and David just keeps goin', and in a very calm fashion he says, "OK, now what we're gonna do, we're gonna put everybody on these boats over here, and we're gonna go down and we're gonna

have lunch and then Don and Brace are gonna stay here and patch the boat and then they'll catch up with us." Just like this is everyday .. .

Steiger: No big . Piece a cake,

Briggs: Yeah, right Oh man, On one of those trips I did with Alan Wilson, we had two motors on each boat, and by the time - I can't remember if we were above <House Rock> ..

Steiger: You better pull that mike down a little bit; I'm hearing your beard a lot. Yeah, that's good,

Briggs: We went through three motors in the first twelve miles and were having to cannibalize -- we had three motors out, We had to get all the people to go up on the beach and sit under a ledge. And try and convince them that this is not a problem. As we're down there tryie' to take three motors apart to make one motor work (laughs).

Steiger: In the first twelve miles.

Briggs: (Laughing) In the first twelve miles!

Steiger: So that you can get outta here. So that you have just two motors. No spares. (

Briggs: Yeah.)

Steiger: Just to get outta here. How'd you do?

Briggs: Oh we always made It. Alan was a great mechanic, and I learned from him, and we learned pretty quickly how to take the different parts (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs: and again there was very little to eo maintenance as best we could tell going on with these engines. So it was whatever we did on the river.

Steiger: Now those motors that went out, did they just conk out, or had you hit'em on rocks

Briggs: No, they quit. They just quit runnin'. (

Steiger: Yeah).

Briggs: We had one Evinrude, or Elvinrood, and that thing could go for days and be just fine. Then all of a sudden It would just drop down to one cylinder. And it happened to me one time just as I was going into <Lava Falls> (Steiger gasps; Briggs laughs) It was (makes high motor sound) then (makes low motor sound), drops down to one. And It was the best ran I ever made in <Lava> In a motor boat.

Steiger: (Laughs) What's that tell ya?

Briggs: Well, I learned a little bit from that (laughs). I was tryin' to go too fast and try and make a cut, whereas I was goin' a lot slower and just klnda .. .

Steiger: Keep it straight, yeah.

Briggs: Kind of wallered on down through.

Steiger: It's amazing how much we got away with (Briggs laughs), how much people got away with. But it didn't seem to phase people. Did you ever see people get really bent out of shape?

Briggs: Yeah, I saw them a little nervous on the first day when they only got one good motor, but Alan was such an incredible head boatman and leader that - and yet you never could quite figure out why. Except he was just - he was a lot of fun; he was just this ordinary guy who just was enthusiastic, wanted to show them the Canyon, and he laughed a lot. And, you know, a pretty simple approach to life. And that's why they liked him. And he was good, and he knew a lot about the Canyon. But mostly he liked to laugh. Oh, we had so much fun. He was a diabetic.

Steiger: Alan Wilson.

Briggs: Yeah. And so I guess it was on that first trip I worked with him (laughs),! remember jumping down on the boat one time kind of unexpected, and he was down there shooting himself with insulin. And I figured, "Oh my God!" (

Steiger: Junkie!)

Briggs: This guy's a junky. No wonder he goes so fast. (Laughs) And then he had to let me in on, you know, let me know what he was doing. And then after we got to know each other a little better, he said, particularly on this private trip, at one point he said, "You know, if I ever seem a little bit odd, a little different," he says, "it's probably because my insulin is off." And he says, "no matter what I say, you gotta get some sugar in me." So, this was on a private trip and we were hiking from - we were above <Havasu Falls> on the way to the Village. The first thing I noticed was I was keeping up with him. Which was a little odd, that I wasn't havin' to work to walk as fast as he did. And then after a while he started... so I said, "Are you OK?" And he says, "Y'eah, I'm fine." And then I looked at him and I remembered. So I had to run all the way up to the Indian Reservation and get a 7-Up and a candy bar and run all the way back, thinking I'd find him dead on the trail. But he was fine. He ate the candy bar and drank the thing, and he went on.

Steiger: So you're takin pictures all this time. And you went and saw Emery Kolb (??). Did that have an influence on you?

Briggs: Oh I don't know. I can't say that it did. He was just a character. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: At the start of the second year, before I was scheduled to do a motorboat trip, there was an oar power trip going out. And I had enough trips to qualify as a boatman, 'cause I'd worked five motor trips. Kent Erskine had only been down the <Grand Canyon> on that trip the fall before, but he knew how to row. And so the two of us shared a boat. We were kinda of co-boatmen. And that was really great. Because, you know, we could unhook both oars and cruise if the winds were up or whatever. And we kinda got to be friends. Then, on the trip after that, I think this is the way it was, I was scheduled to do my owe boat for the first time. I remember it was a motorboat. And, in the meantime, my mother and my family had thought that I had basically gone to the dogs because I'd given up this perfectly wonderful job as a Highway Engineer to go play in the <Grand Canyon>. And my mother was not real happy about that. I was 31 years old and on my way toward being a big star in the Highway Department. And here I was growing long hair and running off. So I decided that I'd better take her down the <Grand Canyon>.

Steiger: So she could see what you were . . .

Briggs: So she could see, you know. So, as it turns out, as luck would have it, she's down there on the boat when I'm taking my own boat down the <Grand Canyon> for the first time (Steiger laughs). And I also have a head boatman that I don't know. Breck O'Neill, (

Steiger: Oh (laughing) no!)

Briggs: (laughing) was a Hatch boatman (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: that they got on. And Hatch had great motors. They had those 20-horse Mercs that never quit. Partly because they were good motors, and partly because they probably maintained them. But here we were driving this ARTA stuff, and Breck, he didn't know how to work on motors. So whenever his motor quit, I had to fix the motor. But the big thing was that I had my mother on the boat. And she came down early enough that she was there when we were doing some of the food shopping. And in those days we would push shopping carts through El Rancho and buy everything off the shelves. There was no central (laughing) food buying.

Steiger: None a that.

Briggs: (Laughing) So we'd have about ten or fifteen carts, and we would load this, and she was pretty impressed by that Then I think she actually rode with us up in the track. And then when we went up and we rigged the boats the day before. And we were, you know, unloading those - we didn't have a hydraulic lift on those trucks. So we were loading on 600-pound pontoons. Just get four guys and - and that was pretty impressive. To watch us unload that thing and build those boats. So she was starting to get the idea that I wasn't down there just having a good time. You know, the fact that it was hard work made it OK. .. . But when I pulled away from the Perry, it dawned on me (

Steiger: Oh dear!)

Briggs: that I didn't have a clue what I was doing. I was going ohhh, why didn't I pay more attention. (Both laugh a lot.) You know, I was too busy having a good time and taking photographs, and all of a sudden here I was with my own boat, and my mother on the boat.

Steiger: And your mom's on your boat.

Briggs: Yeah, so theoretically you should be just as careful with anybody's mother on the boat. (

Steiger: Yeah.) But there's something about having your own mother on the boat (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: that makes you a little more up tight. So off we went. And I sort of didn't know too much about <House Rock> (laughs), I didn't remember that much about hardly anything. So as we were comin' down on that hole, I was trying to motor away from it, and I got most of the front of the boat out of that hole. But I was at an angle, and the motor box was gonna go right through that hole. And I just dropped down on the box and held on for dear life! You know (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.)

Briggs: And then stood up all wet and everything, and everybody turns around and cheers (

Steiger: yeah!)

Briggs: and I'm spitting water out of my mouth and, "Wooo, what was that?" (laughing)

Steiger: I thought you guys might enjoy that (laughs)

Briggs: So then I really got nervous. Then I really knew that I didn't know what the hell I was doin'. I was startin' to get scared. So - god, what else happened on that trip? I mean something major happened every day. We almost got both motor rigs stuck right above or below Qwagunt (??) - those big boulders on the right side? You know, the water goes over there and it goes through? We had both rigs about ready to go over there and get caught. We never woulda got "em out. I think we better stop.

Steiger: OK, now we're up to speed. We're runnin' and we're pickin' back up now. This is gonna be our second session. Now it's February 6, 2003, and here we go again. And so we were talkin' about Qwagunt,

Briggs: It was the first time in the <Grand Canyon> with my own boat, and it was a motorboat and my mother was on the boat. And the head boatman was somebody that I'd never worked with before, and it was his first trip for AZRA. He worked for another company. And he didn't know how to fix motors. And he had a tendency to not look back and check on where I was as the second boat,

Steiger: Now Is this the trip where in the first day you went through the two spares?

Briggs: No, this was a different trip. (

Steiger: OK)

Briggs: But I had to fix all the motors. And we came down to <Crystal>, and <Crystal> was at a pretty nasty level. And the company that this guy worked for used to do these runs where they would back through- they'd go backwards, motoring upstream, to go slow enough and then make the cut over the right. And I had tried that once before, and we had actually let the people off. But that was a different trip. Anyway, I don't know exactly what I did at the top, but I remember the water was going over the Rock Island, but not too deep, and I remember driving right over the Rock Island, with my mother on the boat (

Steiger: Oooh.)

Briggs: (Laughing) And it was like driving off a 12-foot curb with a semi track (laughs). And the entire load moved forward about two feet. And then, when we came out the other side, it kinda moved back two feet. And I was pretty sure I must have injured somebody. But it was pretty scarey. I didn't break the motor or anything. But that kinda shook me up. And we get down into the Jewels, and my motor quit somewhere down in the Jewels. And I ended up floating through practically all the Jewels with no motor as the head boatman disappeared in the sunset, not looking back. And it was i don't know how many miles. But I went through <Ruby> and <Serpentine> - the whole - all of 'em before I got the motor started.

Steiger: The spare didn't work.

Briggs: I can't remember If I tried the spare. I must have. But when we got to camp I was not real happy, and we camped at Bass. And I'd never camped there before. It was only my second year. And so I just pulled in. The water was high. And went off and cooked dinner, And I was kinda fried from the day. And woke up the next morning and there was this guy looking over me and he says, "Ha, ha, high and dry!" And I said, "What?" And he says, "Your boat's completely out of the water," So he didn't bother to tell me where I should park my boat so that when the water dropped, it would be next to his, which was in the water. And mine was completely out of the water (laughs). And I was not too happy.

Steiger: So this is your head boatman that's laughing.

Briggs: It's my head boatman. But, you know, having experienced some similar things with Alan Wilson, in terms of moving boats, it was not a problem. I kinda knew how to get people around and move the boat. So we got it unstuck. So we get down to <Upset>, and I tried to do one of these backward runs where you're going backwards motoring upstream and I always had a hard time figuring out which way to turn the engine when I was going downstream. So with the water going upstream, I just couldn't quite deal with that. (Laughs) My dyslexia, you know?

Steiger: Well, that's not dyslexia. Until you get used to it, everybody goes through that I think

Briggs: So we get down there, and it's the first time I ever saw <Upset> at low water. And here I was in my own boat, with my mother . . .

Steiger: Goin' backwards.

Briggs: So Breck just did the backward ran that they used to do. And, you know, eventually I coulda learned how to do that, but I wasn't about to tangle with that hole So I somewhere in my memory, I remembered Alan Wilson telling me that what you do is you go down the left side and you drive into that first diagonal. Where you drive into the diagonals, and you'll slip down the left side. Well, that was partially correct. I mean he probably told me the right thing. But instead of just kind of hitting the first diagonal and then just backing off- that's kind of where you wanted to be. Then you just basically let go and you're in the chute. I drove .. .

Steiger: Too far left.

Briggs: .. . too far. I went through the first three diagonals, motoring kind of at an angle towards the bank. And so I go down there, and of course I miss the hole, and the boat came up, dropped over into a little eddy there, spun the boat around and I was then floating upstream arid there was this big, sharp pyramid rock. And I saw it comin' and there wasn't anything that I could do about it. And it went right under the motor box and put a 3-foot rip. (

Steiger: Oh!)

Briggs: And i was standing there, and I was standing there one moment and feet were kinda dry and the next second I had sunk. I was standing up to my knees in water (laughs). (Steiger groans.) So, you know, we limp on down to National and I had to derig the entire back of the boat and sew and patch a 3-foot rip, with the water coming up. So I'd get it all set and the water would come up and I'd have to move and pull It took me til midnight. And then the next day - I guess nothing happened at <Havasu> - but I got sick. In those days we just drank the water right out of the river. It was 1972. Even whether it was muddy or not, we drank it. Well, I got sick, and I was so sick on the day we ran <Lava> that my friend Kent Erskine was running the boat, and I was just lying on top of the load. And I got up and ran <Lava> and then went back up and piled back on the load. I was miserable. But anyway, that was the end of that trip.

Steiger: Well now how did it work out with your mom? Did she see what you were up to?

Briggs: So, yeah, the thing about my mother is she had a completely different attitude about me running rivers after that because first of all she saw that it was hard work, so that made it OK.

Steiger: Did she like it? Did she have a good time?

Briggs: Yeah, she had a great time. And within maybe the next - I might have done an oar-power trip, or I don't know - but the next time I ran a motor trip, I was the head boatman.

Steiger: Oh my God.

Briggs: So because it was a position of responsibility, that made it a little better with my mother. But my mother also saw that I was as happy as I had ever been in my entire life, and even a mother couldn't overlook that. But she still tried - she was an accountant for the State of Colorado, and she would find these job openings in the state that would be kind of a real job, but they were outdoor jobs. Like snow surveys and stuff But it was a real job. So she'd pop those things in the mail to me. So she was still tryin' to get me to get a regular job, but I never did (laughs).

Steiger: Did she go boatin' with you . . .

Briggs: She never went again.

Steiger: That was it.

Briggs: Yeah.

Steiger: But she saw what you were up to with that.

Briggs: Yeah. And then, it was '72 when I started making the transition from motorboatman to oar power boatman, so I was doing a few trips of each. When I did my last motor trip, whenever that was, in '72, I was finally learning. I finally got pretty good at it on my last trip. And then I switched over to oars. But it might have been that last trip where we got down below <Lava> and people were grumbling a little bit about some of our late camps. I was the head boatman. So we pull in below <Lava> - not too far down below. And it was a little late, and I knew people were grumbling, and so there was this guy that was working for us. Glen, and I forget his first name. And he worked for about a summer. And just as a matter of coincidence, he was in the choir with my mother at the church back home in Wheatridge. And he was this very sweet guy, and he had a sweet wife, and they're kind of an unlikely pair to be running a boat, but he was pretty good. So when he came through <Lava>, he blew a valve out of the center tube, and we didn't have valve kits in those days, and basically (laughs) what you had to do was pump up the diaphragm and then reach in - kind of cut the valve out and reach in and poke a hole in the diaphragm, therefore defeating the purpose of the four chambers snout.

Steiger: And then patch over the thing.

Briggs: And patch over it. So then when you'd pump the next valve up, then it would slowly go into it. Well, he blew that valve out in <Lava>. So I was doing two things. I was trying to patch that valve, because he had never done that before. And I was tryin' to get the dinner cooked. So I pulled his boat up sideways to the shore, and I kinda tied it -I had the two ends tied on a rope, and when I put the rope around a tamarisk tree, and I was gettin' ready to go cook some dinner, and I hesitated and I looked at the knot I had tied, and it didn't seem quite right, but. I can remember hesitating. But I went off and cooked dinner. Then we finally got the dinner done, and we were sitting on the boat that night, I think I was probably on, yeah I was on my boat, and we were talking to some people, a couple of young girls from <Texas>, and they were with their grandmother. And this was a great lesson early on. Up at the Ferry, my first trip as head

boatman, and this woman gets out of the bus and walks over and she's dressed all in white and she has this white hat with this like mosquito netting ., .

Steiger: Like a veil.

Briggs: Yeah, tied around her chin. And she appeared to be 70 years old. And I just go, "Oh my god." (laughs) That's not what I need on my first trip as the head boatman. Some lady who's all spic and span in ail her white,.. Well, as it turns out, she was one of the most charming people I'd ever taken down the river. Her name was Golda Cokeraught (??) (laughs). And she was from the hill country in <Texas>.

Steiger: Now how would you spell Cokraught? Any idea?

Briggs: K-O-C-A-N-A-U -T?? I don't know how to spell it. (

Steiger: Yeah.).

Briggs: But she grew up in the hill country of <Texas> out on a ranch, and she told some of the best stories ever. She actually saw Pancho Villa and his boys riding around in <Texas>. And that was so cool. (

Steiger: Whoa.)

Briggs: And she had her two granddaughters there, and she was absolutely not a problem on the trip. In fact she always wanted to ride on the front of the boat up on the snout where you get the wettest. (Steiger laughs.) And she had to fight the young boys to get up there. So, I mean, she was just completely great. And she'd help in the kitchen. So it was a great lesson in not pre-judging anybody. So we were on the boat, and it was dark. End of the day, havin' a beer. And Glen's boat - there was kind of an eddy there, and this boat kept coming up and kind of bumping my boat. It'd go around the eddy and if d come back, and in the dark you'd see the snouts coming kind of through the dark and it would bump into the boat, kinda like this boat was tryin' to tell me something, (

Steiger: Uh-huh.)

Briggs: And get up the next morning, and I'm waking up, and there's Glen over me. And he says, "My boat's gone." I'm goin', "Whadda you mean, your boat's gone." He says, "My boat's gone." I'm goin "what?" And I go out there and ! look, and sure enough there's only one boat. And I remember (laughs), Fm going "Ooohh!" Alan Wilson had lost a boat one time from the ledges, and it was a single boat trip (laughs). And there was a great story, which I can't tell now. So I kinda knew that it might end up being a good story. And I got the crew together and I said, "Listen, this is gonna be one of the more interesting days that you've ever had. Now here's what we have to do. We have to pack up all the stuff. We're not gonna have breakfast. We've gotta wake everybody up and tell 'em we gotta go." (Laughs) So we ran around through camp. We're waking everybody up. Saying, "Hey, get ready, we gotta go. One of the boats is gone!" And they'd look up and say, "What do you mean the boat's gone?" "The boat's gone." So I was

scurrying around getting everything together. So we piled all 28 people and all the gear on the one boat, and in those days we had the portapotties that you carried around - it was like a real toilet kinda deal. And they had to put that in the motor box, and I had to stand on to drive in order to see over the load 'cause there were so many people. And I had not said too much about what was going on. And I pulled away from the shore and I went down a little bit, and I thought, "Well, you know, I probably oughtta let these people know what's going on here." But I didn't know exactly what was gonna happen. And I kinda had an idea where that boat was gonna be. There was an eddy that I used to get stuck in all the time down there. One down by .. .

Steiger: Yeah, black lava rocks?

Briggs: Well, we used to call it Ambush Brock, where it comes down into the . . .

Steiger: Yeah, you gotta go to the left of the lava rocks, 183 or somethin'.

Briggs: And then there's a big rock . ..

Steiger: Below that,

Briggs: .. . in the river below there, (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: And we used to get our boats behind there and ambush motor trips, or other trips, for a water fight. (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.)

Briggs: So I call it Ambush Rock. So I kinda thought that it was gonaa be in that very first one where you come down. So I just turned the motor down and said, "Oh, by the way, we're goima find the boat in thirty minutes." And there was this one guy who was one of the ones who was griping and stuff, and I saw him look at his watch. But what else was I gonna do? I didn't know where the hell the boat was. But I kinda thought it'd be there. So we go along down and get close to that place where you can see it, and I look down there. The boat is not there. I'm just goin' "oh." So we go down there, and to make it through that eddy you have to cut left and the boat had gone through that and was in that other eddy that's over on the other side. So there it was. And everybody's cheering and stuff like this. And I had the motor cranked down, and this guy pulls out his watch. He says, "You had one minute!" (Both laugh) I said, "Oh, no problem." So we had our breakfast and had a good story.

Steiger: That is a good story.

Briggs: There're so many good stories about the take-outs. We used to go to <Meadview> on those motorboats. And Lou Elliott had got this jet boat. And so he'd meet us on Separation, and we'd unload the people and all their gear, and then we'd have to drive from there all the way to <South Cove>. So that's 65 miles. And try and get out there by night.

Steiger: So you'd drive empty to the site?

Briggs: Drive empty. Ugh. So one time we were runnin' a little late, and we got down on the lake and it was getting dark. And, as everybody knows, trying to find the entrance to <Iceberg Canyon> is not that easy. Particularly when it's your second year. But I thought I had it spotted and I tried to memorize the mountains on the skyline. But it was pitch black and we went roaring along, and, I don't know whether this was the same trip or what, but I remember this other boat was off to my right and back about one boat-length, and we were motoring through the dark. And I was going along thinking I was going right in the right place, and all of a sudden I ran right straight into the bank. All of a sudden it's right there in front of me. And I ran right into the bank of the lake full boar (laughs). I kind of bounce off a little bit. Just, you know, I get my bearings, just in time to see this other boat come (laughing) next to me and run right into it and bounce back to me. And I'm goin' "Oh, jeez, I guess this must not be it." So I took another guess, and we drove for another 30 minutes. Saw a light. Saw a light and motored over there and it was a coupla fishermen fishing at night. So (laughs) you can imagine what they thought these two motor rigs coming out of the dark. We had no lights or anything. And finally I turned down the motor and said, "You guys know where <Iceberg Canyon> is?" (laughs) And the guy says, "You just came out of it." He thought we were comin' up the lake rather than down. So I said, "OK." So I turned around and motored away for another twenty minutes, and then I said, "OK, that's it." We just tied the boats together and slept on the boats. Figured nobody was going to run into us at night. And, of course, we floated into <Iceberg Canyon> in the morning (laughs). We woke up and there it was, (

Steiger: Whew!)

Briggs: Oh man, one time the trailer broke down or something so we had to put all the motor rigs in the one track. And we used to ride in the back of the track. I mean it was a small truck. And (laughs) by the time we got that in there was hardly any room for us. So we kinda had to work these ropes kinda like shoelace fashion across the back, and we had to sit right on the very back, Kinda had to tie ourselves in, all the way from <South Cove> across Hackberry (??) Road in the dust. And as we drove along the highway we were tired! Oh god, we were just kinda hangin' in these ropes (laughing). It must have looked really pretty bizarre. And it was pretty dangerous. Of getting fumed to death and . Hmm. Motorboat stories. . .. Those Evinrudes and those Johnsons, they did have interchangeable handles. The bracket where the handle reached was attached to -- the motor was this pot aluminum. And because the load was high, we would put these extension handles on the motor. And it was way too much leverage for that handle. So occasionally the bracket would break off there. And then you'd have two motors out, and you'd have to take the handle from the other one. So you'd have to take the motor apart enough to get the other handle out. I don't know how many times I did that. So you had to be careful to not jerk it or something like that. But I remember one time (laughing) before I learned exactly where the currents go in <Horn Creek> (??), I, of course, drove right straight over the Horns. And it was a pretty violent drop. And I got (laughs) thrown out of the right side of the boat, and I broke the handle off on my way out. I didn't go quite out, but I was hanging on the side of the motor frame, hanging in the river. And I managed to pull myself back in and stand up just in time to get a standing ovation for my ran! (Both laugh). They never knew that I was gone! (Laughs very hard)

Steiger: They Uh-huh.

Briggs: And then another time that happened. In fact it was the time on this previous trip as we were pulling into Bass Camp, and the handle broke. Maybe that was part of the problem. No, maybe I broke it when I turned into camp. So all of a sudden, there we were, going to camp. So I had to drop to my knees ... .

Steiger: Catch the .

Briggs: . . . and run the throttle, grab hold of that little brass gear there.(

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: There were a coupla gears, one from the handle into the motor. And so I had the throttle with one hand, turning this little brass gear, and then I had my arm around the motor to steer it, (

Steiger: Uh-huh,)

Briggs: and I was looking backwards, and I was just hollering at Kent, who was my assistant, to tell me where to go. And he "Left, right." (Laughs) And that's how I got into camp. (Laughs)

Steiger: Ah, those were the days!

Briggs: Oh god, those were the days, weren't they?

Steiger: So this was like '71 - '72.

Briggs: '72, yeah.

Steiger: You were a motorboatman.

Briggs: And it was all just such - every single day was such a great adventure. And it was obviously a life-changing experience. But one thing that happened was that I was ten years older than almost everybody I worked with. And because of that I kind of took on all the values and everything of these people who were ten years younger. And so I don't know how to say it except that I never have the sense that... I mean, what can I say? It was just this really great experience with all these new friends. It was a completely different life. I didn't even realize how miserable I was being a highway engineer, until I quit (

Steiger: Uh-huh.)

Briggs: and actually found my calling, so to speak. This stuff from the aptitude test that said I should do something outdoors, mechanical and creative. And there I was. So when the season would come to an end, you were kinda glad because you were tired, but on the other hand, you know, it's that old, "what am I gonna do in the winter?" For a coupla years I went back to <Colorado>, 'cause that's where I lived, I was living down in the basement (laughs) with my old

climbing partner, and he rented me this coal bin in this old house. So I was living in this coal bin. And there no windows, so you never knew what time it was. And I kept getting depressed. You know, spending all summer in the biggest room in the world, the <Grand Canyon>, and then all of a sudden I'm living in a coal bin. It took me a while to figure out why I was getting depressed. But he had his equipment manufacturing company there, so I kinda had a part-time job helping him manufacture his climbing equipment. Oh, and then I was driving this Porsche, as I said, and it was really a great car. But I was in the process of trying to even be - I was still trying to become a hippy, I guess. And this river guide. Well the car didn't quite fit the image. So the spring before I took off for- it was the '72 or '73 season - I sold the Porsche. And I took the money. It was a '59 Porsche. I bought a '67 Volkswagen Beetle. I was able to buy a stereo tapedeck mounted in the door, a hundred dollars worth of blank tapes, which I recorded from records, and a pound of dope, and I had a hundred dollars left over. (

Steiger: Wooo!)

Briggs: And I hit the road. (Both laugh)

Steiger: Now were these 8-track tapes?

Briggs: No.

Steiger: Nos so it was tape cassettes.

Briggs: It was cassettes. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: So that was a lot better for my Image, driving this Volkswagen, In the winter I'd go to like these, you know, people were having bread making classes and all these back to basics. Candle making. You know, and I was gonna go to these classes so I could be a hippy and maybe meet some girls. And I'd always park this Porsche around the comer. Because, you know, by then I had a beard and kinda long hair. And I kinda was ashamed of this car (Both laugh quite a bit) 'cause It didn't fit the Image. Oh, what a fool! I wish I had that car now. You could drive that car 90 miles an hour all day and get about 25 miles to the gallon. Oh, it was beautiful. Oh well.

Steiger: Ah, image.

Briggs: So each spring I started going out to <California> a little earlier, because guys that I was working with were all from <California>. And ARTA was based in <California>. So we'd go out and start running rivers in the spring. And I got hooked up with Peter Winn, and boy, I mean that was good news/bad news. I mean, he always had some adventure of some kind that he could talk us into doing. Well the first one that we did was at the end of 71 season, when I worked that last oar power trip . . .

Steiger: And that was when you were training.

Briggs: I was training on that one. And I got to be pretty good buddies with Peter and Kent. And It was mid-September, or something like that, and I didn't know what the hell I was gonna do. And somebody came up with the bright idea that we should go run the Rogue River. You know, we were there in <Flagstaff>, and "Oh, jeez, that's a good idea.5' So Peter took off. He was from <Woodland>. And I went home with Kent in his Volkswagen, and we drove through and went over Tioga Pass and it took a coupla weeks from the time we had the idea to the time we pulled it off. And Peter had some boats. He had three old Navy tee mans that he'd gotten from Ron Smith (??) was it? Who was the competitor with ARTA, And he was based, I think, out of <Woodland>. Anyway, so we had to get some people to go on this trip with us. So Peter said, "Well, I know some <California> boatmen, I'll call 'em up." And then we got to be good friends with some of the passengers on the trip, and we tried to get them to go. And they didn't go, but they had some people that were visiting. I don't know, anyway, the trip came together. We had about 13 people, I guess. And they kept telling me about this rapid, Rainey Falls, and they had me stoked, you know. They had me all excited to try to row a small boat on a small river. They were telling me how different it is. And I was pretty gullible, and Peter was pretty good at talking people into doing (laughing) dumb things. And this <California> boatman that he called - it was Bob Melville. The first time I saw Bob Melville, I was looking out the window of Peter's car and there's this Volkswagen that's trying to run us off the road. And it was Melville. We were up on 15, on the way. And I was going isn't that crazy - anyway. Melville and I started to tell this story one time. Someone asked as at a Friends of the River dinner how we met. And we started tellin' this story, between the two of us, and we had to digress to explain this, to explain that. And we went on all through dinner and everybody else got up and left, and Melville and I were stii there. We hadn't finished the story. (Both laugh) So I'm not gonna get into that part. We get up to the Rogue, and sure enough, it's raining. Not only is it raining, about 200 feet up in the trees, it's snowing. And I guess it never entered our minds not to go. No wetsuits. And we went anyway. And I was kind of scheduled to row one of the boats over Rainey Falls. Never having seen it. So we get down there, which is pretty early there on the very first hour or so when we left from Grave Creek {??) I guess it was. And it was raining. It was cold. And we get down there and look at it. And I was just goin', "Holy shit. I don't know about this." So Dick Pfeiffer . . .

Steiger: We gotta be careful. Somewhere there's a cord short right there.

Briggs: So we get down to Rainey Falls, and it's raining, and it's a little chaotic because we can't really decide if we're gorma go over the Falls. And Dick Pfeiffer went over and got thrown -I don't think he got thrown out of the boat, but it was not a very pleasant experience, you could tell that. I was goin', "Oh jeez." And Kent took one of the boats down through the fish ladder (??), and he got an oar stuck, and it was kind of the medium, easy way to go through. We didn't really want to risk having all these boats turn over or anything, so Kent went that way. Then Melville took a Redshank (??) (laughs). This Rainey Falls. 13 foot waterfall. So there was only one boat left, and Peter was just standin' there lookin' at me. And I said, "OK, I'm gonna do it." So I went back down and I was just totally beside myself. I was just completely wired. I was terrified. And I wanted to do it and I didn't want to do it. And I wanted to do it. . . So I get up there and I'm untying the boat, and these two women that had been invited on the trip came walking up. And they said, "Oh, we wanna go over with you!" And I said, "I don't think that's a good idea." And they said, "Oh no. those other people made it." I said. "Listen, I've never rowed a boat like this before." And they looked at me like "isn't he cute, isn't he fenny," I said (laughing), "No, I'm

serious." I didn't even row from where we put in down to there. It was the first time I ever rowed a small boat on a small river. And I was rowin" this ten man and I was gorma row over Rainey Falls. So I couldn't convince them that It wasn't a good Idea. So I said, "OK." So I get 'em loaded up, and I row out, and I immediately row out and get stuck on a rock (both laugh). And I have to get off of that, and maybe they're starting to believe me by that point (both laugh). So it took me a while to get it off the rock, and then I finally went out there. And the trick, obviously, is going over straight. And I took maybe one stroke on one oar too many trying to___________________. And then, as I knew after the fact, when you go over, rather than leaning forward and grabbing hold of the seat, you should put your arms behind you and hold on from the back, (

Steiger: Uh-huh.)

Briggs: But I didn't know that. So my momentum was going forward to grab hold of the seat about the time that we hit the bottom of the falls, and the boat just kind of sandwiched. And I flew up to the front between the two women, and actually I think hit my head on the front of the boat, and then it unfolded again, and I went out into the river. And down under and (laughs), and I guess these two women were cheering and all this because they'd made it and all that. And everybody kept pointing backwards (laughs), cause I'm in the river, you know, and I'm floundering along, and it's cold. And so they had to come and drag me in, which is kind of humiliating, but maybe they believed me that I'd never rowed in one of those boats before. I actually have a film of that somewhere. (

Steiger: Oh dear.)

Briggs: Anyway, oh god, and it rained. And we went down to Zane Grey's cabin there, which is owned by Levi-Strauss is it? And they have these little tent cabin things. And we were so cold. And we weren't supposed to stop there. So we parked and went in there and spent the night, because at least it was sort of dry. Then we got up the next morning and sure enough one of the boats was gone. And the caretaker came by, and he was pretty nice, but he just kind of told us to move on. And Peter was convinced that the caretaker maybe took one of the boats and pulled it upstream. So we jumped in, a bunch of us, about five us, because we had a few too many people, four or five of us jumped in a Redshank and headed off to try and find this boat. And the others were left to pack up camp and follow. Well, I had brought along some treats. (Both laugh) Some Baby Blue. And so we decided, well, you know, it's gonna be an interesting day, we might as well. And (laughs) we had a great old time. We were pretty sure that it was gonna be stuck on the top of the rock, up at Blossom Bar Rapid. So we went through Mule Creek, and got down in there. I mean this was, I don't know, four hours paddling along. And it wasn't there. At which point we were starting to think more and more that maybe the caretaker did take the boat. Because, aside from Rainey Falls, which you usually go around, it's the most difficult rapid. And you've gotta make a coupla moves in there. Otherwise, you're gonna get on a rock. But, we went on down, and sure enough, we were getting into the area where there's some lodges there, and these people were sitting there eating breakfast one morning and they saw this boat floating by and they ran out and grabbed it, pulled it over. So we were ail happy. I mean we were really happy (laughs). So Melville and I went over and we shouted to the guy, or something. So we went over and we went up all these outside stairs to go up and thank the guy. And we were going

through these bushes to go over there and thank him. And he comes out on the porch and says, "Do you guys know that that's Poison Oak?" (Both laugh). Anyway, that trip was completely nuts. The last night the moon finally came out and we howled at the moon. But man it was cold. But we survived. And then started doing other adventures, like that one, again one spring, it was February or March, and Peter decided that we should go up and ran the North Fork of the American. Which was up to that point a river that wasn't being run that much, and was only being ran by kayakers. But, because some of us didn't particularly know how to kayak, we decided to take these little rubber duckies. WMcfa was not a particularly good idea. Particularly a Redshank. And we paddled this Redshank, and again the weather was just unbelievable. We were driving up into the Sierras, and it was raining. And everybody was going up skiing. They had all their skis on top of the car, and we had all these kayaks and these oars (laughing), and people were looking at us like "oh." And this is a good part of the story that the night before we stayed in <Sacramento> at Ron Caldwell's house. And he lived about a block and a half from the Tower Theatre, And "Deliverance" was showing there. So (laughing) we went over and saw "Deliverance."

Steiger: Just for a little

Briggs: (Both speak at once) The next morning we're goin' up to this river, and we come down the switchbacks, down this gravel road into the bottom of this canyon, and the clouds are low, and it's dreary and there's this kirida cabin type shack kind of up on the side of the hill by the bridge where we were gonna take it out. And you could see people peekin' out the windows. And we were just completely paranoid of course (both laugh), after watching "Deliverance." (Steiger groans) And then we took off, and in the very first rapid I was , and it was this really massive drop and a turn. And as it turns out you could probably never make that ran in the Redshank, 'cause if you could choose the worst boat to ran that rapid in, it would've been a Redshank. Because it was small tubes, and it just didn't have enough width. Anyway, there were just three of us in there, and I was the captain, and I got thrown out. And as I went I could look up in the air, and there was a loose rope in the bottom of the boat. And I could see this loose rope like a snake, and it came and it wrapped right around my ankle. (Laughing) I can remember seeing it. (

Steiger: Oh no!)

Briggs: So I went into the water, and then, because my body was down in the current, I went down under the boat with my leg still kinda tied into the boat. (Laughs) And it took my glasses off. Never did find them. And,! mean I just made this incredible adrenal surge, and I just kinda pulled myself back into the boat with my leg, 'cause (laughing) I was so afraid. Of course, again, no wetsuits. One guy had been down the river before, and he was a kayaker. And he had primed us for all these rapids, and we go down there and we make it down through this and this, and there's this Chamberlain Falls is this big rapid. And so we go over this thing, and we make it through this rapid that we think is Chamberlain Falls. And it's just like a four foot drop, but we all went over pretty straight and we all were happy that we made it through what we thought was Chamberlain Falls. Well it really wasn't Chamberlain Falls, come to find out. And so we says, "Oh well, Mike, what's on ahead?" And he says, "Oh, it's nuthin. It's mellow from here to the take out." So we all take off and (laughs) we go around the corner and we get into this rapid and it starts progressively getting, you know, a little more technical and we're workin' away and doin'

our thing pretty good, but right down at the end of it there's another drop. Which we didn't know about. And so .. .

Steiger: The real Chamberlain Falls, in other words.

Briggs: Well, I think it was called - well we named it Snowball Falls. Because we had . . . four outta six boats, and they were little boats, some were just Rubber Duckies (??) You had four out of six boats, and eight out of eleven people in the river at the same time.

Steiger: The end of that...

Briggs: (Two speak at once) Cause we just (laughing) were coming down, and Peter's brother looked down there, and it looked like this guy was running back and forth on the bank. But as we got closer, we realized that the Redshank he was in had flipped, and it was staying in the hole, and he climbed up on the bottom of it and was running back and forth on the bottom of the upside down boat, trying to get enough weight shift to get it out of the hole. And all we could see (laughs), was, you know, from his shoulders down kinda of this guy. 'Cause it was about a four or five foot drop. And of course we came in and knocked him out. And of course ours flipped. (

Steiger: Of course.) (Both laugh)

Briggs: You know, it came up, and I looked around and there was river equipment everywhere, I mean there were people and bags (??) and like I say, eight out of eleven people at the same time. But...

Steiger: "Don't try this in your own home, Leave it to the professionals."

Briggs: .. . we got it together.

Steiger: I've gotta change this battery, I fear. It wasn't a new one after all. Hold on. .. . OK, we're back rollin' again. What was it you said about - that was a good line - you never learned not to . ..

Briggs: When Peter would call up and say he had an idea, I never learned to say no, I don't think I wanna do that one. I mean they were all great adventures.

Steiger: So I guess you and Melville became good buds. (

Briggs: Yeah.)

Steiger: Through all that.

Briggs: 'Cause Melville was livin' here in the Bay Area.

Steiger: So were you and Peter the connection that got him into ARTA?

Briggs: No, Melville started working for ARTA in 1970,

Steiger: Oh, so he was just ARTA <California>. Briggsi He was ARTA <California>, In fact he was the area manager when Peter called him up on the phone. Melville tells the (laughing) story about being in the store, the kinda the general store up around Valecito (??), which is where the warehouse for ARTA and the Stanislaus operation are. And he just happened to be in the store. And Peter didn't know how to get hold of him, so he just called the store to leave a message for Melville. And of course the guy who runs the store knew Bob. So the phone rings and Bob's in there doin' somethin' and the guy picks up the phone and he says, "Hey, Bob, it's for you." (Laughs) And Bob says, "What?' It was Peter. And things like that happened all the time. We went up one time, again in the rain, and ran the South Fork of the Eel. And I think to this day, I mean it's a kayaking river- incredibly beautiful place -again, in the rain, it was like paddling through a Japanese landscape, a painting. It was totally, unbelievably beautiful, with moss and all this monochrome. But it was a pretty dicey place too, and we were paddling like probably a Yampa (??), which was a military -- like a ten man. Like the river runners version of the ten man. 'Cause ten mans weigh about 250 pounds; they were heavy. And we paddled it, and it was very dicey. We got down to one place where we had to make this cut. If you didn't make the cut you were gonna go up into a log that was half submerged and pointing upstream. And the boat was gonna wrap under there and somebody was gonna drown. There's no doubt about it, if you didn't make the cut. So I lobbied (??) it was gonna be the easiest portage in the world. You only had to carry the boat about 40 feet across from rocks and put it in and keep going. So I said, "Well, we're gonna portage." Melville said oh, he'd hump up. "We gotta ran it." I said, "Well, why?" He says, "Well because I've never portaged before." I said, "Well, of course, and that's the reason you have to do it. Because you've never done it." Well, Melville and I had this strange - anyway -I can't go too far into it,

Steiger: So, did you win out on that one?

Briggs: Yeah, we portaged. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: I mean somebody was gonna die. There was no doubt. Everybody kind of agreed that if the boat went into that piace, somebody's gonna die. So .. . so I started coming out to <California> earlier each spring. And in '73 we started going down the Stanislaus, which is a beautiful little river. About a nine mile ran. And we started to learn then - oh, I know. No, no. In the spring of '72 Peter said, "Well, you know, you probably oughta leam how to row if you're gonna be on the rowing crew. So ARTA had this spring training on the Stanislaus. "So go to the spring training 'cause they're training a buncha people for <California> rivers. So I show up, and Melville's one of the instructors, and Rob Elliot I think is an instructor and H Dnbner. And one of the Thomas brothers. Ron Caldwell. So these guys knew that I'd worked a year in the <Grand Canyon>, so they kinda figured I knew what I was doin'. Well, I proved that wrong. And they had these what they called a basket boat. It was oval, but it kinda like a wading pool.

Steiger: Yeah, almost round, and then it had this roll (??)bar

Briggs: They had the roll bar. They were life rafts, and they had the inflatable roll bars, which they could run a tarp over out in the ocean to protect yourself from the sun. Should cut off the

roil bars (??) But they were very floppy. They were meant to float in still water. And you'd put a frame on it, you'd take a hard enough stroke, and the boat would bend around the (laughs). If you took too hard a stroke, the boat would actually deflect (laughs).

Steiger: Musta got a really good deal on them or somethin'.

Briggs: So we were comin' down and they kept getting these people in the boat So Ron called and said, "OK, Briggs," he says. "I want you to row down. Why don'tcha go down to that rock and do a rock pivot, and then, you know, kinda pull in behind that rock, do a rock pivot, and then go down and go right of the rock down there. And this was called "Death Rapids."

Steiger: What's a rock pivot?

Briggs: Well I didn't know! I didn't know the rock pivot - what the hell he's talkin' about? But, you know, I'm from the <Grand Canyon>. I'm supposed to know these things. So, you know, I kinda get back there and I think again it was like the first rapid I rowed that day, or on that river. But I guess it was fairly tricky, so he wanted the most experienced guy to maybe do it. 'Cause the thing was called Death Rock. This rock that the wall was all piled up on (??), you had to go to the right. And of course we'd learned from this session - we started to learn about high-siding. And, you know, most <Grand Canyon> boatmen don't know what highside means. But on a small river, you know, it's crucial that you get the weight to the highside. The side that that rock's on, to keep the boat from wrapping. So I kinda knew about that. But by the time I blew the rock pivot and was heading right straight in to Death Rock and I hit it right straight forward. I didn't hit it sideways. So I didn't quite figure out that if the highside would be on the front of the boat, where normally it's always on the side of the boat. So I didn't know what to say. So Ron had to get everybody up on the front of the boat, and we managed to spin off. We didn't wrap. It was very embarrassing. As usual. But it was great. I mean it was such an incredible group of people. Jimmy Hendrix was on that training crew.

(Steiger gets a big kick out of that, laughs, "Yeah,')

Briggs: And David Haliday, And I don't know anybody else from the <Grand Canyon>, But Phil Town. Phil Town was fresh outta the Green Berets and showed up at this training completely decked out like he was gonna (laughs)..,

Steiger: Go to war?

Briggs: Go on a mission. I mean he had the knives and the attitude. And he actually told me the story later that he had come home from <Vietnam> and was just like patrolling the neighborhood at night (laughing) and I mean he was still (

Steiger: Out there.) at war. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: And his mother somehow found out about this ARTA training and he says, "If I hadn't a come there," he says, "I probably would' ve been one of these guys that went out and went berserk and shot people (laughs).

Steiger: Mmm-hmm. But he showed up and became a river guide.

Briggs: He became a river guide, and he eventually became a Transcendental Meditation guy and moved in to <Fairfield Iowa> with the Maharishi and, I mean, the whole deal. That's a whole other story, Phil Town. Steiger; Is that T-O-W-N.

Briggs: Just "N

Steiger: Oh yeah? Just T-O-W-N.

Briggs: Yeah. Most of the people there- well Kent Erskine. He was great. But that's when we started learning that this river was gonna be - that the dam was already being planned. And that was in '72. And so we were aware of it, and people started putting the campaign together. As it turned out, a guy that was on the Rogue River- that ill-fated Rogue River trip in the rain - ended up partnering up with another guy earned Rob Cogland (??), and they put together the first campaign for Friends of the River. And David Kaye (??) was a guy who was the business manager for ARIA, And he and Jerry Merrill (??), who was a kayaker, got this Friends of the River organization started. And then .. . So I kept working in the <Grand Canyon> in the summer, from May to the end of September, and then I'd end up coming back to <California>, spending more time each year in <California>, and got involved in this river campaign to try and save this river. And at some point I met Mark Dubois, who is kind of the spiritual leader of Friends of the River. And he's kind of a Gandhi character, and didn't wear shoes, on the river or in town. But he was incredibly devoted to saving this river.

Steiger: Is that D-U-capitalB-O-I-S?.

Briggs: D-U-B-O-I-S.

Steiger: Yeah, is it a big B or a little b?

Briggs: Little b. (

Steiger: OK/)

Briggs: And this is a campaign that got serious in '74. Maybe it was '73 when I started doing a few things. Getting people to write letters.

Steiger: Now is this the State of <California> that's gonna dam the Stanislaus?

Briggs: It was the Army Corps of Engineers.

Steiger: The Army Corps of Engineers.

Briggs: Was gonna dam it. So we took on the Army Corps of Engineers. And we got this petition campaign going in I think it was '74, and we had to collect signatures. So many hundred thousand signatures. And the way they do it now, they pay people to go out and get the signatures. The proposition process was designed so that citizens could go out and gather the names. But then of course if corporations wanted to pass a proposition, they would just pay people to go out and get the names. But we were doing it all on a volunteer basis. And we had a really incredible time getting this proposition passed, Proposition 17. Getting it on the ballot. And we got people to sign these petitions everywhere. We'd sit out for hours in front of the co-ops in <Berkeley>, and we'd go to different events. We went to the World Series game when <Oakland> was in the World Series and worked the World Series game. Anyplace there was a lot of people. Went to a Blue Grass Festival here in Marin County. And we couldn't stop. We'd go all day long. And this is like Melville and Bruce Simbala was in on this. And I can't remember if I worked a trip with Brace Simbala on the <Grand Canyon> or not, before he started working for the Dories, But at the end of the day - like, I remember, one time we went in to the Starry Plough, which was kinda the Irish hangout in <Berkeley>, You know, kinda the place where maybe IRA wannabees would hang out or something. I mean it was a serious place, and they had pretty good music there too. And we went in, and we figured that maybe we'd get some petitions here. I mean we would petition anybody and everybody. So the band took a break, and somebody went up and talked to the guy and the band, and they were totally into it. So somehow we spontaneously were gonna put on a skit, I don't know how we did it. It was Melville, Simbala and myself. And we ran out to the car and we got an old folding shovel and we somehow put together this little skit about the Army Corps of Engineers damming this river. And the keyboard guy got into it and was playing this melodramatic music, like an old-time music (ta-ta-ta-ta-ta, laughs), and we got everybody to sign. That was in the spring, and then I went back to the <Grand Canyon>, And in the fall we had to campaign for the election. And again the contractors and the local people who wanted the dam to be built had gathered all this money, I mean the contractors stood to lose a lot of money.

Steiger: What was the point of the dam?

Briggs: They were getting ready to build the dam.

Steiger: Why did they want it?

Briggs: It was a multi-purpose dam, you know, recreation, hydroelectric, irrigation and fish, or something.

Steiger: So the contractors wanted a lake, so they could build houses around the lake? Was that it?

Briggs: No, the contractors were the heavy-duty contractors.

Steiger: They wanted to build the dam.

Briggs: They wanted to build the dam. So they had hundreds of thousands of dollars, and they hired this PR firm in <LA> to put out this totally deceptive advertising. And all the polls proved

that the general public wanted to save the river. So when they found that out, the vote that people wanted to do was, you had to vote "yes." But they put up these bulletin boards and all these things and they ran a campaign that said, "Vote No on 17. Stop the river hoax." And then it would say "Save the River." And if you could confront them on it, what they would say was, "Well, we're trying to save the lower part of the river for the farmers." It was down in the Central Valley. So "We're trying to save that. Because if you build that...

Steiger: If you don't build the dam ...

Briggs: If you don't do it, then it's gonna damage the lower river. I mean it was completely (

Steiger: Slimey.),

Briggs: totally deceptive. So they had these billboards all over the state. So we figured -I think this was Brace's idea and my idea- we decided to have what we eventually called the Bananner Campaign. So we gathered together some money, went to all the Good Will jobs and got all the white sheets we could get. And we made banners. And we made our own bill boards. We got refrigerator boxes and cut out the letters and made our own bill boards that said, "Yes on 17," You know. "Save the River," I don't know what we did. And I actually have a little movie of this, which is pretty cool And we were up at the Vallecita Wearhouse, and Brace Simbala was sitting there with a tredle sewing machine in his bare feet smoking his corn-cob pipe, sewing these sheets together. And then we had big banners and little banners. And we knew that we were gonna have to do something in <LA>. 'Cause we figured the northern <California> vote would go our way. So the river outfitters, I mean, we took a coupla school bus loads of river guides down to <LA>, And some Friends of the River people down there had a little office on Wilshire Boulevard. And we set about tryin' to do this grassroots stuff. I mean we were gonna tackle <LA> and get the word out. So I went down, I had these banners in my old Volkswagen. And I went down and drove every freeway kind of in the general vicinity. I think I drove 150 miles in one day just circling freeways and mapping all the overpasses. All the potential places where we could put these banners. Places where everybody going to work in <LA> would have to go past one of our banners. We had this entire campaign. And we went out and we had them staked on hillsides. We had them hanging inside wire-covered overpasses, so people could read them, but, you know, it wasn't like you hang 'em over the edge. You know, it wouldn't be cool if one these sheets fell across a windshield of a car. And we were pretty careful But we still got harassed a little bit by the police. They wanted to know what we were doin' up there. This wasn't me, but this was John Cassidy. The police came up on those guys and they said, "What are you guys doin' here?" And they said, "Oh, we're tryin" to do this." And they said, "Well, we've had reports of kids throwing rocks at cars, so why don't you get outta here." And Cassidy convinced them, "You know, if we're here tryin' to save this river with this banner, there's gonna be no kids throwin' rocks." And the cops said, "Oh, that's a good idea." (Laughs) So they let them stay there. Oh, and then we would leaflet neighborhoods. I mean, c'mon, think of it, taking on the entire <LA>. And then Jerry Brown was coming in to speak at the Burbank Airport, so we all drove out there with all our banners and tried to make our presence known everyplace that one of these politicians would come. We'd find out where they were gonna be and we'd drive over there. And we had these bumper stickers and things that we would put up on telephone poles. We actually made a

Spanish version of our brochure, and Simbala and I went in to East <LA> and were handing out brochures on the night of the Day of the Dead. I mean, you know, this is 1973.

Steiger: How was that? Was that pretty scarey to do that?

Briggs: No, we never even thought about it. (

Steiger: Uh-huh.)

Briggs: I don't think it was like it is now, but we never thought about it. And people were cool, you know. We kinda had the River Magic protecting us. Everybody kinda knew that we were doin' good stuff.

Steiger: Well how did that turn out? Did it work? Did it win? Briggs; Well, no. But one more story. On the day the <LA> Times - so we had this political, and the PR people and the more - not the foot soldiers, but other people going to editorial boards and giving the pitch, and we had like the Secretary of State under Jerry Brown was on our side. And lots of politicians. Alan Cranston. There were a lot of people. And we would get them to lobby the LA Times for an editorial Well, while we were down there, we were counting on the LA Times coming out on our side. And they didn't They came out against us. And it was really kind of a crashing blow. And so that night, I think I was driving with Bruce Simbala in downtown <LA>, and I have no idea where we were going, but all of a sudden we looked outside the car, and it was the LA Times Distribution Center. And they had about 30 or 40 newspaper trucks lined up there. And in the evening, they were going to load up with the papers. And we just looked at each other and said, "Oh yeah!" So we got our bumper sticks (laughs) that said, "Yes on 17. Deliver the River." And so we went and put a bumper sticker on every single LA Times track (laughing) that we could. But, we lost.

Steiger: OK, I should change tape. We're doin' good here.

Briggs: I probably oughta go through this river conservation stuff, and get it out of the way, right?

