RUSSELL FOUTZ INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.16

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're with Russell Foutz in <Scottsdale Arizona>, at his store called Russell Foutz's Indian Room. And we're going to interview Mr. Foutz about his days as an Indian Trader, and this is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. Also present in the room are Ed Foutz, and Lew Steiger, who is running the audio and camera. 

Cole: Russell, if we could start out, you could tell us when and where you were born. 

R. Foutz: My folks was runnin' the Teec Nos Pos Trading Post when I was born. I guess they brought Mother in about a few days before, and I was born in <Kirtland New Mexico>. Our family's been in the trading post business and the ranching business practically all their lives.

I understand this interview is about the history of the Traders Association. The Traders Association, as far as I can remember, was in existence about all the time I was a trader, which is quite a while. I started out in this, working for my dad in a store that was called Progressive Mercantile Company. That was a little wholesale supply store at <Kirtland New Mexico>. They furnished financial backing and merchandise to quite a few of the stores on that part of the reservation. I think at one time there was probably about twenty-two or something. They was four partners involved in this. All of 'em were ex Indian traders. There was Burt Dustin, his brother, Shel Dustin, and my dad, who the Indians called ‘Ashkii biwoo’ bitsilí. His brother was one of the founders of this business. He was known as "the man with the big teeth," ‘Ashkii biwoo’, and so naturally my dad went as "the brother of the man with the big teeth." The Indians would have a name for practically every trader that come on the reservation--they would attach a name to him. Like one of the old traders was Shash yázhí, and that was Tanner. He was built like a little bear, so they called him "Little Bear." 

Cole: What was Tanner's first name, do you know? 

R. Foutz: Joe Tanner--the old man Joe Tanner. He was married to one of my dad's sisters. The other partner, he did a lot of this. Burt Dustin did a lot of freighting and hauling merchandise to these stores. And they named him. He had a real nice team of horses they freighted with, so they named him ºíí’ bidziilii, "the man with the big horses, with the strong horses." The other partner was Willard Stolworthy who was married to one of Joe Tanner's daughters, so he was known as Shash yázhí biye’. He was the son-in-law of him. So it was a fairly [small] Mormon community in those days, and I started out working there, helping to buy the rugs and keeping the dry goods straightened up. I was, in those days, when we started out, we was buying these Navajo rugs by the pound. I would set them out and put them in the different stacks. I think, as I remember, they went from about 75¢ to $4.50 a pound. And then they would weigh them out, and there would be a few special rugs that would be bought by the piece. I would get one of the--either Dad or one of 'em--to help put a price on one of those. One of the stores was at Crystal, and Chee Dodge had died and there was one of the daughters that had some of his things, and one of his rugs, [a buy it a dress?] or something would come through every once in a while from his. So the rugs in those days run from a dollar a pound saddle blanket up to--a real high-priced rug, if it went to be a hundred dollars, it was right special.

The best rugs of the area was made at either Two Grey Hills, <Teec Nos Pos> was a two grade see, the rugs mostly came from--the better rugs came from. But all of them did some part of the weaving. So that's how a lot of these stores got started. I know that I can recall that Red Mesa was bought from Bob Martin, a Navajo fan. And Roscoe McGee's uncle, who was a partner in this store--Willard Stolworthy set him up and sold him an interest in that store. He also set Jewel McGee up, helped set him up at Red Rock. There was an older brother that died, a Melvin McGee. He had a little store called Bitterwater. They made nice red rugs out there too.

My first memories of the Traders Association.... 

E. Foutz: Russ, can I just interject something? 

R. Foutz: Yeah. 

E. Foutz: Before you leave Progressive Merc, they had an unusual working agreement, the four partners. 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh. 

E. Foutz: Did they all work there at one time? 

R. Foutz: No, they would two work for six months, and then the other two would work for six months. There would be Dad and Shel Dustin would work for six months, and then Willard Stolworthy and Burt Dustin would work for six months. 

Cole: Why did they split the time? 

R. Foutz: Well, I guess there wasn't enough work for them. They had other interests. They had either ranches or something to look after, or interest in other stores to look after. That just seemed to be the arrangement that they did, and it lasted for the entire time from the early 1900s 'til they sold out in, I believe, the forties. 

Cole: Do you remember who they sold out to? 

R. Foutz: They sold out to Charles Ilfeld, and they took interest in the store at the Ilfeld Partner Merc Company in <Farmington>. And Ilfeld had one large store in <Gallup>, and they had a branch store in <Farmington>, and that's who they sold out to. But they took an interest in that.

In those days, all the sheep from that area was brought to <Farmington> and shipped out on a narrow gauge railroad track. And there must have been, they'd probably been close to 100,000 head of sheep that would come through there and be shipped out from <Farmington>. And they would go to <Alamosa Colorado>, and then they'd be unloaded and transferred onto a broad gauge.

In the fall of the year it's quite cold. I remember one story they tell about these Indians coming in. That was before alcohol was legal, but they would get hold of wine when they got to town. And it was cold this night that they were shipping these sheep. And I guess two of the herders had got in the railroad car and passed out, and they went to <Alamosa> with the sheep. They said when the gate was opened to unload the sheep at <Alamosa>, these two herders was the first ones out, so they tried to get them back there. Then they had to be....

When I was about the last year in high school, there was a man from Armour Packing Company come to <New Mexico>--wanted to buy Navajo lambs. They had heard that they was real thrifty and progressive, so they was signed up with Ilfeld Company, and Kelly there was agreeing, and they would feel free to buy for anybody else. But they said that I knew most of the traders and that I would be willing to help them. That was my first experience in the sheep business. I think we bought close to 50,000 head of sheep that year for Armour Packing Company. I think I received a commission of 10¢ a head for buying them, so that was a lot of money in those days.

But right after that, the livestock began to dwindle on the reservation, and they call it the "John Collier days," when he brought in his sheep reduction program. It brought a lot of uprising on the reservation. Before that, some of the families had probably over a thousand head of livestock. And they were making them slaughter their goats and their sheep, making them buy 'em.

I remember that was my brother who was one of the early members of the Traders Association, [Edwin Luff Foutz?] was out at <Teec Nos Pos> right about that time. And maybe he had just died right before that. He died at <Teec Nos Pos>. There was an epidemic of meningitis going around, and they didn't feel that they could close the store, that that was the only source the Indians had of getting merchandise, or getting help, or getting any word to the hospitals or anything. But even though he run the store with the no stove in it, and the windows and doors open, he still contracted meningitis and died. 

Cole: Do you remember what year that was? 

R. Foutz: I don't remember exactly what year he died. What year.... 

E. Foutz: It was 1939. 

R. Foutz: At that time, Kenneth Washburn was his right-hand man that was helpin' him out there. There was an Indian by the name of--what the Indians had got together and they was gonna lynch the range rider--or the district superintendent he was, I guess. Rudy Swivel [phonetic spelling]. I guess he's from the district superintendent. 

Cole: What was his last name? 

R. Foutz: Rudy Swivel. And they took he and his wife, and they was tied up in a hogan, never--but released. They weren't hurt, but they kept 'em for several days there. They said that a Navajo by the name of Earl Saltwater come by and told Ken Washburn that he'd better send his wife and kids to town, and that he had to cut the telephone lines. So Ken sent his wife and kids to town, and Earl cut the telephone lines. So they had no way of getting word to the police at <Shiprock> or anything that this riot was going on. It had gone on for about a day or a day-and-a- half, when they got somebody sent to a nearby trading post, Beclabito, where they could get word to <Shiprock> to send the police out to settle it up. And some of the--I know the people that went to jail--they were some of the finest Indians we have. But they believed that they was having their liberty taken away from them, and they had to protect it.

So after my brother died--he had a half-interest in the store, and the other half belonged to Willard and my dad. They bought the interest from her, and that's when I first got my interest. I got my fourth-interest of [Luffs?] and the other fourth of it went to the man he had out there running it, Kenneth Washburn, who stayed up and run the store.

The Association, the first time I can remember about the accomplishments of the Association, was when they first tried to establish sales tax to the Indians on it. I know Jack Klein [phonetic spelling], who could have been the president of the Association at that time--I don't know for sure. But I know he and Luff Foutz and Ralph Bilby, who was in charge of both of the Babbitt stores, they was the instigators of getting the help of.... Who was the congressman? Dale Rhodes [phonetic spelling] I guess it was. Rhodes, they was getting his help. And they got an attorney from <Provo>. This attorney had got a tribal settlement from the Utes, and so they hired him. And the Traders Association gathered money enough to hire him, and they took this to the Supreme Court, and it was proven in their favor that there was so much regulations of the federal government and the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the tribes, that there was no room for any state regulations on the reservation to any of the Indians. So they didn't have to pay on the tax. That was one of the big accomplishments of the Traders [Association] that I can remember. 

Cole: Do you remember about what year that might have been? 

R. Foutz: Oh, gosh, I can't remember what year that was. You can research it and see what year that was passed, that went there, but I don't remember about what year that would have been. 

E. Foutz: Boy, that was before me, Russell. I know that lawyer you spoke of from <Utah> was Ernest Wilkinson, that later became president of BYU, Brigham Young University. 

R. Foutz: I don't even remember when Rhodes was in. I don't remember what years Rhodes was _____________. 

E. Foutz: Wouldn't it be in the forties? Or earlier? 

R. Foutz: I think it's earlier. I think it was before _________. 

E. Foutz: Dad was involved with that? 

R. Foutz: I think it was probably before the forties, because I got out of the service in the forties, 'cause the first store I ever owned all by myself, without a partner, was a store called Coyote Canyon, which was right out of <Gallup>. And I know I hired this Ardith Pennielson [phonetic spelling] to run it, and made an agreement that where he could buy it if he wanted to. But when I was in the service, the rumor was going around that the tribe was buying all the stores, and they were gonna run them themselves. He was offered a job at Babbitt's, and he took that, and then Coyote Canyon was sold. That store was sold in the thirties, so I imagine this was before the thirties, that that was taking place. 

Steiger: I just wanted to clarify. When those guys took that trading post over, the Navajos--that was over the stock reduction? 

R. Foutz: They didn't take the trading post, they took the government ... 

E. Foutz: ... representative, the Bureau of Indian Affairs ... 

Steiger: ... who was the one who was sayin', "We're gonna have to take back _________." 

R. Foutz: He's the one that was gonna take out Lynch. They had he and his wife both _____________. That was over the stock reduction, yes. That was over the stock reduction. 

Cole: Was there any kind of procedure? How was the stock reduction implemented, and how did they actually.... 

R. Foutz: They just told these people that they had to get rid of that many sheep, that they was gonna slaughter 'em, buy 'em at a certain price, that they had to get rid of a certain amount of sheep, goats, and horses. They was so extreme about it, that the herds went down, some of 'em went down so far that some of us traders brought in sheep and let them buy them back, and we brought in bucks and stuff. It was like any other program, it goes to the excess when it was in there. And a lot of the Indians shifted from sheep to cows, where it didn't take a herder.... 'Cause that was a custom among the Navajos, that they would keep one of the children home, and wouldn't go to school. He would be the sheepherder. The one they kept home, sometimes you'd only see that one, ____________, you'd only see them once a year when the sheep come to town. I mean, they was very uneducated. Some of the sheepherder girls and some of 'em that was in there was crippled, had a broken hip. There's several stories about why they were, but I don't know whether any of 'em was true or not. But they always kept one child out of school to take care of the livestock. 

Steiger: What would those stories have been? That they did it deliberately? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, some of those. Uh-huh, some of those stories would be.... But I had cousins that was in the early trading business, too. They were the Powells, and one of 'em about my age was Francis Powell. And about the first Indian Traders Association I can remember going to, I went with Francis Powell. We went into that Association [meeting], I can remember seein' this grayish-haired man setting up there. I asked him [Francis] who what was, and he said that was Lorenzo Hubbell. So when he was active in the Association, I don't know. In those days, the active people was the Hubbells, the Wheelers, the Bellamys, and on our side of the reservation was the Foutz’s and the McGees on that side. I guess the early days, the papers of the Association, they must have been--I understand they was in a fire and a lot of 'em was burned up in <Gallup> before the headquarters was shifted to <Farmington>.

I think that that bill was one of the highlights that the Association got through. Another one of their big accomplishments, besides being a liaison with the tribe, was during the war [World War II], when silver and everything was rationed, and they wasn't able to get silver when the traders kind of formed, through their organization, was able to buy silver to be distributed to the Navajo silversmiths. They had to keep track of this silver and who it went to and what store it went to. That silver the merchandise was made out of was marked with a number. The stores all had a number printed on that. On our side of the reservation, over on the <San Juan> side, we had very few silversmiths, so that didn't affect us very much. The Indians over here were more into the weaving of rugs, and the ones over on the <Gallup> side were more the silversmiths. There were some good silversmiths around <Sheep Springs> and <Newcombs>, but there wasn't very many right up and down the valley. 

Cole: So the numbering system was mainly so the government could track where the silver was going? 

R. Foutz: So it could track where the silver went, yeah. And then as the tribe and the regulations and the government was putting more restrictions on the stores, and the leases, the amount of time that you could have a lease was up, the Association played a big part in negotiating with the tribe and with the government on leases on the reservation. It ended up that quite a lot of the stores got twenty-five-year leases that they never got before.

With the livestock gone, and all the Indians having cars, most of the trading posts just went to the stations with the 7-Eleven-type [convenience store] business. They felt that the Association had served their purpose, and voted to abandon it, which there is probably only about a half a dozen stores on the reservation anymore that is, or that you could count, of old-time trading posts. And there just really wasn't that much use for them. The Association probably had served their days. Like a lot of the rest of us old traders, (someone chuckles) we've served our days, along with the Association.

It was a good life. We needed the Indians, and in those days, the Indians needed us. All of us old timers at one time have helped bury their dead; been their banker; been their advisor. Most of us was sincere, we had their interest at heart.

I do recall one winter day that they come into <Teec Nos Pos> and he wanted us to help his--Old Growler was from up there at <Sweetwater>. His son had died, and he wanted us to come up and help bury him. That was quite an education for me, because I had always heard that they was reluctant to--these women were reluctant to dress and to have to do much with one of the ones that was buried, that had died. But when we went up there, his face was painted with his war paint, and they had made him white pants out of this white calico, and he was all dressed for burial. They buried him, they said their prayers over the grave, they asked us to say a prayer over the grave for him. And that was all fine. And it was cold. About a couple of weeks later, Old Growler, he come in the store. He said he'd been by the grave, and it looked like the coyotes was digging down in that. Did he think we ought to go out and put him back a little deeper. And we told him no, we thought that that was all right, that we'd put him deep enough, that we didn't think we needed to go back to put him a little deeper.

But both the old traditions of the Indians fading away, it is good that the younger weavers are keeping on weaving, and now I think the Indians themselves are realizing what a part of history that amends to their children. And I think they are teaching their children more of their languages and their customs than they have in the past.

I know it was a good life for my family, and a good life for my folks' family. They are wonderful people to work with, and they're showing as they go to school and stuff, that they are leaders, and they can compete with anybody in this business of these days. 

Cole: When did your dad get in the trading business? 

R. Foutz: Dad come from a polygamous family. He was born at <Kanab Utah>. 

Cole: Do you remember about when that was? 

E. Foutz: Dad'd be about a hundred years old or something, so when.... When he come to <Kanab>, when they come in there? 

Cole: Or when your dad was born. 

R. Foutz: When my dad was born? Dad was born, I don't remember his birthday. I don't remember it off hand. 

Cole: Somewhere in the 1890s, it sounds like. 

R. Foutz: [In] 1880-something, yeah. 

E. Foutz: Eighty-seven [1887], I believe, but that's a guess. I can get it for you this afternoon. 

R. Foutz: Yeah, uh-huh. But this was a Mormon settlement in <Tuba City>. I think he had three wives. He had one up in the <Utah> area, I think. And the government bought out that <Tuba City> area where they settled. And of course they refused to sell their little piece of land that they had there, and it's still deeded land--it belongs to the Babbitt Company now. I remember the first time I went through there, looking for it. There's a little graveyard there, and I did find the headstone, or the board of a head, where one of dad's sisters was buried there. He has a sister buried there. He was in the trading business all his life. 

Cole: When did he move over to the <New Mexico> area, do you know? 

R. Foutz: (long pause) Hmmmm, in about, oh, somewhere between 1915 and 1920, in there someplace. There was four of 'em. That was quite an unusual story, 'cause there was four of 'em down there, that Progressive. So every time anybody wanted anything, they would get the agency for it. So I think one time or other they had the Maytag agency; they was the first one to have the Chevrolet agency that went to [Prairie Smoke?]; they was the first one to have the Chrysler agency. (chuckles) They thought they could get it cheaper if they got the agency, so they got the agency, I think, in there.

Then Joe Tanner, he was.... (phone rings) He was one of these people that lived with the Indians, traded with the Indians, and I think Uncle Willard, they took care of a lot. In fact, he was the first one that brought any buffalo to the reservation. He was a friend of Chee Dodge's--he got in good with Chee Dodge. He talked Chee Dodge into developin' the artesian well out there the other side of <Bisti>, out in there. He thought they could farm on it. And then he bought a herd of buffalo. He would take these buffalo to the Gallup Ceremonial. The Indians would ride some of 'em. I think he'd kill one buffalo and maybe twenty head of cows and sell buffalo sandwiches all during the Gallup Ceremonial. He was quite a character of the early days of the reservation. 

Cole: When did your dad end up at <Teec Nos Pos>? 

R. Foutz: Teec Nos Pos, one of the first owners of it was Hamp Knowle [phonetic spelling]. He come out, he had TB and he was out at <Teec Nos Pos>. Dad went there right after he was married. And [Luff?] was the old--Holmes Luff [phonetic spelling], now. 

E. Foutz: Luff would have been--let's see, he died in 1939. Dad was born in 1909. 

R. Foutz: In 1909. 

E. Foutz: So he would be.... 

Cole: Eighty-nine. 

E. Foutz: That'd be eighty-nine years old. 

R. Foutz: So, see, he was out there when these kids were just this tall, so he was out there in.... 

E. Foutz: About 1900? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh. The first picture I see of Bob is about three or four years old out there, feeding the chickens, so it's about that, yeah. 

Cole: So was your Dad one of the founders of Progressive Mercantile? 

R. Foutz: His brother was--Jim Foutz that went to <Salt Lake>, yeah. 

Cole: And then did your dad own other trading posts? 

R. Foutz: Yeah. Let's see, the group of 'em owned different. They owned shares in maybe a quarter of all those trading posts. Then the four of 'em, I think, bought--a very interesting story--they bought a sheep ranch. It was called the Gallego Sheep and Mercantile. They bought it from an Englishman that come from England by the name of Dick Simpson. The story goes that he was from a royal family there in England, and they said if he didn't quit gambling and losing money, they were gonna disinherit him. So I guess he went out and lost a lot of money and then he got on a boat and come to America. And he ended up out there on this Gallego Sheep [Ranch]. It was an old....

But I remember I went with Dad--these four people in there bought this ranch at Gallego. It's called the Checkerboard area. It's right off the reservation and they have deeded land, homestead land, Indian allotments, and the grazing?]. I think there was about twelve school sections, five deeded sections, and then some State land. I don't know how much it was, but I know when I came back from the service, we decided to go from sheep to cattle. It took about fifty miles of five [strand] barbed wire fence just to fence it all. That's the story of how come that I own the building that we're setting in now. The government condemned this Checkerboard area where we had our ranch to put in the Napi [phonetic spelling] Irrigation Project. And they bought us out--Ken Washburn, myself, and Dad still had an interest in it at that time. And with the money that I got, I came to <Scottsdale> and bought this property here, and the property across the street. ________________. And then I liked <Scottsdale>. The people here, the arts and crafts _________, they bought lots of high-priced Indian rugs. Mrs. McCormick, and Mrs. Wrigley, they were both collectors of it, of Indian arts and crafts--Mrs. McCormick, especially was. She had hogans built for them to live in, and had a place for them to sell their merchandise, and she was a big collector of it.

About this time of year, about February, fat sheep was very hard to come [by] on the reservation. And this was a driveway where the Basque would drive their sheep from the mesa up to Flagstaff, and they would stop here on the canal and shear the sheep. I would set on a wool bag, and I would buy the dry fat sheep from them, and truck them back to the reservation for meat for the reservation. That's where a good supply of their winter meat come from, the mutton, because that's their main source of food, is mutton. 

Cole: About when was that, do you remember? 

R. Foutz: Oh, that was about the late forties. 

Cole: I'm not sure I got this down, but what were your Mom and Dad's names? 

R. Foutz: His was Alma Luff Foutz, and hers was Harriet Dustin Foutz. 

Cole: And your dad had how many brothers then? 

R. Foutz: I think there was eleven in the family. 

E. Foutz: Thirteen. 

R. Foutz: Thirteen in the family, but there's only about.... 

E. Foutz: Two died early. 

R. Foutz: Two died early, yeah. Two or three died-- Don, the baby, I think. June was the oldest. They were all traders, I guess. June, Dad, Elmer, and Hugh-- that's it. That was all of 'em, yeah. And the sisters, a lot of 'em were married to traders, too. 

Cole: Well, you said you were born at <Teec Nos Pos>. Did you then move to grow up in <Kirtland> then? 

R. Foutz: We grew up in <Kirtland>, yeah, 'cause after Dad got his start there at <Teec Nos Pos>--I don't remember whether it was Shell or Willard's turn to go out there--but we moved into there, and Dad went into the running of the Progressive, yeah. 

Cole: When did you first, yourself, start working in a trading post, do you remember? 

R. Foutz: When I was in high school, in the summers I would go to Teec Nos Pos and relieve Luff or whoever was there, where they could go on vacation. Then they would be gone for ten days. Then I'd go on down to Red Mesa, and stay at Red Mesa and relieve that trader, where he went on vacation. That's when I was in high school. I was out at the trading posts when I was in high school. 

Cole: At that time, did you think you were gonna become a trader? 

R. Foutz: I thought I'd become a trader or a rancher, because that's all there was in those days. The Burnhams had some nice horses that ran. I thought I might become a horse owner, too, which I did, but that was....

As for stock, these stock brokers would call me up and say, "We have some nice stock." I would ask them what breed they was (Cole chuckles) and they would get disgusted and hang up on me. And I'd want to know what they ate [and so on]. That was about the only stock I ever owned, was just the livestock that you had to feed. 

Cole: What were the trading posts like when you were in high school out there working? 

R. Foutz: Well, let's see, at <Teec Nos Pos>, I was out there working at <Teec Nos Pos>. As we'd go into the store, it was connected to there. They were old rock buildings. I remember this first time that I was going from the store to--here come this great big blow snake which I got this close to, and then had to go over the top of it. They kept them in the wareroom to take [care of] the mice.

There was very few checks, maybe.... At first there was only about one family that got a check there. There was very little money. We kept on the wool. We'd sell part of it, then we kept on the wool. Most of the furniture was made out of coffee crates--the Arbuckles Coffee Company. You did your own cooking. They had a cow. It was quite primitive in those days, yeah. So it was about as primitive as you can get, probably, in those days. Ken Washburn, he was there. (narrator moves away from microphone) By the way, he wrote poetry at night, when he was a teenager, too. (tape turned off and on) ... right around the fire. That's when I was still in high school. He would write poetry and send it in to the Ladies Home Journal under a woman's name--he would put a fictitious name on it. A few pieces of his poetry was published. 

Cole: Was it about that time when they had that incident with the range riders--you were still in high school then?, or about that time period? 

R. Foutz: No, I was out of high school then. 

Cole: And what exactly were the duties of a range rider? 

R. Foutz: He was to keep track of any dispute over the Indians--who was on the right range. He was a government man. And he was supposed to control the range, to see that it wasn't overstocked and stuff. That's what brought about this.... 

Cole: Do you remember--either yourself or your father--was the range overgrazed at that time? 

R. Foutz: It was overgrazed at that time, yes. And it was a drought year. They had some dry years, I know. It put us practically out of the sheep business, it was so dry around that year. They did have some real droughthy years, yeah. And it did need reducing, there was no question about it. They had lots of horses, because a lot of the Indian's wealth was measured in the amount of livestock he had and the amount of horses he owned. That was his status. And the wild horses wasn't--they were overdoing the land all right, yeah. 

Cole: What kind of horses? Any particular breeds? 

R. Foutz: No. They were just mostly horses, descendants from some horses that come out of Old <Mexico>. But later on, there was some horses that was bred pretty well. The calvary had some good remount horses, and some of those remount studs went to the reservation. But some of these over around this side of <Gallup>, they raised some horses, and they raised 'em all the time. And there's a few remount studs got around the valley there.

The Indians have always raced horses. They raced at their squaw dances and whatever they did--one day or one afternoon they would lead out a horse. They would put a shawl or a blanket out there, and one would lead out their horse, and one would lead out the other horse, and they would start betting and putting their money on this blanket. They would bet, and they've always had a place to run horses. When we were kids there at <Kirtland> or <Fruitland>, we used to swim our horses across the river and race with the Indians. They had a track smoothed out there. Then we'd race against 'em, and they did the same way. We'd put what we had to bet on the blanket, they would put what they had [on the blanket]. 

Cole: Was it money, or other things? 

R. Foutz: Well, money, or watch, or whatever we had, what we would bet with them. 

Cole: How did you do? 

R. Foutz: We did pretty well. I didn't have anything really that fast. I didn't do so well, but some of the others did pretty well. They had some mares out of a remount stud, and they did pretty well. My little buckskin mare didn't do all that good.

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

E. Foutz: Russ, there's a story that I'd like to kind of get down, because it's of interest, and I think it ties to one of the court cases that the United Indian Traders Association was involved in. Remember when the person came out from Winslow or Holbrook to try to close you down at <Teec Nos Pos>? 

R. Foutz: Oh, to collect his.... Yeah, that was from St. John's, yeah. 

E. Foutz: Tell us about that. 

R. Foutz: Well, that was after this ruling went through that they had no authority on the reservation. 

E. Foutz: Who had no authority? The State? 

R. Foutz: The State had no authority, or the counties had no authority or jurisdiction. 

E. Foutz: To collect taxes? 

R. Foutz: To collect taxes. So that's when I was young and smarty, probably. This man from St. John's says that we didn't pay our taxes on that. He was gonna come out and collect enough stuff to get our taxes. I told him, "Fine, just come right out." I was just kidding him, I didn't think he would show up. But he did, he showed up with his siren and everything, at the front of the store. So I got on the phone and called the supervisor in <Shiprock>--his name was Jonas-- and told him they had been out here to collect stuff for [the money?]. And he just said, "Let me talk to him." And so he talked to him, he said, "Well, if you pick up anything, we'll have the Navajo police waiting for you here, and we'll have to confiscate that, and we'll have to detain you too." So he got back in his car and went back to St. John's (chuckles) and didn't bother me. So that was after that court hearing that they had, though. But now, I think it's come that you have to pay on your own personal stuff, but that's all you have to pay on. Going back to Gallego. When they bought that Gallego, I told you this man.… He went from that back to bein' the English gentleman. There were only two tennis courts at that time in that country, and they were both from Englishmen. He'd built one there that they played on, and then there was an Englishman that settled at <Fruitland> right there next to where Gressy was. He built his tennis court, too, there. The other gentleman we're talking about, that owned Bruce Bernard's, that this come from, I think he was a surveyor that come to this country. He was very much interested in the improvement of the Navajo sheep. So he raised a herd of sheep of the finest stock you could have, and he would lamb them out right back of his trading post, and then he had a range up at Dolores where he run them in. And he would grade their wool when it come in, and he would sell the Indians the bucks and put them out to 'em. He was the first one to put bucks and stuff up there, to improve their sheep. 

Cole: And where was his store at? 

R. Foutz: His store was right there at <Shiprock>. It's one of the oldest stores there. Where Ed has his store--that's <Shiprock> Trade--I don't know what year I bought that, but that was quite a sight. I bought that, that was bankrupt, and it had been closed up for almost a year, I guess. And I bought it without going inside. And so when we looked in there after we bought it--I opened the door and looked at it, and you couldn't even see the floor for those big cockroaches and stuff that was around that store. (phone rings) This store has quite a history to it, too, the <Shiprock> Trading Company. It was run by Uncle Shel, and Claude Powell's dad. They run that store there. Later, a man by the name of Will Evans bought it from them. And Will Evans was a painter, and he painted yé’ii bicheii all over everything--on the tables, on the walls, on the service station and everything. The <Shiprock> white yé’ii rug didn't come from any Navajo's background--they're copies of Will Evans' [designs]. The <Shiprock> yé’ii is what he painted all over his store. That store was responsible for the <Shiprock> yé’ii that come around there. And the other store above it that was Bruce Bernard's, they were responsible for the improvement of the sheep in that area. He did the most for the improvement of the sheep in that area. 

Cole: So did you buy Shiprock from Evans? 

R. Foutz: I bought it from Vernon Jack, I think. I think Evans sold it to Jack. Did I buy it from Vernon Jack? 

E. Foutz: Was it Vernon or Sylvan? One of the two. 

R. Foutz: Vernon Jack, I bought it from Vernon Jack. 

Cole: Now, was that the first trading post you owned on your own? 

R. Foutz: Let's see.... No, the stores I have owned, one of the first I owned on my own was during the war that I said I owned. 

E. Foutz: Coyote Canyon. 

R. Foutz: Coyote Canyon. Then the next one was my interest in Teec Nos Pos. 

Cole: How much of an interest? 

R. Foutz: I started out with a fourth, and then I was the only one that ever owned, in the history of the store, all of it. I ended up owning all of Teec Nos Pos. 

Cole: Did you sell that at some point, then? 

R. Foutz: I’ve never sold Teec Nos Pos. I guess my daughter thinks she owns it now, it's in her name--so I guess I've sold it now. And then I bought a store called Tosito [phonetic spelling]. That was right close to St. Austie [phonetic spelling], and I think that store's closed. It was a beautiful location. It had an artesian well by it. I sold _____ stores. Then I bought Beclabito, which is the store just close to <Teec Nos Pos> there. I bought that from Dad's brother, Hugh Foutz. He was a man that didn't put anything back into his store. It was just the old number, it had an old two-by-twelve flooring in there, and there was cracks in there. And after I bought it, he said, "When I bought this store they told me that they were pulling out the cash register one time, and there were some gold coins that fell down between these cracks. I was gonna take the floor up and look for those gold coins some day, but I never got around to it. But if you ever get around to it, there's some gold coins out there." So right after Teec Nos Pos burned--I don't know, that had to be a bad time--Beclabito caught on fire and burned down. 

Cole: Both of 'em? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, both stores burnt down. I tried to figure out where that cash register was in those ashes, to dig around to see if those gold coins was really there, but I never did. No one ever got to know whether those gold coins was really there or not. 

Cole: Did you rebuild the stores? 

R. Foutz: We rebuilt the store and then I sold it to cousins of mine that had been workin' for me at <Teec Nos Pos>--Lloyd and Jay Foutz. I sold them Beclabito. 

Cole: Do you remember when the stores burned down? 

R. Foutz: Oh, God, when did they? My wife would remember the dates. 

E. Foutz: I'm not sure, Russ. 

R. Foutz: It burnt down, and it burnt down all the pawn, probably in the sixties, I think. 

Cole: That's sort of interesting. If it burned the pawn, did that cause problems? 

R. Foutz: It caused some problems. I replaced: I bought beads, jewelry, and stuff from all over the country to replace that pawn with. I replaced all their pawn that had burnt down. I still have a drawer full of old wrinkled-up pawn and stuff that was that.

And after that store burnt down, they was starting to build the road on there where the <Teec Nos Pos> store is now. Every time I'd stake out a place to build the store, they'd move the road. But before I could build it, I had to get permission from the community to rebuild that store there. So these Indians, they always liked big, long meetings, so they had to have a big meeting to decide whether they was gonna let me rebuild the store out there, or whether I was gonna replace their pawn and all that--they had a meeting about it. So they had this meeting, and everybody got up and talked about whether they should. And finally old Fred Todachini [phonetic spelling] got up and he says, "We know all the white men cheat us. But this man we know. He just cheats us a little bit. I think we better keep him." This was all in Navajo. Then he sat down and laughed. He thought he'd pulled [off run?], so they all voted they would keep him, 'cause he just cheated 'em a little bit.

But I guess that's the only stores I ever owned. 

Cole: And then <Shiprock>? 

R. Foutz: And <Shiprock>, yeah. 

Cole: Were there differences working in the post, say, in <Shiprock>, which is a little bit of a community, versus <Teec Nos Pos> or some of the others further out? 

R. Foutz: Well, it was different, you had to promote your business, and you had competition there. That was one of the things that brought me to looking for this fat mutton, because if you had fat mutton, you would draw the business. So every Saturday we had fat mutton for sale for 19¢ a pound. We would kill about twenty of these fat, globby sheep, that we got over in <Arizona> and sell mutton. And we had a butcher that drank quite a bit. So he'd get up about four o'clock in the morning for his nip, and he would have that butcher shop in real good condition. Then we had this old man that butchered. We had a little butcher shop where we butchered our own. The Indians would all come and butcher for free so they could get the blood, the guts, and we would throw out about twenty head of fat ewes every Saturday. But you had competition out to the other stores. You was far enough away in those days--they didn't have cars--you had your own customers there. In fact, there at <Teec Nos Pos>, there wasn't very many stores close. Even some of the Indians that lived across the river on the bluff side, over on that side, the store owned a little boat there where they could come across there, bring their wool across. We kept it tied up there at <Cudei>, where the Indians could come across and trade and bring their wool back across.

You had very little competition in your areas way out, where <Shiprock> was a community and you had to merchandise your things there. I don't know, was the 19¢ mutton before your time? 

E. Foutz: No. I remember that. 

R. Foutz: You remember the 19¢ mutton? 

E. Foutz: Yes, I do. _________. 

Cole: Did you live at any of the other trading posts? 

R. Foutz: The only one I ever lived at was at <Teec Nos Pos>. I lived at the old store, and then I had a batchy [bachelor's] quarters at _________ that I lived. But as far as my family, I lived there. And then I lived at Gallego, where this sheep ranch was. That was the old trading post there, and that was in the Checkerboard area. And we had to build a new store there, too. When we had kids, in Gallego the washes ran quite heavily, and there was a wash on both sides of that store. And when the washes run real heavy, there was no way of getting out of that store a'tall. So with kids, I didn't want to be stuck out there where you couldn't get out, so we built a new store up on the hill from there, on a school section. Even though we built it on school land, you got permission from the State to build it. The store out there was on school land when it was taken over by the government. 

Cole: Now, were you ever involved with the Progressive Mercantile yourself? Or was that sold before? 

R. Foutz: I was involved in that. I was there quite _______. Like I said, I worked there.... They had an upstairs to it, and what little dry goods was, I kept the pants and the Levis and the stuff, and peddled the robes and shawls. I worked in the store all the time. I was involved in it even when I went in the service. I went to the service in <San Francisco>, and everything was rationed. I would go to these what they called sweat shops of these Japanese sweat shops and buy little overalls and stuff for Progressive and ship 'em out there. And then I went to a saddle shop that went out of business, and I bought some saddles and nose bags and things like that. Like I said, yes, I was involved in it. I never owned any part of it, but I was just involved in doing it, and buying things for it. When I was in the service, _________. 

Cole: How many stores did Progressive stock, do you know? 

R. Foutz: I don't know, there was around twenty. 

Cole: Were they mainly ones that the partners owned? 

R. Foutz: Well, they would be.... Like maybe Red Mesa, I think like Red Mesa maybe. Maybe Roscoe would get a fourth when he first went out there, or maybe a third. Maybe Shel and Willard, which is relations of Ross, well, maybe they would have the other two-thirds. And then after they got that paid for, they would get a half, and they'd would eventually buy all the stores. And then Burt Dustin, he had two sons-in-law, and he put them in business, bought the stores at <Greasewood> and put them in there. Dad bought my [middle?] brother, he bought, he had a brother-in-law, and my son, that's <Sheep Springs>. He would buy those and then he turned those over there--Bob had <Sheep Springs>.

Some of those stores that they didn't have interest in, but the people who owned them lived right there at <Fruitland>, and they supplied them there. And a lot of 'em was related some way or the other, like St. Austie, that was a Foutz, but that was Dad's half brother. And at Tosito, that was some relation to my mother. They were all related in there, one way or the other, that owned most of these stores. 

E. Foutz: Would Progressive Merc run accounts on these other stores until wool and lamb season? They would actually carry these other people? 

R. Foutz: They carried 'em, they paid twice a year, yeah. They paid the wool season, then they carried their accounts. And all the records of those are still in the basement there. Yeah, they would pay twice a year. They in turn borrowed the money from the bank, Mrs. Sammons [phonetic spelling], what they didn't have. 

E. Foutz: Progressive Merc would, and the traders would buy some. 

R. Foutz: They would buy, and they financed the stores. 

Cole: Do you remember any problems like in the thirties, during the Depression, with the economy? Did that affect the posts on the reservation? 

R. Foutz: It affected everybody: the traders that had kids in college, they were cut off. They'd go, but it was real bad during the thirties. 

Cole: I was sort of curious, too, about the meningitis epidemic. What effect did that have on the Navajo also? 

R. Foutz: There was quite a few of 'em died in that area. That was the epidemic that went through there, yeah. In those days I guess there wasn't very little cure for it, I guess. 

Cole: How long did that last? 

R. Foutz: (sigh) I don't know. 

Cole: Do you speak Navajo, Russell? 

R. Foutz: Enough to get by, yeah. I never talked it real fluently, but I speak, yeah. 

Cole: How long did it take you to learn, or when did you start? 

R. Foutz: Oh, I learned it in high school. I mean, when you was out there.... I was out there by myself, and none of 'em spoke English, so you had to speak enough to get by. When I'd go out there to relieve a trader, you was the only one there, so you had to speak enough to get by. 

Cole: When you were in high school, how would you describe the living conditions of the Navajo? 

R. Foutz: In those days they all either went away to school or they went to these boarding schools. The Indians, which there's a boarding--there's still some of 'em in existence where the Indians would send their children to a boarding school. They'd go to <Shiprock> or they had a few boarding schools around on the different parts of the reservation. There's one there in <Teec Nos Pos>. I would say that some of each family went to school and some of 'em didn't. But they didn't go to public schools in those days. 

Cole: Did they live fairly close to <Teec Nos Pos>? How far would some of 'em come to the trading post, do you know? 

R. Foutz: They would come.... We always kept a hogan for 'em to stay at night. A lot of 'em come and spent the night there. They would come from, oh, twenty-five miles. The ones that come from way down the other side of Cudyhi, I guess it'd be further than that--close to Fiftymile area, they would come. They would bring their horses. They would either come horse and wagon, you always had a place for 'em, tied their horses, a place for 'em to stay at night. The hogan was nearly always busy, somebody was staying there-- sometimes a couple of families would stay there at night. 

Cole: What was the economy like then when you were in high school? 

R. Foutz: The only pay days they had.... We didn't need a lot, we always had all we could eat. There wasn't any.... When I was in high school the economy was decent, they had some kind of a job. They had enough money that they could go to a dance on Saturday night. Nobody went without anything. It was a Mormon community and nobody went hungry in a Mormon community. It wasn't that bad. 

Cole: Did the Navajo have much cash at all then? 

R. Foutz: Very little. Like I said, at first I don't remember why these people got a check. There was only one check come there for years. They were descendants of scouts, and these ones that got it were both deformed. But I think it was a check from a family that was government scouts or something there. At one time, there was only one family that got checks at <Teec Nos Pos> in the real early days. 

Steiger: The scouts--what campaign would that have been? 

R. Foutz: That would have been of the early work for the government. Some of their descendants might have got money. 

Steiger: Like not World War I or something like that? 

R. Foutz: No, no, no. 

Steiger: Before that? 

R. Foutz: That was way before that, yeah. 

Cole: Did World War II have a big impact on the reservation, do you think? 

R. Foutz: I don't think so. There were a lot of the educated Navajos went, and most of the young people went, but I don't think the world.... There was a shortage of sugar and coffee, and all the rationing that went on, but I think they fared as well, because they raised so much of their own stuff anyway. I don't believe it affected them as much. 

Cole: How about after the war when Navajo soldiers came back? Was there more cash in the economy then? 

R. Foutz: There was more cash in the economy, yeah. 

Cole: How did that affect the trading business, or did it? 

R. Foutz: Well, that didn't affect it as much as it did when they got the Aid to Dependent Children and stuff--that brought in lots of checks. 

Cole: And when was that, do you know? 

R. Foutz: I don't know when that first come into effect. I don't know, it was about.... 

Cole: Was that 1960s? 

E. Foutz: It had to be 1960s or a little before that. I believe even in the fifties they started some of those programs. 

R. Foutz: And then the tribe and the government would have work projects that would bring in quite a bunch of money. They'd have a project where they would have a bunch of women working on a project, and a bunch of men, so they had work projects on the Indians. 

E. Foutz: I think those were Roosevelt, probably. 

R. Foutz: But right now the economy, I think, is probably the best it's ever been on the reservation. There's jobs for either on or off, I think you could call 'em. It's not what it should be, yes, but I think it's the best it's ever been. 

Cole: How big did the Shiprock Trading Company get to be, as far as employees and business? What kind of an annual business did it do, do you remember? 

R. Foutz: Well, Ed was there when it was at its peak, so Ed could tell you that. What was the maximum-- twelve employees, Ed? 

E. Foutz: While you were there, probably twelve. I mean, it slowly got up to about thirty [to] thirty- seven. But no, we had about twelve with Joe and that, before that expansion. Yeah, about twelve. 

R. Foutz: I think it was about twelve. 

E. Foutz: I think that would be right. A couple at the station. 

R. Foutz: And some girls working. 

Cole: Do you still have a store up in that area, Russell? 

R. Foutz: No, the only ones I have is I have a little store and a pawn shop at <Kirtland>, and then I have a store in <Farmington>. That's the two stores. 

Cole: When did you establish those? 

R. Foutz: (sigh) The one in <Farmington>, probably in the late forties. And I left in the late forties. I bought E. P. Wood's store in the late forties, I guess, when I established a store there in <Farmington>. And the one in <Kirtland>, that was probably forty years ago, so that was probably maybe--so what's forty years from now? 

E. Foutz: Forty years ago would be about in the fifties. 

R. Foutz: One of 'em in the forties and one in the fifties, probably. 

Cole: And when did you sell <Shiprock>? 

R. Foutz: (sigh) When did you buy all of <Shiprock>, Ed? 

E. Foutz: Oh, boy! (laughs) I don't know. It was, I think, in the early seventies, wasn't it? Or late sixties, early seventies? 

R. Foutz: Early seventies, probably. 

E. Foutz: Early seventies, I would guess. 

Cole: To sort of change gears a little bit, I was interested, you mentioned going to the Gallup Ceremonial when the fellow had the buffalo. 

E. Foutz: That was Joe Tanner. 

R. Foutz: Joe Tanner. They have a big Gallup Ceremonial every year where all the people in it were supposed to be Indians. It's a rodeo. It's kind of like the Shiprock Ceremonial, only it was bigger than that. They had a yé’ii bicheii and an Indian rodeo and all that. It continues on. We have one in <Shiprock>. We call it the Shiprock Fair there, where they have a ten-day yé’ii bicheii and dance and run horses and stuff. 

Cole: Do you remember the first time you went to the Gallup Ceremonial, how old you were? 

R. Foutz: No, I don't remember that. When I first went I was probably ten, twelve, or fourteen, something like that. Let's see, we had a relation that lived in <Gallup>, and they had a boy about my age. I was probably ten or twelve when I first went there. And the Shiprock Fairs, I guess they've been going on ever since we've--I don't know when they first started, but they've always had a Shiprock Fair there too, where they have the yé’ii bicheii. They display their stuff. Grandma Martin, we used to put her beads out on display, her red beads.

Speaking of Grandma Martin, when the government give Fort Lewis to the school, what part of the school education, they went through it, they made it [that] any Navajo had free tuition to go to Fort Lewis. And there's a very well-known woman that we call Grandma Martin. She only died about four or five years ago, I guess. She was one of the first Indians to go to college, and she went to that Fort Lewis School there. And we was talkin' about her famous red beads. She had probably the biggest strand of red beads that there was--had two strands--she always wore around her neck, under her clothes. And I was almost kiddin' her about when she died, about I was gettin' her red beads. Her kids drank quite a bit. And she said, "Yes, you're gonna get a strand of my beads, but my kids are not gonna get it--you're the one that's gonna get a strand of beads." So one day she came in there, and she motioned for me to come in the back room. She sat down, and she had her red beads out. She said, "I'm going to give you these. I promised you a string of my beads. These beads have been on the Long Walk." You know, whenever that.... "They were my grandmother's beads, they've been on the Long Walk, and I want you to have a strand of them." And here she was in the back room, telling me she's dying this weekend. I said, "You're not dying this weekend," with her little hands trying' to get this string of red beads off. _____ off, she gave 'em to me, and she said, "No." I said, "Grandma, as long as you're that--I want to furnish the bracelets they're going to bury you with." "Okay, let's pick 'em out." And I said, "Grandma, this is a payday week, we're busy out there. You don't have to die this weekend, you can die some other time." She said, "Oh, Mr. Foutz, you say the most terrible things!" I said, "Put it off 'til Monday. Come back in and get your [bracelets]." "Okay, I'll try." So the following Monday, she come in to get her bracelets to be buried with. She'd put it off. She lived another five years! (laughter) 

E. Foutz: After that did she? 

R. Foutz: Another five years. I've still got the string of beads just in my desk drawer up there. And I don't know who got the rest of those. She said those kids wasn't gonna get 'em, so I don't know whether they did or not. 

E. Foutz: I don't know if they took 'em off, or they were buried with her. Did Bob Martin and her husband and her, did they run a store? _________. Did they run a store in <Shiprock>? Didn't they own Vaughn's or something? ________ one of the stores? 

R. Foutz: That was Dax De Claw [phonetic spelling] that owned Vaughn's. 

E. Foutz: Okay, I thought her and Bob Martin had started a store. No? 

R. Foutz: Don't think they ever started--the only store that I ever knew [that was] Indian run was Dashley's. Dax De Claw owned the Bond Store there. 

E. Foutz: The old Bond Store on the river. 

R. Foutz: Right there where--who's there?, Chuck or somebody's there? 

E. Foutz: Uh-huh, Chuck. 

R. Foutz: I said no--no, Dave said that. Dax De Claw, he was killed in--wasn't he hit over the head or something, too? 

E. Foutz: He was killed. 

R. Foutz: He was killed, yeah. I think _________. 

Steiger: I think we should say just real quick what the Long Walk was, or would people know that? 

R. Foutz: That was the one where they rounded 'em up and....

?: [Bosque Redondo] 

Steiger: Okay. I was gonna ask about _________. Well, actually, you can tell us, Ed. 

E. Foutz: Well, the Long Walk would be when the Indians were rounded up by Kit Carson and the calvary and were gathered up and taken off of that reservation, or off of that area, and taken down to the Rio Grande to, what is it?

?: The Bosque Redondo? [phonetic spelling]. 

E. Foutz: Bosque Redondo, yeah--and area. And the Indians remember that very, very well. That would be likened to the Bataan Death March to a lot of us, because a lot of the tribe were either kidnapped or died during that long walk. It was in the wintertime-- I think he was referring to. 

(aside about tape) 

Cole: I was wondering, Russell, would you ever hear stories about the Long Walk, or about the Navajo Treaty of 1868? Did people talk about that?, either of those? 

R. Foutz: No, she [Grandma Martin] was about the only woman that I ever discussed it with, because she spoke fluent English. But anything else about it is just what I've read. I guess, well, you can read the history on it, about how many of 'em died. I guess hundreds died on it, and hundreds died while they were there, before they was sent back to their own land. What was that, 1860s? 

R. Foutz: I don't know, it was in the early 1800s, I'd say. 

Steiger: (aside about tape, tape turned off and on) 

Cole: Russell, was it common for you to supply jewelry and items for Native American Navajo burials? 

R. Foutz: Yeah, it's real common for other Indians and other people that know them to give things for burial, yes. When somebody dies, yes, it's quite common. They always come to the traders and say, "Will you help with something?" "Yes." It's generally a piece of jewelry or a robe or a belt or something you'd furnish. Even today, I still do it quite a bit. 

Cole: What would you do if somebody passed away that had pawn in your store? Would you give that back? 

R. Foutz: Some of the families do, and some of the families don't. Some of the families take it out. And the ones that don't take it, it's probably still around. Like this pawn that's hanging in there, that I still own, of Fred Todachini's. A lot of those Indians at <Teec Nos Pos> that have died, the kids didn't take it out. A lot of that pawned jewelry I still own. But you always give the kids a chance to take it out if they want their family's jewelry.

But these beads, this red coral, it had to come up with the early Spaniards, and it's kind of like a family tree. When one dies, they take some of it and bury it with them. And the others, they keep on and build and put it on. And you take one of these old strings of red beads, and you can go through and count about five generations on that one strand of beads, that they do that.

And then when the coral--that was their most precious stone, and their most precious thing they owned. If you had the red beads, it didn't matter how much you pawned 'em for, if they were good red beads, they were gonna take those red beads out of pawn. They was valuable.

And then, there for quite a long period, there was no coral that was around the reservation, that went on the market. It was just this real old coral that come from up, probably old timers from Old <Mexico>. So I was down here one year, and I ran into a teacher and someone by the name of Mrs. Stavasanio [phonetic spelling], and they was from <Italy>, and she was doing something over there. They had some coral like you see these Indians wear, and she had some drilled. It was a big coral, and she had drilled this coral. (aside about locking door) She had brought this coral over, and she had drilled this coral across. They wanted to know if I would buy it, that she heard the Indians liked coral. I said, "No, but if you would take that back and get them to drill it lengthwise and bring it over, you could sell all the coral that you could have made." And she went back and started to have them doing that, and bringing it over here and selling it. And about ten years ago, or six--no, less than that-- six years ago, I guess she died, and I got a letter from her. She's saying--thanking me for putting in that _____, that that had supplied them with a living for the last forty-five years. And her husband had died and she was selling the last of her coral. I still have some of that original coral that they sent back over there, that they drilled this way. So that red coral we're talking about, is either a couple of hundred years old and it come up with the early Spaniards, or it's coral that has been imported in the last sixty-five years. So it's either a couple of hundred years old, or only sixty-five or seventy years old. But that is their most valuable possession of a family, is their string of red beads. 

Cole: What other influences have you had on arts and crafts that you can remember? 

R. Foutz: Well, after the war, they always [skinded?] their own wool and stuff, and after the war, they had these Shamiah [phonetic spelling] rugs. And I come across a--I had a beautiful Germantown rug that I exhibited at the Gallup Ceremonial, and somebody bought. And some woman come up to me and she says, "I know who wove that rug," and she named the man that had wove it. I always admired his rug. And these Germantown rugs, they sold for in demand and they brought lots of money. So I went to Shamiah and I saw these Shamiah people weaving these rugs out in Shamiah. So I got the address of these people that was where they got their four-ply yarn from. And I ordered the four-ply yarn and brought it, stocked it, to <Teec Nos Pos>. And I had some rugs wove out of it. Then I even had one of the weavers split it, this German[town yarn], and weave it into one-ply. The one-ply that they--and I couldn't tell the difference, and so I didn't think the experts could tell the difference. So I had one of the better weavers weave one of the rugs out of the commercial one-ply, and put it in the Gallup Ceremonial. And I just put it in the Gallup Ceremonial--"I don't know what category this rug should go in. You can put it whatever category that it goes in." So they put it in the category of the hand-spun Navajo weavings and give it the blue prize of hand-ply weaves. Well, I knew the judge quite well…. And not only that, it got the Indian Traders Association prize. I said, "[judge], it was bad enough that you put a blue ribbon as homespun on a factory-made rug, but it was even worse when you gave the Traders Association prize money on it." I took the ribbon off of it…. I had a lot of fun out of it. So I thought, "Well, if the judges can't even tell the difference in these rugs, and these old rugs are worth a lot of money, why wouldn't the new rugs be worth just as much money as the old ones whether they were commercial or not?" So whether it was a good thing or a bad thing, but it's the only thing, but I introduced the commercial four- ply wool on the reservation that all the rugs are made out of now, except maybe one percent maybe. 

E. Foutz: I think it really helped a lot of your poor weavers become better weavers and get more money for their rugs, because they could control the coloring and their consistency of weave a lot better. I think it was really--I would say this, it helped a lot of families make a lot more money on the reservation. 

R. Foutz: Do you remember Clay Lockett? 

E. Foutz: Oh, yes! very well. 

R. Foutz: He drank quite a bit and he cussed quite a bit. He cussed me quite a bit for doing that, but it was all in fun. 

Cole: Why was he such an expert on rugs? 

R. Foutz: 'Cause his mother left him a lot of money, I guess, I don't know. (laughs) 

E. Foutz: Clay had studied, and he (

R. Foutz: Yeah, he wrote a lot of books.) _______ authority and he had a shop at that time in <Tucson>. Wasn't that back in ________ when he had that shop in <Tucson>? And he was looked on, and he had done some studying. He was one that liked to do it, and he was the kind of person that they sought after. Russ, you also did--I think in learning from you, I watched you. Tell us a little about some of your rug contests that you ran, and the extremely good jewelry that you give. 

R. Foutz: Yeah, we did give rug contests, and then we would have the tribal authorities judge these rugs every year. There at the early days of <Teec Nos Pos>, they would just string over the sheep fence all the way around. We would give to these weavers, I would give the real good jewelry for different prizes. It turned out to be in those days it was good jewelry--it was jewelry that could be passed down, so that a lot of the good jewelry was given up there. So that was a big influence on helping them to weave good patterns and encourage their weaving.

And then there was one real talented boy. Most of the Teec Nos Pos weavers, they all have their own designs _____________. But there was one, we called him "Little Indian," that he always drew on a piece of wrapping paper the design for his wife's rug, and they followed that. I thought, well, the man can do that, too. So then there was one of the good weaver's sons, on a tablet he was doing that. So we'd get him to draw rug designs. He'd draw 'em on a paper....

[END SIDE 3, BEGIN SIDE 4]

... and he says when he was up at <Teec Nos Pos>, he sold bayeta cloth. He says it come in a bolt. He says it just looks like red outing flannel. 

Cole: Really? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, he says that he would sell that. He imported it from England. 

E. Foutz: [Well, my loss?] 

R. Foutz: And he sold it. He said it was on a bolt, looked like white outing flannel. And since that, I notice in that medicine man kit that's in our back room where there's supposed to be some bayeta cloth, you get to lookin' at it close, when it's torn up, it looks like a piece of red outing flannel. 

Cole: Interesting. 

Steiger: (aside about tape) 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University, we're with Russell Foutz in <Scottsdale Arizona>. It's April 3, [1998]. Also present in the room are Ed Foutz and Lew Steiger, and this is Tape #3.

Russell, you were telling us about the fellow at <Teec Nos Pos> who made the drawings for patterns and sold 'em there. Maybe tell us about that. 

R. Foutz: Yeah, there's this.... The women at <Teec Nos Pos>, those rugs are famous for their patterns and their outline patterns. If one family uses it, the other family's not supposed to. And there was a real talented boy by the name of--his name at first was Harry. His mother was one of the better weavers out there, and he was always drawing the patterns for these rugs. And so he would draw them on sheets of paper. He'd put 'em in our candy case and we'd let him sell 'em for 50¢ a piece. Some of the real good patterns from <Teec Nos Pos> ________ come from the weaver was probably a pattern that this young boy designed. And one of the most famous <Teec Nos Pos> weavers is Little Indian. This little man would come to the store all the time, riding his mule, and her rugs are the most collectable of any of the Teec Nos Poses. And her designs were drawn by her husband. So the men did play an important part in some of the designs of the rugs today that's on the market. 

Cole: What would you do to encourage kids that were learning to weave? Was there anything there? Did you buy their rugs? 

R. Foutz: We'd always buy their rugs and put their ages on 'em. And we used to exhibit rugs with the juveniles, and we used to buy all [of them]. We would always by a little girl's first rug. We always did that to encourage them. And there is some men that got to be good weavers. What was our blind man, Ed? 

E. Foutz: James Sherman? 

R. Foutz: James Sherman. James Sherman went blind and even though he couldn't finish a rug, he would get it half-way finished, and we'd buy his unfinished rug and roll it up, which we still have quite a few of. But we always did what we could to try to encourage weavings.

Weavings and rugs was my first love. I started my first collection before I was married. Now the main things I put back was I was real interested in sand painting rugs. So the rugs that I saved mainly was the rugs that was woven from the red sheep. The reddish sheep was the color, by the time they carded it out, was the color of the sand. I knew this color could never be reproduced, because the reddish sheep was going out of existence. I did collect some sand paintings of that. I think probably the most valuable rugs probably that's on the market is this Hosteen Klah's sand painting rugs, which ended up at the Wheelwright Museum. He is probably the most famous of all the weavers, and he was a man with no children, and his nephews and nieces have turned out to be some of the best weavers on the reservation. They were guided by him. Daisy Tauglechee was his youngest niece. Mrs. Sam, her rugs are collectable. They're the finest sand paintings. And Mrs. Jim, they're all descendants of Hosteen Klah. Hosteen Klah had a rug half finished when he died, and these three nieces finished it. I think that rug is still owned by the Newcomb family. And Daisy went on to be the most famous of all the Two Grey Hill weavers. She's noted for her tapestries. If you owned a Hosteen Klah, I'm sure they're valued in the $50,000 and upward class. So it was not only the women, but the men also have played a very important part in the history of the weaving of the Navajo Tribe. 

Cole: Are the sand painting rugs kind of unusual? 

R. Foutz: A sand painting rug is a copy of a sand painting they do in a ceremony, you know. And these they tear up. And they have copied these. And unless you were a medicine man, it's a kind of a--you're not supposed to weave one of those rugs--you'll go blind if you do. I remember the first rug I got, the first sand painting rug I bought, it was at Gallego, and I had made arrangements to buy that rug for a certain price. And when it was finished, the deal was made. Then about two weeks later she came back and said that I had to give her another $200 because she was going blind from weaving that rug, and she would have to hire a medicine man to give her a ceremony to keep from going blind. So I had to give her another $200 for her to have the medicine man treat her so she wouldn't go blind. That is the value of these rugs, because they are copies of what they do in the healing ceremonies. They have what they call a ten-day--nine nights and ten days. Each day a different sand painting is made in the hogan, and it's part of the healing ceremony of that ritual __________. And then just a regular squaw dance that is three days, there's still the sand paintings ____ with that. Some of these Indians make up their own sand paintings and their own drawing. It's just like a doctor has his own medicine, they have their own sand painting. That's supposed to heal a certain disease. I think when I went to my first ceremonial, I think it was with Bruce's dad, Bob Burnham. I was staying with him out to <Bisti>, and we rode out to this hogan on our horses. We went to this ceremony--they always last all night. About three o'clock in the morning, his folks come looking for him. We was about thirteen, and we were still settin' in that hogan with that medicine man, havin' a healing ceremony on these women. That intrigued us, so we were still there. They thought something had happened to us, but we were just at the ceremonial. 

Cole: Did you stay, or did you have to go? 

R. Foutz: Well, we had to go home. It was three. They told us to get on our horses and go home. 

Cole: Were you allowed to see the sand painting done? 

R. Foutz: They're allowed. If you're known in those families, you're allowed to go in. As a rule, they don't. Like out there, they were friends of the trader, they knew the trader, and they were allowed to go in.

When I was first married at <Teec Nos Pos>, my wife was from the East, and so I paid for an entire ten-day yé’ii bicheii right at the trading post, so she could see the ceremonies. Since I was footing all the bills, we was allowed to go in and see all the ceremonies there. 

Steiger: Did you think the medicine men were fairly effective? We've heard some stories both ways, and I'm just curious. 

R. Foutz: Certainly their effective, because they believe in 'em. It's just whether you.... Of course they're not gonna cure an uncurable disease, but it's just like you going to a doctor. If you believe in that doctor, he's gonna do you some good. And they believe in what they're doing, and they're gonna do good, but if it’s diabetes or something like that that they have, some of the things that they do, they're probably the only help they can do is a person's mind and the state of their being, they're helping. But some things make 'em think they're well, so they are well, and the same with a lot of us, too. We think we're well, we'll get up and be well. 

Cole: You had mentioned your uncle selling by-etta [phonetic spelling] cloth. 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh. 

Cole: What exactly is that? Was it used in weaving? 

R. Foutz: That's what all the collectors are looking for now, is the real old rugs that was made out of bayeta, or some of it was made out of uniforms-- unravelled material that the uniforms had of the colors there--an indigo blue. But the bayeta cloth was kind of an imported cloth from England that was used in their weaving. They're very rare, and it's a real collectible. And anything ________ if it was unravelled material, whether it was out of this cloth, whether it was obvious cloth, or whether it was out of an army man's uniform, you probably can't tell which is which, but they claim they can. 

Cole: If you could kind of walk us through maybe how you'd buy rugs, and also how did you market them? Did you sell them just to people that came to your store off the reservation, or.... 

R. Foutz: We sold them to the different places. Our biggest place we sold to was Fred Harvey. They had all the parks there. We sold them lots of rugs there. And we sold a lot to the other national parks. There was Rocky Mountain Transportation in <Denver>, which they had the concessions for all those parks up there that we sold to them. We sold mostly to dealers. And then we'd go on what we'd call a rug trip, and we'd go up in the Black Hills and sell to those parks--we had somebody that we sold 'em to wherever. 

Cole: When did you start your rug trips? 

R. Foutz: Oh, I went on rug trips when I was in high school. I would go with Uncle Shel, with an uncle of mine, and we'd go up through <Denver>, up through the Black Hills and there. Then we'd go over to Albuquerk [<Albuquerque>], to where they did the buying for Fred Harvey's stores, and we'd go to <Gallup> and sell 'em there. That was in the thirties when they started. 

Cole: Were other traders doing that also? 

R. Foutz: We were probably the biggest. Progressive on this side was probably the biggest distributors of that. And C. N. Cotton in <Gallup>. And they even went back East to the department stores, and put 'em in at the World's Fairs. They went there and sold. They were probably the biggest distributors, yes. 

Cole: So Progressive was really doing the marketing. 

R. Foutz: They was doing the marketing of the rugs, yeah. 

(break) 

Cole: ... Fred Harvey Company. 

R. Foutz: The first person I remember dealing with is a name by Mr. Ebbens [phonetic spelling]. He was the buyer when they was at Albuquerk where they tore that deal down there. And the railroads, they come right along the railroad there. He was all concerned because they had a new manager, and they said that the volume of good Indian rugs wasn't selling like it should be. They wanted rugs just to fit on those tables that they had, so the tourists would just _______ tables. And I know we had to give Mr. Ebbens some consignment of some good rugs so he could sell 'em, to show his new boss that Fred Harvey could still sell the good expensive rugs. I think that's twice in my lifetime we have done that to Fred Harvey--they've taken in new management and the new manager looks at figures that turns, and they don't think good things turn fast enough, so they have wanted to lean more toward the inexpensive stuff. Now this new company, I guess they want to lean towards "T" shirts, 'cause I guess that's the big thing now. 

Cole: You also mentioned C. N. Cotton. Was that a company or a person? 

R. Foutz: C. N. Cotton was a wholesale place in <Gallup> that supplied a lot of the--serviced a lot of the traders on that side, the <Gallup> side of the reservation. And they were old-time wholesalers, just like Progressive was on this side. Then there's also Charles Ilfeld. They handled probably more rugs than anybody. They would buy them and they was getting them distributed in the East. A lot of the rugs were at the World's Fair in <Chicago>. The World's Fair they had was having Indian dancers and sand painters and silversmiths go back, so there got to be quite a market for Indian goods back there, on account of these displays that they had at the World's Fairs. 

Cole: How did you buy rugs? How did that work? 

R. Foutz: Like I said, when I first started in the___, years ago they bought some of 'em by the pound, and now you just buy them by--some people measure 'em, some of 'em look at.... But I've gone through so many I just throw 'em out and buy 'em. The weave has something to do with it. Design has something to do with it. And the type of rug has something to do with it. 

Cole: Do you have favorite weavers that you deal with still? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, we have favorite weavers, yes. ___________ layin' it right there. I saw one layin' _________________. 

Steiger: (aside about microphone) 

R. Foutz: You can have one of each of us. That was taken in our store. This is Daisy Tauglechee. She got to be the most famous weaver of any of the Two Grey Hill weavers. She got to weaving such fine tapestries, that no [collection of rugs] is complete unless they have one of her rugs in it. 

Steiger: (aside about holding photo) 

Cole: And how long did you work with Daisy? 

R. Foutz: Hm, probably twenty years. 

Cole: When you got somebody that was doing her quality of work, would she already have the rug sold before she even started? 

R. Foutz: No. She wove two different sizes, we just bought the one that come in. We had collectors that we knew we could sell them to. She'd got famous... And then the sand painting rugs, like you heard us talking about Hosteen Klah and the [morphodite?]. He was so famous. Then [Daisy's] nieces, there were three of them, and they all turned out to be famous weavers, and two of them continued weaving sand painting rugs. That rug that we're talking about that those come off of, nobody knows what that rug is worth. Everybody thought if it went to an auction, it might bring in the $50,000 bracket--if they could prove the history of it and exactly who did weave it. 

Cole: Do you have any sort of stories about unusual customers that might have just showed up in the trading posts to buy rugs? Did you have famous people? 

R. Foutz: We've sold rugs to Mrs. Wrigley. And Mrs. McCormick was a big buyer of Indian arts and crafts. And one day I was here decorating this window. This window here, I was changing stuff in it, and some man come in and wanted to know something about rugs, if I'd show him a rug. "[Do you] know about rugs?" And I said, "Yeah. Do you know anything [about] decoratin' a window? If you'll help me with this window, I'll show you rugs. Do you know anything about it?" He said, "Yeah, but it's been a long time." So he helped me finish the window, and then we got back to look at rugs, and then he introduced himself. He was chairman of the board of Sears and Roebuck, Mr. Miller. Then he went on to be quite a collector of old high-priced rugs, and he was a collector of it.

Another man that used to buy rugs used to buy 'em down here. Then he come to <Shiprock>, he had two big boxes, he come rollin' 'em in there--of rugs. He said, "Sell these rugs for me. This is my education. Now you know what I want to buy." And he would buy Daisy's, and he would buy.... This one rug I remember that his wife was buying, he had a special-built trailer and a trailer house down here, and they had that there____ pulling all through <Africa>. And this one, we had a Daisy Tauglechee that had just come in. It was tiny. We wanted $3,500 for it, _______ him. And he turned to his wife and he said, "You don't have a place in this left that you can put a rug. You have Greys over the top of vegetables and dyes now. Where could you put this Daisy Tauglechee?" "I could put it right in front of the sink, she said." A Daisy Tauglechee tapestry! 

Cole: What other kinds of arts and crafts did you sell besides rugs? 

R. Foutz: Oh, sand paintings, sculptures. Let's see, I started a store on 5th Avenue in <Scottsdale> one time, and there was only seven of us over there that had stores on 5th Avenue. And Mrs. McCormick had sponsored this Indian in the one. Old Man Godberr [phonetic spelling]--the Godberrs around here--their dad had a store. Five others that was there. So that the first item we sold out of that store was a cane. In those early days, in those days there were very few buffalos in the country. Anything off a buffalo was sacred, and sacred medicine to the Indians. We got some buffalo penises, and to stretch that penis, we'd put it over a welding rod up there. And just for kicks, we'd take that buffalo penis that was on this welding rod, they bent the top over, and on the top of it we put the rattles off a rattlesnake. And this woman come in and she was looking around the store, and she says, "What is that cane up there?" I said, "Well, that's a ceremonial cane," or something, "of the Navajos." I didn't tell her [it was a] buffalo penis. "I want that. My husband collects canes." So that cane made out of a buffalo penis was the first thing we sold to this woman. Why we put it over this buffalo penis, we had a hack saw, and we'd cut off an inch of it to sell to these medicine men. They'd put this penis over the fires where the smoke ____________. So that buffalo penis, that's probably about the most unusual thing I sold. I can't think of anything more unusual. 

Cole: We were wondering if you could maybe tell us any stories about other traders that you worked with. You were telling us something earlier about Harry Goulding. 

R. Foutz: I told you about Harry Goulding. I told you about Wiff Wheeler, that the bank foreclosed them. She wanted the keys. I think I told it to you where this woman banker said that she was gonna have to close his store down, and he gave her back the keys, and he wouldn't take them until she gave him $2,000 more. And he was quite a drunk. And the closest place where they sent 'em was up there at <Colorado Springs> someplace. And if he didn't show up there to the nurses, they would call up and say, "Where is Wiff? Where is Wiff? When is Wiff coming up here?" He'd be all liquored up. "He always does Indian dances for us." [They] wanted [him] to come up and dry out again so he could do his Indian dances. No, I don't know any _______. 

Steiger: You know, we didn't get the Harry Goulding story on tape. 

Cole: I was wondering if you could tell us that again, because we didn't have the camera on when you were talking about Harry Goulding, how he sold rugs. 

R. Foutz: How he sold the rugs? You didn't get that on tape? Well, it was just this cousin of mine, this Claude Powell, he was the son of my father's sister. He was an old-time trader and been around it all the time. He used to go out and sell Goulding rugs when he was working for us. And he said he'd go there to Goulding and they would be talking about rugs, and Goulding had an Indian woman hid out just a few, a little place from the store. And when a car would come, and they'd come in and wanted to buy rugs, he would say, "I just don't have very many rugs here. And I don't have much money to buy rugs with, but here comes a woman that looks like she's got a rug right now. Maybe you'd like to buy a rug directly from the weaver." And so she would come in and she would sell her rug, he would interpret it for her, and he would sell the rug to the tourists." After they left, he would give this woman another rug, and she'd go out, away from the store, and wait for another tourist to come by so she could come in with the rug she "wove herself" to sell to the tourists.

But these modern Indians has got quite smart. I guess we have about four different Indian families that come to <Farmington> and buy rugs from us all the time and go out and sell them. We have a woman that comes down here that goes through all the hospitals and sells those to all the doctors and nurses. They're supposed to be her rugs that she wove, ________. So they're gettin' to be quite the merchandisers. 

Steiger: Was it fun doin' business with 'em, just to trade with various people? Did you have people that were always tryin' to out-fox you and like that? 

R. Foutz: Yeah, we had people that was always--we had some people that was out to fox us quite a bit. And it was fun. I mean, out there on the reservation you'd be bored, you'd have to have something to entertain yourself. So we had what we called the wool room, where the women go back and pick out their own wool to make a rug with. And they'd come in and weigh the wool and buy it. So we had this one woman that she was just adapted to steal. She would steal anything she could get her hands on. So back in the wool room, we put a case of pop. Here she would be gathered up her wool like this, and put it in a sack _____. Then she'd sneak in two or three bottles of pop in with the wool. Then she'd come out and have it weighed. Well, she was paying twice as much for that pop by the pound (laughs) as she was if she'd just come to the store and bought it! But you have to do something to amuse yourself up there.

But yes, you have characters; you have people that you depend on to come and watch your store; you always have a favorite around there that you can depend on. Our first year there was an Indian by the name of Cady [phonetic spelling]. They were real poor people, and one time I went up to pick him up to come down and watch the store. His wife was on the loom. She was tearing up all the kids' old clothes into strips, and she was weaving the old clothes into a rug. I don't know what it would look like when it was finished, but you had very interesting people around the stores _________.

You would almost have one person that was a famous-- somebody was always the most famous, _______ medicine man or the medicine woman, and Indians would come from hundreds of miles. They'd hear about her and come. This one woman, they would bring their pawn and stuff to pay the medicine man. I know this one medicine man, he would bring 'em in, pawn 'em at the store. So this pawn got to be an awful lot of this one medicine man's there at <Teec Nos Pos> that come in. And it was almost a flour sack full, and I went in the back room and dumped it on the bed, and I said, "How much of this pawn is yours? How much do you want to keep?" She picked up about three pieces and she says, "I don't want any more, but this is just what they paid me for." She said, "I pawned it to you _________." But they bring sheep and they bring cows. A good medicine man would get paid real high.

But there was always something going on at a store-- either good or bad, there was something always going on. 

Cole: Did you ever have any kind of scary incidents, or robberies, or anything like that? 

R. Foutz: We never had any real, real, real bad brushes. When I was staying at the trading post when I was just in high school, staying on the trading post at <Teec Nos Pos>, I got awful scared one night. I heard this pounding, pounding, pounding, and then it stopped, and then it'd come again. I was really quite upset about it, afraid somebody was out there trying to break in. I got up about daylight, I went up there to see what was going on, and here was a horse on this tin roof. He was taking his front foot, pawing [piped lead?] on the side of the building, and some of the hay leaves would come out of the barn, and he would eat them. Then he'd put his foot out and pound for some more to get some hay leaf. I wasn't gettin' broke into a'tall! It was just the horse, tryin' to get some hay out of the hay leaves.

No, we had one man come back that was--he come in and wanted to know if we knew who he was. And we told him, "Yeah, we know, you're Zonie, you're the one that killed the white trader across the way and went to jail and got out. But you're not botherin' us, we're not scared of you. ____________."

We really had no--the only serious things we had is some tragedies. One, they would get peyote and the liquor mixed up, somebody'd go completely nuts. But outside that, we never had any serious troubles.

I can remember one time we was on a selling trip, and we was over, went to the pueblos over there, ___ rugs looked at the pueblo. And we stopped, Johnny traded a few rugs to this pueblo store for [hay-see?] and turquoise that they drilled. And I was with Uncle Shel, and Uncle Shel says, "Well, wait a minute, I'm going to go lock the car." And this Pueblo says, "Oh, you don't have to lock it, there's no white people around here." (chuckles)

As a rule, they're just like anybody else. They're mostly all honest people, but there's bad and good in every race. 

Cole: What would you say makes a good trader? What kind of qualities? 

R. Foutz: You have to realize that you are on their land, you're on the reservation, and they are your customers. And you have to have respect for them, and you have to treat them just like you'd like to be treated. And that's what a lot of traders don't understand. 

Cole: Were there trading posts that would have poor reputations? 

R. Foutz: Yes. They would sell their pawn early, yes. They would put weights in their scales. But they had a hard time keeping ahead of these Indians, because they can put lots of weight in that wool and stuff. _______ probably balanced out pretty even, but they did have. It's in any business, you have good and bad in any of 'em, yeah.

I remember another. This Claude Powell that I've talked about several times, same one that I told you about was with Goulding. He said he got to be--he was deputy sheriff there at Bluff. And this one fellah he knew come by. He says, "Why don't you go with me and help me? We're goin' down to this squaw dance down here with this load of watermelons to sell." He says, "We're settin' there sellin' the watermelons," and Claude turned to him and says, "You say you're gonna pay me that much money. How are we gonna make any money selling these watermelons for 50¢ a piece and make anything?!" He says, "It's not the watermelons we're making the money on, it's the moonshine that's under the watermelons we're making the money on." He says, "There I was a deputy sheriff and got trapped into (laughing) into going out there to sell watermelons. And after all, he was just gonna bootleg whiskey to the squaw dance." It wasn't the watermelons they was making any money on, it was what was underneath 'em. 

Cole: Was there a lot of bootlegging that went on? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, there was a lot of bootlegging that went on. And a lot of the Indians made some of their own wines and stuff and bootlegged it too. There was a lot of home bootleggin' goin' on, on the reservation, you know. 

Cole: Could a trader have alcohol just in his residence? 

R. Foutz: You can now, but in those days you couldn't even have it in your residence, no. 

Cole: You'd mentioned peyote. Was the Native American Church fairly big? 

R. Foutz: It was big in some areas. In the <Teec Nos Pos> area where we were, it was big there. Where I got so much knowledge of it was we always had exhibits and wholesale sales at the <Gallup>--they had a big <Gallup> fiesta and the wholesale show. And the one who had the booth right next to us was Woody Grumlung [phonetic spelling] who was an artist, painter, and he was also the head honcho of the Peyote Church in <Oklahoma>. And he was telling me all about the Peyote Church. And I was always bringing either feathers or rattles or something back from them to the Indians. But it was a real problem up there around <Teec Nos Pos>-- peyote was, yeah. 

Cole: Is it still, do you think? 

R. Foutz: It's still quite peyote, yeah. 

Cole: Why is that, do you think? 

R. Foutz: I don't know. It's got to be a religious deal. They call it the first church of America. They have all these hallucinations when they're on that peyote and taking that buttons, and I guess they think these hallucinations is coming from some higher power or something. It's quite prominent. But they don't believe in alcohol. It has some good with 'em, because they know how it makes 'em crazy if they do. So it's not all bad. 

Cole: Can I ask you a couple more questions about the Traders Association? When did you actually, yourself, become a member? 

R. Foutz: I would say after the war, about probably the very late forties, early fifties. 

Cole: And was your dad a member also? 

R. Foutz: I don't think so, no. I'm not sure. If it was, it was just like Bruce Bernard said, they can go to a meeting, maybe they bought a membership. The Association had several types of memberships. They had some memberships of people like Palatin Arden [phonetic spelling], Pendelton Woolen Mills, and deals like that, that sponsored it. But as far as going to a meeting with any active part of that, no, he wasn't. 

Cole: I noticed on that one xerox you showed us from Bruce Bernard, it was for selling a rug, and it has the number 2. What does that mean? 

R. Foutz: I don't know. I was asking Ed. I was wondering if it was that he was the second one that was issued these tags and stuff to come out. About the same time that come out, the Bureau of Indian Affairs put out a tag to put on rugs with a metal deal on it, where you put this metal tag on that's saying it was genuine Navajo rugs and made by handspun wool and stuff. And you had to buy these tags from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to put on it. And those were the only rugs that were supposed to be in the national parks there for a while. Now, whether he was the second one that got one of those or what, I don't know what that number 2 meant--whether he was the first one in the Association or the second one that got these tags. 

Cole: You had mentioned stamps they were putting on the silver. Did you ever have a number like that yourself? 

R. Foutz: I never had a number like that ourselves, but I remember seein'.... No, we never had a number. 

Steiger: Speaking of the silver, it seems like--and I don't know if this is appropriate to talk about either--but we were tryin' to understand how we come to be here, how the Traders Association even had this money to give away this grant. Mrs. Kennedy said something about there had been some leftover silver and somebody made a real smart trade with that, or something. 

R. Foutz: After the war, this is no longer needed, to get this silver business, you could buy this silver anyplace, so the traders didn't need the silver business, so they sold the silver business. And for the money they got out of the silver business, they put it in [AandT] stock, and that has been ever since they sold that thing, has been that stock. And that thing has accumulated from that original amount of money up to almost $600,000. 

Steiger: So when you say "silver business," they just had a leftover inventory of silver, and they sold that? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, they sold their leftover inventory and stuff to a private company. I don't know whether it went directly to Mr. Woodward, or whether it went to some man and back to Woodward, but originally that's the same start of what Woodards have. His sons still have a silver business. 

Cole: Did you know Woodard? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh. 

Cole: What was his [first] name? 

R. Foutz: He was the secretary-treasurer of the Traders Association for years, and a very good bookkeeper, and very conscientious. He probably did as much for the Association as anybody did. I think it's Woody Woodard--I think it was Woody. 

Cole: And what did he do for a living, other than.... 

R. Foutz: He kept books for the Association, and he run the silver business when he was in the Association, and that was his business. 

Cole: So he wasn't an Indian trader himself? 

R. Foutz: No, he wasn't an Indian trader. 

Cole: Back in the forties when you became a member, did you attend the meetings on an annual basis? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh. 

Cole: Do you remember who some of the presidents or board of directors were then? 

R. Foutz: Well, in the early times before, it was some of the Wheelers, and there was one of the Lees. But the ones I got to know real well was not until Ralph Bilby was president. With Babbitt brothers, the ones before that, I knew, but not real well, until he [Bilby] got to be the president. Very sharp, very fine person, fluent speaker. 

Cole: Did he work on the reservation at all? 

R. Foutz: I don't think so, I think he just worked in the office. 

Cole: Do you remember about how many members there were back in the forties? 

R. Foutz: Enough to fill a good-sized dance hall. (laughs) I don't know. There had to be somewhere between fifty and a hundred people that would come to them. It was very educational if you wanted. 

[END SIDE 3, BEGIN SIDE 4] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're with Russell Foutz in <Scottsdale Arizona>. It's April 3,[ 1998]. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger. This is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project.

Russell, you were telling us that in the 1940s at the annual meetings of the United Traders Association you'd get enough people to fill up a dance hall. How many would that be?, and what were the annual meetings like? 

R. Foutz: The annual meetings, they had them before they had the banquet and the dance and the open bar, 'cause they figured that nobody'd be wantin' to go to a meeting after that. It was quite a social event when they all got together. 

Cole: Would it be the only time of the year that you'd see quite a lot of these people? 

R. Foutz: It'd be the only time of the year we'd see a lot of the different traders, yeah. It would make kind of a reunion of traders, yeah. 

Cole: And you were saying you remember Bilby being president of the organization. Do you know about what time period that was when he.... 

R. Foutz: No. The Association still has the records of that. He served for several terms. He probably got as much done for the Association as any president in my lifetime. 

Cole: You had mentioned earlier the sales tax issue. Were you involved at all with the Federal Trade Commission hearings when that happened? 

R. Foutz: No, that was before my time. My older brother was, and Jack Klein was--that was before [my time]. 

Cole: And that would have been when they eliminated pawn from the reservation? 

R. Foutz: Well, no, that was when they was trying to put sales tax on the Indians on the reservation, yeah. 

Cole: Okay. Do you remember the whole issue of the pawn issue, when that came about? 

R. Foutz: The pawn issue was only about ten--I don't think it was over ten years ago. They made such strict rulings on taking the pawn on the reservation that it was prohibitive for the traders to take pawn on the reservation. So most of 'em quit taking pawn. 

Cole: Do you remember--I was reading in the records that there was some kind of an issue dealing with endangered bird feathers or something like that. (

R. Foutz: Uh-huh.) Do you remember anything about that at all? 

R. Foutz: Let's see, $500 worth one time, I remember. (pause) Maybe another $500 worth again, maybe down here. That was when they was--almost all of the old headdresses, most of all the old dolls and all of that, had some kind of eagle feathers or some kind of feathers in them. I had, I think it was some feathers, a feathered fan, I think, that we had for decoration in the store. Abath [phonetic spelling], the woman that was working for me, called and said that there was a man here from <Oklahoma> or something that collected these, and would I put a price on this to sell this. I put a price on it, and I said, "They're not supposed to sell it." And she said, "Oh, he won't, he's a real nice man. He just wants it for his collection." (doorbell rings) And so she sold it to him. I got hauled into court over it. Even in court they said that, "We know Mr. Foutz was innocent about the goings on in all this transaction, but since it's been quite an expense to getting him here and all this time, we think we should fine him." The judge said, "We'd better fine him 500 bucks anyway, to help pay the expenses." So that cost me $500. 

Cole: Did the Association get involved with that at all? 

R. Foutz: No, the Association, I don't think, got involved in any of that. I think it was all just individuals, between Fish and Life and the individual traders. I don't think the Association got involved in that at all.

But there was a bounty on coyotes and stuff that we bought coyote hides. We didn't sell them for very much, but they got a bounty that was put out to the Indians for killing coyotes. 

Cole: Overall, how would you say that traders have influenced Native American art? 

R. Foutz: I think it would be just like a lot of the others. If it hadn't been for the traders, it would have been like the plains Indians--beadwork and the other work--if they hadn't taken an interest in the people and kept it going. I think it wouldn't have gone very far. I think they're the ones that marketed and made it worthwhile for the Indians to stay in it. I think that's what kept them in it. Where there wasn't a traders' group that helped market their merchandise, that is places that the Indian crafts are practically nonexisting. 

Cole: What would you say that an Anglo person should understand about Navajo culture? If you could teach 'em any one thing. 

R. Foutz: Respect for their parents, and respect for their elders. I think that's a lot they could learn from 'em, because they do have a big respect for the older generation. 

Cole: What do you feel the Navajo learn from you? 

R. Foutz: (long pause) Oh, we have helped a lot of them, in helping them with some of the designs, and what types of arts and crafts would sell. We have found a market for the things that they made. But they haven't learned as much from me as they have passed on to us, I think. We've learned from them: their history, their culture, and the things that they still respect and feel very meaningful to 'em. Their respect for their older people and their family ties. But you can learn a lot from the Indian culture. You can learn their medicine, their care of their people. It's a lot that you get from their culture--more than we have to give--they have more to give to us than we give back. 

Cole: How has their culture changed, if any, over the years you've been associated with the Navajo? 

R. Foutz: Oh, it's changed completely. Some of these families brag that they've sent practically all their families to college, that they've gone to school and to college. The only place when you was young, was maybe you had somebody working in the wool room, helping you with the wool. And now in a trading post, you couldn't run a trading post without the Navajo help: they're the cashiers, they're the bookkeepers. Every phase of it they can run now. It has completely changed. They run their own stores. 

Cole: Did that change while you were in the business? 

R. Foutz: It's changed in my lifetime, yes. It certainly has. 

Cole: You said your daughter's at <Teec Nos Pos> now? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh. 

Cole: What's trading like for her there now? What kind of store is it? 

R. Foutz: It's a different kind of a store. She had a dress shop. She still goes to <Dallas> to do the buying. It is surprising, she mingles clothes right in with her store. It's not only the Indians buy 'em, but the tourists. It's western clothes. It's a different type of store than I run. 

Cole: What is her name? 

R. Foutz: Kathy, Kathleen. 

Cole: Does she still buy and sell rugs? 

R. Foutz: She buys and sells rugs. She has a collection of <Teec Nos Pos> rugs herself. She has one rug that is probably about--I don't know, I think it's about twelve by eighteen, I think it is--probably one of the largest Teec Nos Poses ever woven. And she has the same family weaving another one in the same loom. She has her favorite weavers. She is marketing her rugs, and they are getting probably a bigger price for their rugs out there than they've ever got. She's letting the girl's family work in the curio part of it, selling the rugs. Some of 'em work on commission in there. She's doin' a real fine job out there, and yet they're continuin' the old type of it, where they're buying livestock, wool, sheep, and everything, and it's still one of the old-type reservation [trading posts], yet it's got a modern touch to it. 

Cole: Does she still do a lot of credit business too, do you know? 

R. Foutz: Not as much. They have about maybe a half a dozen livestock accounts, and a few rug accounts, and a few thirty-day accounts. There's some check accounts, but not to the extent that we did when we was out there, where everything was on account and we got paid twice a year. But they still run some credit business. 

Cole: So is she your competitor, then, or your partner? 

R. Foutz: She is my partner. I am supposed to be retired, I don't know. But she still helps us with the store in <Farmington>, too. The rugs that this one family is weaving, they're spectacular. I think that last big one, she paid, the weaver got a little better than $20,000 for weaving that. Whether she can sell it or not, I don't know, but she hasn't tried, she doesn't want to put it on the market for sale. When she gets two of 'em, she'll have to probably put one of 'em on the market. I'm very happy that she is encouraging in going on with that weaving program out there, doing a good job of it. 

Cole: Do you have other children besides Kathy? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, they're both in the same type business. The youngest one, he trains the horses here ________. One of 'em has a silver place where they sell wholesale silver and supplies--artists' supplies. And the oldest son is in about the same type of business that I was in, and he was in the old Bruce Bernard store at <Shiprock>. He has an arts and crafts store on the corner at <Teec Nos Pos>, and he's just built another one at <Kirtland>. But he ran Teec Nos Pos for a while. We tried to get him to run it, but he didn't want anything to do with the wool and the lambs for the trading post. His interest was leaning towards arts and crafts, and that's what he wanted to get into-- sand painting, arts and crafts, and rugs.

I was determined as long as I was alive that <Teec Nos Pos> was gonna be an old-time trading post that sold hay, grain, gas, and oil. (chuckles) Our daughter was the only one willing to do it, so she's the one that's out there doing it. 

Cole: Do you see a future for the traders on the reservation? 

R. Foutz: Yes. That store there, that they've got at <Teec Nos Pos>, the way they've modernized it with a little dining area, and their curio store is so nice, that the people, especially the Easterners, the foreigners, they want to go to the reservation to buy their rugs. It's gonna continue to be a very good place. You have to just change with the times. If you're willing to change with the times, yes, the future is good on the reservation. 

Cole: How would you remember your dad? What kind of a trader was he? 

R. Foutz: Dad was very quiet, a very good business person. They didn't even use typewriters there. He wrote a beautiful hand. He was very athletic. The Indians liked him, he liked the Indian people. He always used them to work around the ranch. I can remember when I was young, going to these carnivals and they had an Indian at <Shiprock>, they called him Big Jim. He would go and swing the [sledge hammer] to see how he could send it up, hit the bell. Then he'd holler at Dad, holler at him to come over here. "You try it. See if you can get it up to the bell." They'd have a contest of hitting the bell and everything. They always have been a very--he always liked them. He gave people jobs that nobody else would hire. I guess I inherited that to a point, I do the same thing. He saw the talents in these people, that "there would be a good irrigator," "there's a good farmer." They could herd sheep, they would take care of the sheep. They would do this, even though they were alcoholics and they couldn't hold a job. He overlooked those things and worked them for the good points they had. I'm the same way. The employees he had was all his life, and living there. And my feeling is that I outlived my good employees. Mine had been with me for forty years. They either died off on me, or got where they couldn't work. When they worked, they never got fired, they had to quit. He had the same feelings there. I have a hard time getting used to new help. 

Cole: If you can, maybe describe what kind of a trader was your nephew, Ed. 

R. Foutz: Ed? Ed, when he first come to work for us, Claude was with me--Claude Powell. He was a crack salesman. He was selling ladies shoes in <Provo>, and he could charm those women into anything he wanted to. He was wanting to learn faster than we wanted to teach him. So when it would get wintertime, about the middle of the winter, we'd figure out some rug trip to send him on, to get him out of the store. And he would come out all dressed up with his summer clothes. The truck would be all packed. "Ed, why do you have those clothes on?! You're not going to <Phoenix>, you're going to <Denver> and <Wyoming>." We sent him up to <Denver> and <Wyoming> where there's no business--he would sell! He would come back with money, it wouldn't make any difference where you sent him, he would sell. Very ambitious, a good business person.

After he learned the business, he did a super job of marketing the rugs. After I sold him all of it, he continued to expand the wholesale business, and he's passed it on to his son Jed, that's out there running it now. Ed did a super job. But he never was involved too much with the early trading part. He was more interested in the arts and crafts ___________ than he was the.... 

Steiger: When you say "early trading," you mean just buying sheep and like that kind of thing? 

R. Foutz: Yeah, he did that, he got somebody to do it for him, but that wasn't his--he himself wasn't that much interested in it, no. He was raised in <Provo> a lot, up there, and he was down to our place in the summertime. But he did a super job with the store. 

Cole: Did you ever work with any of the McGees?, Jewel or any of those folks? 

R. Foutz: Jewel and I graduated from high school at the same time. Jewel was at Red Rock. I don't think Dad was in partners in anything with Jewel or with Roscoe. I think some of 'em was in partnership with some of the other McGees. There were three of them. But Jewel was the one I was the closest with. We were in high school together, we graduated at the same time. 

Cole: What was he like as a trader, do you know? 

R. Foutz: He was a good trader. He was an excellent trader. He wasn't afraid of work, he was out there in the store with the sheep and everything. _________ he was an excellent trader.

Now, Roscoe was interested in trading, but his son here, isn't he on the board? Which McGee was on the board? 

Cole: Lavoy was. 

R. Foutz: Lavoy was. Lavoy never did like it. He just didn't like it. 

Cole: What about maybe the Kennedys? Did you know them fairly well at all? 

R. Foutz: Uh-huh, I knew them all. Mrs. Kennedy's husband, Troy, was one of our best friends that we went to the races with __________. 

Cole: Maybe describe him a little bit _______. 

R. Foutz: Troy was a gambler and a money-maker and a good trader. When uranium come on the reservation, he was out there with those Indians with their uranium mines. And I'm positive that's one of the things that was--his [poor] health was from being around the uranium so much. He liked good rugs. He was probably a top trader.

Walter, he didn't do a hell of a lot of good for the reservation. He was all right, but he never wanted to give anything back. He didn't spend much back on his store. He was (microphone knocked) trader all the time. Walter stayed with it for years, he was one of the young and early traders. And he was a good trader, he made a lot of money out there on the reservations. 

Cole: What post was he at? 

R. Foutz: Dinnehotso, mostly. But he worked for other traders before he got his own store. But he never changed much from the times. He had about the same Levis on.

What probably changed the fastest was Thriftway, when they started buying these stores and making them into gas stations. I think that changed the image of the reservation more than anything, faster than anything they did. But the people that changed with it, like our daughter at <Teec Nos Pos>, and some of the stores that are along the other, kept up the arts and crafts, they're still gonna be real good stores and the future is good for them. Mary, out at <Canyon de Chelly>, she's probably selling as many good rugs as anybody in the country. They come out there to buy them. 

Cole: And what's her last name? 

R. Foutz: Hell, I don't know what Mary's last name is. I just call her Mary. And speaking of Indian help, she takes her Indian girls around with [her]. They do the buying of the rugs and the wholesale buying, and she does the selling. I noticed at the last sale that she has Indian girls, she uses Indian help all the time, including doing the buying for her. Of course they have a good market there at <Canyon de Chelly>, lots of tourists. She sells expensive rugs…. 

Cole: How is it for you, getting licensing from the tribe? Did you have problems with that, or was it.... 

R. Foutz: I've never had any problems. I think the community has a lot to do with it. If the chapter wants you there, and recommends you, they're gonna see that you do get a license. Like our daughter there that wanted a twenty-five-year lease on <Teec Nos Pos> since she's taken over. The people out there can see what she's done for the store, and how she's brought such a nice shopping place to them. I mean, they did all the work about getting her lease--she didn't have to do it, the community did that, because they wanted her there. If you're gonna be a benefit for the community and they want you there, I'm sure you're not gonna have any trouble with your leases. But if you try to take out everything and not put anything back in, then you'll probably have trouble. 

Cole: What would some of your favorite memories of being a trader be? 

R. Foutz: Oh, I would say some of my favorite [memories would be] some of the Gallup Ceremonials where you took the weavings of the rugs where you had had a contest from the Indians and picked their best rugs. And if you would take 'em to the Ceremonial and got a lot of blue ribbons on their rugs, that was very satisfying.

Probably the most interesting part of it was down at the old store. It's a beautiful old place surrounded by cottonwood trees, and that's what [<Teec Nos Pos>] means. And then there's a steep hill up on top of it there. When I got married, and when I took my wife out there--hadn't been married all that long--I took her out there, and had the ten-day ceremony yé’ii bicheii there, right up on the hill, where you could hear them singing all night. That was probably interesting stuff. It would be fun to just take up there. ___________ wagons, and you just set back on the blanket and listened to 'em sing. The chantin' all night, I think that was probably as interesting as anything.

It is a satisfaction that you've seen the trading post be brought up to be successful all these years, and go through the different good times and bad times and see it's still existing. (chuckles) To see all these fancy service stations--and I think we put up a little shed like this over our gas pumps. I remember it had a painting on each side of it, and somebody was looking through one of the historical magazines, and here was a picture of <Teec Nos Pos> with these two pumps out in the middle of the desert. So everybody was makin' fun of my shed. Then I would ask 'em, "Did you ever get yours in the historical magazine?!"

And then I guess my first very pleasant deal was when one year that wool went to a dollar a pound at <Teec Nos Pos>. I sold my wool at a dollar a pound when it was up to a dollar a pound, and paid off the bank, and by spring the people that sold theirs got 25¢ for it, and that was probably my most satisfactory deal. (laughter) It went to $1.25, and nobody [sold]. They [were] waiting for it to go higher. Then it started down. I sold at a dollar, 'cause I couldn't sleep at night. I owed the bank so much money I didn't sleep good at night. I sold mine and paid the bank off. Most everybody else waited for it to go back up again, and they ended up gettin' a quarter for it. (laughter) So I think that was one. My most satisfaction was to get the bank paid off at a dollar a pound. I think that was probably what my.... 

Cole: You mentioned your wife, Helen, was from the East. Whereabouts? 

R. Foutz: She's from <Minnesota>. 

Cole: What was her reaction to living out on the reservation? 

R. Foutz: We met in <San Francisco> during the war. I told her where I was going and where it was. We got married in <San Francisco>. I said, "That's it, that's the only thing I know. If we go out there, I know we'll eat well. If we go anyplace else, we'll probably starve to death. We'd better go over there where we know what we're doing." So she has enjoyed it. She was a big help, because she took shorthand, typed, and so she.... That's why I was able to probably modernize a little bit faster than the other traders, on account of she had worked in an office. All of our kids stayed on the reservation, they stayed close. So it's really been a good family tradition for us. 

Cole: I should ask, too, do you have a nickname? 

R. Foutz: I should have told Ed what his name was. Do I have one? In my days I've had about three names. My first name was ‘Ashkii naaki yáál. Naaki yáál was "25¢ a piece." ‘Ashkii is "kid." I would go out shooting rabbits with my dad, hunting rabbits. We'd eat the cottontails--he'd take them home _______ cottontails. And these jackrabbits, I'd carry 'em around by the ears, sell 'em to the Indians. The only Indian word I could say was naaki yáál, and that's how much I wanted for a rabbit. So they named me ‘Ashkii naaki yáál.

Then when I went to <Teec Nos Pos>, I let my whiskers grow out there, 'cause I thought that was the thing to do, and then they named me "Red Whiskers," Déghaa’ »ich out there. So I had that.

But I guess my family name, if I had a family name, it'd be ‘Ashkii biwoo’ bitsilí biye’, "the son of the brother of the man with the big teeth." See, I told you that Jim Foutz was "the man who had big front teeth." He was named ‘Ashkii biwoo’. And my dad was his brother, and I am the son of ‘Ashkii biwoo’ bitsilí.

So by one of the three names, they all know me, one place on the reservation. 

Cole: How about Helen? Did she ever get a nickname? 

R. Foutz: No, that's an easy name to say. They all say, (with Navajo accent), "Hel-len, Hel-len, Hel-len." Just like Uncle Shel never got a nickname. His name was (with Navajo accent), Shel-li, Shel-li, Shel-li, so he never got one. 

Cole: If you could change anything about your life or your work, would you do that? Or what would you change? 

R. Foutz: (chuckles) I don't know! I don't think I would change hardly anything. I'm very happy with what I've done, and so I don't think I would change it. I don't know whether I'd want to go through it again or not (laughter) but I don't want to change it. No, I wouldn't.

When I went into the service--I've had a good and lucky life. When I went into the service, we was all in this boot camp, go around pickin' up cigarette butts, waiting to be shipped out and sent someplace. It was there in <San Francisco>. And this one person pickin' up cigarette butts to the side of me, he says, "I didn't join this Navy to do this! I'm gonna go see the commander and get a job! You wanna go with me?" I didn't know where he was goin', but I said, "Sure, I'll go with you." So he just went in there and (chuckles), he says.... It turns out that his folks owned a steamship company that the commanding officer, when he was drafted as a commanding officer, he walked in here and all this brass, and he just says.... (tape turned off and on) So when I was in the service there, he said he didn't join this service to pick up cigarette butts, and he was gonna go in and get a job. And I said, "Well, I'll go in with you." So he just went in there to this commander and he told him that he didn't join this service to pick up cigarette butts. If that's all they were gonna have him do, he wanted out, he wanted to go back and load ships. It seemed that this commander worked for his family in the steamship business, and this fellah I was pickin' up butts with was an experienced ship loader with steamships. And [the commander] picked up a phone [and said], "I'll send you up to the port of entry there to see the people in charge of the port of entry." And they assigned us permanent duty on the piers, loading cargo ships. I never seen the water and all the ships before, as long as I was with him. Then that type of help was so scarce, of people that knew how to load the cargo ships, and that worked on the waterfront, there was an order come through that all port director's employees were frozen for the duration of the war. And so (chuckles) poor me, I was frozen in <San Francisco> for the duration of the war. And that's where I met my wife, she was working there in <San Francisco>. But that's why I happened to be able to go to these sweatshops and the Japs and Chinamen had to make clothing and stuff, where I bought and sent home to the reservation during the war there.

So I've loaded ships, raised cattle, raised sheep, run horses, run trading posts, have a successful ranch, so I don't think I would change anything. 

Cole: Where's your ranch at right now? 

R. Foutz: In <Kirtland>. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

R. Foutz: (laughs) Yeah, I'd like to have a cure for arthritis! Do you have any cure for arthritis? After you get to be about eighty-four or something, it crops out pretty good. It's a little rough getting around in the mornings. 

Cole: Do you have a cure, Lew? 

Steiger: Ahhh, I'm not sure that I do. (laughter) My grandma used to wear a copper bracelet, but you probably heard about that. 

R. Foutz: I heard about that copper bracelet, yeah. And these Indians, they [say], "Get in that sweathouse, then jump in the cold river." That's a little bit too strenuous for me. Get in one of these sweathouses with these rocks, pour that water on 'em 'til they got soaked in sweat. That was right beside the river. Then they'd go jump in the river. 

Cole: Did you ever do that? 

R. Foutz: No, I never did. I got in the sweathouse a couple of times, but I never did go jump in the river after I got out of it. Nope, didn't do that. 

Cole: How about you, Lew, do you have a question? 

Steiger: I jotted down a couple. 

R. Foutz: I think we've.... 

Steiger: Worn you out? 

R. Foutz: (chuckles) I think we've covered about every subject. 

Steiger: What'll happen is, when we're drivin' away, we'll get in the car, and then we'll think, "Now, wait a minute, ________." 

R. Foutz: Should have been in there, yeah. But I don't know. Whatever they could [reek?] out of that to put in a book, I guess it would be.... The Association did a lot of good. It was a __________, I thought. I'm just sorry they didn't take Eddie's sister's advice and hold onto it and double the money before they spent it! (laughs) 

Cole: And I can't make a comment on that. We came out real well! 

R. Foutz: You come out real well! (laughter) Yeah, the University come out real well. 



