MR. and MRS. TERRY "TUMP" FREEMAN INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-34

[BEGIN SIDE A]

Babbitt: Well, Tump, I was interested in talking to you about the early days of <Arizona> when you first came into <Arizona>. Your official name, as I understand it, is Tump Freeman?

Tump: T-U-M-P, Tump.

Babbitt: You're one of the first people that I know of who ever came into Northern <Arizona>, isn't that right?

Tump: Yes, sir.

Babbitt: When did you come up there, Tump?

Tump: We landed in <Holbrook> along just before Christmas in '79 [1879]. Had Christmas dinner at <Holbrook> in the camp. We started with cattle from <Utah>, and landed at Johnson, I think it was. Traded them off for teams and wagons, and started with four nice heifers to kill along on the road. So we landed in <Holbrook>. We lost our heifers in a snowstorm the other side of <Lee's Ferry> on the Colorado River. So we got short of meat. When we landed at <Holbrook>, we was out of meat. Everybody was out of meat. So Father had an old needle gun that they wanted to get rid of, and they traded it to the Navajos for nine goats. So everybody had Christmas dinner, goat dinner. (laughter)

Babbitt: Needle gun? What do you mean by needle gun, Tump?

Tump: Well, it's an old-fashioned gun. You wouldn't know what it was. They have a needle to 'em, and he had a gun a little better than that, so he traded with these Navajos. It's an old-time gun, an old model.

Babbitt: Was it an old ball-and-cap?

Tump: No. We had one of those too, cap-and-ball.

Babbitt: What did it shoot?

Tump: Well, it shot a big cartridge, I don't know, about -it looked like a .50 calibre, those old-style guns. But it kicked back. It'd kick you plumb over the fence if you went to shoot it. (laughter)

Babbitt: Well, now, you came through <Lee's Ferry> and went on into <Holbrook>, is that it?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: How did you get across <Lee's Ferry>, Tump?

Tump: Ferried over. They had a ferry boat there, and we had to put our wagons on. We had about three wagons and some loose horses, and our teams. We just drove 'em on, and (unclear) the loose horses, and held 'em, and ferried across.

Babbitt: Was John D. Lee operating the ferry at that time?

Tump: No, he wasn't there, but he was connected up with it some way. They had some little town away back in the hills there somewhere. I can't remember all about it. I was only eight years old then.

Babbitt: You wouldn't remember much about it.

Tump: No.

Babbitt: But you do remember that Christmas dinner?

Tump: Yeah, I do.

Babbitt: Well, you went into <Holbrook> and had that nine head of goats that your dad traded for the needle gun. Then where did you go from there?

Tump: Well, we stayed there and Father got -they was buildin' that railroad, gonna start the railroad, the Santa Fe Railroad, from Bacon Springs. That's eighty miles in <New Mexico>, back. And we had to go back there to get provisions to go on up to <Flagstaff>. We got a contract cuttin' ties -Father did. And a lot of boys had joined him, come to <Arizona> in that early day. And they all fell in with us, about thirty men. Bob Brown and Lou Hager was two of 'em. Lou Hager was a gambler, and Bob Brown was a saloon man. So anyhow, they was in with Father's project. We cut ties that summer 'til it got cold, and then went down to <Holbrook>, thinkin' we'd have to -we were headin' for the <Gila Valley>. But we got a grazing contract seven miles west of <Flagstaff>, and finished that up the next summer. Then we come down and went down the <Gila Valley>.

Babbitt: You say "we." That was your father and some of his associates. What was your father's name, please.

Tump: [Sierra?] Freeman. Son of [Shreeve?] Freeman and Tump (unclear), Tump Freeman. So we had lots of teams and we freighted. Times was pretty hard, believe me. Lots of Indians. (unclear) And the Mexicans stole our horses and left us afoot a time or two. We finally traded some of the wagons for a farm, and then traded that out for cattle, and growed up to quite a little bunch of cattle. In '91, '2, and '3 [1891-93], the drought cleaned us out.

Babbitt: Well now when you started this tie contract, that was for the old Atlantic and Pacific Railroad Company, wasn't it?

Tump: It's the Santa Fe now.

Babbitt: That's right, it is now.

Tump: Well, you'd know the name -I wouldn't. I wouldn't remember it.

Babbitt: There was no mill at <Flagstaff> then, was there?

Tump: Oh, no! there was nothing there.

Babbitt: That was in '79?

Tump: No, that was in '80. After Christmas, just as quick as it got there -it was about a month after Christmas, probably February -we went on up to pitchin' camp and built us a little log cabin about a mile on a little prairie, right due east of the little spring at <Flagstaff>. That was our home place.

Babbitt: There was no town of <Flagstaff>?

Tump: Oh, nothing a'tall there. We built the first little log cabin there. Old John D. Lee had the tie contract, and Father subcontracted from him.

Babbitt: And you built the first log cabin in <Flagstaff>, then, but there was no town there then.

Tump: For an office for the tie camp. I helped build it, and we hewed the logs, two big logs, and put in there for the table, for the office. Father could do most anything like that.

Babbitt: Was that somewhere near what's now known as Old Town?

Tump: Well, I haven't been there since I was eight years old. The next year -well, I was about ten when we left there. And there was a big town there then. There was big [crating?] and headquarters for everything.

Babbitt: The mill had come in by that time then?

Tump: No, I don't think the mill was in there. I don't think the mill was in there then. I never heard of it.

Babbitt: This man Ayer was supposed to have come in along about that time, wasn't it?

Tump: Well, how'd it get in there? He could have it hauled in.

Babbitt: He freighted his material in. There was no town of <Flagstaff>, and it was just (unclear). You built the first cabin?

Tump: Yes, sir. And we had an awful time for water there for our stock, our teams -hauling water from these little.... We (unclear) and come to fill up the water hole so we'd have water for our stock.

Babbitt: Do you remember anything about this story about the tree from which <Flagstaff> got its name?

Tump: No, I've heard of a good many stories of that way, about it, but I don't know anything about it.

Babbitt: You were a little bit too young to remember anything about that?

Tump: (unclear)

Babbitt: Apparently then, that tree had been chopped off by some surveyors who came through for the railroad company in the early days, before you fellahs came through with your tie contract -wouldn't you say so?

Tump: Yeah, mighta been.

Babbitt: That would be my thought too. Well, did the Indians bother you around <Flagstaff> and through that area?

Tump: Oh, no. But when we got down in the <Gila Valley> country and through there, it was pretty bad.

Babbitt: Were there any animals around <Flagstaff> then, or what's now known as <Flagstaff>? Of course there was nothing there.

Tump: There wasn't any ranches there. The Mormons had a dairy at <Mormon Lake>. But the water dried up and they moved out. They used to farm that -the whole lake there was dry. [Raised potatoes there?]. We wasn't over there a'tall. That's about twenty miles, isn't it, from Flag?

Babbitt: That's right. It's a little more than that, south of <Flagstaff>.

Tump: There's another little lake there between <Flagstaff> and <Mormon Lake>. Let's see, what did they call that?

Babbitt: Lake Mary.

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Timber must have been awful thick.

Tump: Oh, it was awful thick, fine timber.

Babbitt: There must have been lots of turkey and deer.

Tump: Lot's of 'em. Didn't have any trouble keepin' meat on hand. But after we got on the railroad, well, we had men to go ahead and chop. They didn't have these bulldozers to knock the trees down and pull 'em out. The men would chop the trees down, you know, for the right-of-way, with the right-of-way measured out to us, a mile long for us. They'd chop 'em down and we had a big ol'.... We had a team of an old buckskin mule and a bay mule. My oldest brother put a rolling hitch on them logs and get 'em started, you know, and had 'em come off as they rolled down, rolled up, (unclear) rollin' on the side of the hill. Then we had a big [sill?] too, if I remember right. (clock chimes) Then we went up to these [slip scrapers?].

Babbitt: Well, when you had the tie contract, would you chop the logs up by hand into ties?

Tump: Yeah. They wasn't logs, they were just trees, made ties, you know. We'd cut the tree that we didn't have to split.

Babbitt: And then the railroad company would just use those as supports for the track, is that it?

Tump: Yeah, ties, (unclear). We'd cut 'em, I think it was seven feet. That's a tie, ain't it?

Babbitt: Yeah, that's about right.

Tump: Well, I know I peeled the ties. I was one of 'em who had to peel 'em. Father would hew 'em, and the other men would cut 'em. We had several crews that way to cut 'em. Soon got through with it. We had a team to haul 'em in, after they was piled up and received.

Babbitt: Well, they started you out early then, didn't they, if you were only eight years old?

Tump: But we enjoyed it. There was four boys of us, and three girls. Pretty happy family.

Babbitt: There were no other outfits around there? No cattle outfits or no sheep outfits?

Tump: No, sir, but I was going to tell you, we bought a beef when we got on the freighting job, from down about, oh, what's this river out here? Camp Verde. There's farms along there, and they had quite a lot of cattle, and they'd peddle this meat. They'd kill a beef and sell it. We'd buy a half a beef at a time, twice a week, from 'em, for our camp. And it was the finest and the fattest beef you ever saw. Horses got fat. We worked 'em all the time, turned 'em on the grass and then round 'em up in the morning and feed 'em a little grain.

Babbitt: Where would you get your grain?

Tump: Well, it'd come in with the railroad. They could bring it in. It was pretty high.

Babbitt: I'll bet it was. Of course when you first started, there was no railroad there.

Tump: Oh, no, they built that railroad mighty fast, right behind the grading outfit. They just laid that -took our ties and went back and brought it on.

Babbitt: And you were only eight years old at that time?

Tump: Eight years old. I done a man's job.

Babbitt: I knew they started a lot when they were young (laughs) doin' a man's work. Well, that surely is interesting. Your dad had a subcontract then from John D. Lee on the ties (unclear) is that it?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Do you remember Old John Lee?

Tump: No, I never met him. I never met him a'tall. He was a big Mormon. He was a big (unclear) in the Mormon Church. He had an office, too, there at Flag.

Babbitt: Well, you were probably the first settlers then in <Flagstaff>, you and your daddy.

Tump: I guess it was, right there, yeah.

Babbitt: Before the mill or before anybody ever started.

Tump: (unclear) told me they built the first house there. You know Dan?

Babbitt: Oh, very well.

Tump: I said, "Dan, you were just too young."

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear, far from mic)

Tump: He said he was born there.

Babbitt: Well, let's see, Tump, you're now....

Tump: Seventy-eight.

Babbitt: It had to be seventy years ago. That would be '81 or '80 that you were there.

Tump: Yeah, 1880. Well, we come in '79, just before Christmas. We had a Christmas dinner there, the goat dinner. (laughter) Glad to get it.

Babbitt: Those chiwas [phonetic] tasted pretty good? Do you remember the names of any of the old-timers that came in there?

Tump: Well, there wasn't really no old-timers there -just our men we come in contact with. Prizentine [phonetic] they were a big contractor. They joined our line, and they had a big outfit, and they had lots of big Missouri mules. We had a regular shotgun outfit, Utah horses. Oh, we had good teams too.

Babbitt: You didn't know anybody, I suppose, like the Camerons?

Tump: Oh (unclear).

Babbitt: They were a little later on, I mean. You stayed there how long in <Flagstaff>?

Tump: Well, we were there two summers -about two years.

Babbitt: And then in the wintertime you'd pull out and go down (unclear).

Tump: Yeah, down to the valley where it was warm.

Babbitt: Were there any Indians around?

Tump: No, there wasn't any Indians there -only Navajos. There was lots of Navajos, but they weren't hostile, they weren't desperados.

Babbitt: Did they work for your father?

Tump: They never worked for nobody, did they? (laughter) I never knew of an Indian.... No, sir, they never done a [tad?].

Babbitt: Well, today they get paid for it, I don't know how much (unclear).

Tump: (unclear) They were feedin' 'em when we come there, and they was feedin' 'em when we left, and I guess they're feedin' 'em yet.

Babbitt: They didn't go on the rampage or cause you any trouble?

Tump: Oh, no. The Apaches were pretty bad.

Babbitt: Well, your daddy was up in <Flagstaff> for these two years on this tie contract. You feel that you built the first log cabin. Would you have any idea where that was?

Tump: There's a little spring there. There's a little spring and we built it right above the spring. Some people said that the main town (unclear). We went to <Mormon Lake> and one of the boys got an infection in his foot and we had to take him in, and they had to bring him right in here. So I left there, we got in there about one o'clock. My wife took (unclear) then we left before daylight and come down here that day. So I never (unclear) daylight since.

Babbitt: Well, you should come back up and see it sometime.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear)

Tump: It was about '82 when we left there.

Babbitt: Well, where you built that was undoubtedly by what's called the Old Town Spring.

Tump: That's the place -they say, I don't know.

Babbitt: If you built the first cabin there, it would have been up around that water supply, certainly. Then after you were there, Ed Whipple and the Camerons and the Clarks and all those old-timers came in. But you preceded them. You didn't know Charlie Clark, who was here for a number of years, did you?

Tump: No.

Babbitt: Too bad you hadn't met him. You fellahs (unclear).

Tump: Well, (unclear) much. We had our ranches over in <Pinal County>. We raised a family here, (unclear) here much.

Babbitt: Then after you went off and left <Flagstaff>, you went on down to <Gila County>.

Tump: No, <Graham County>.

Babbitt: That's where you ran into the Indians (unclear) the Apaches?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Did you ever have any particular trouble with 'em personally?

Tump: Well, not personally. They killed people, tried to get in our corrals, steal our horses. Went out one night and we fought the dogs away. They was tryin' to get in to get our horses. We went on up, and the Wright boys, and Bill Marsh [phonetic] and Robert Walker followed 'em on, and they killed the two white boys right above <Solomonville>. My brother went up and helped haul 'em out. And Father, he went (unclear) Willcox after provisions, and had a buckboard and a team of mules. I took his track and lit out after him, and I caught him in about twenty-five miles to bring him back before they could get him. So the kid.... Oh, I don't want to repeat all that stuff. Then the kid, he stole my horse.

Babbitt: A young Apache kid?

Tump: Yeah. The last trade he made, I was workin' for Old Man Gilson [phonetic], fifty cents a day and fifty cents a night -a dollar a day.

Babbitt: No Social Security tax on it, either.

Tump: So I had four horses camped up above (unclear), holding the cattle (unclear) Indians (unclear). He come one night and stole one of my horses, and captured a squaw and killed an Indian to get the squaw. So I resigned my little job and turned it over and quit. That's the (unclear). But (unclear) she told me to get out of there, because the kid would have killed me. So I moved (unclear) and stayed all night and come back in the morning, and got my other three horses, and went into the ranch and quit.

Babbitt: Was your dad around down there too? He had a cattle outfit by that time?

Tump: Well, he was up in <Graham County>, he was. I (unclear) <Gila County>, where I worked.

Babbitt: But when you left <Gila County> and you went up to your dad's (unclear).

Tump: Oh yes, then we had cattle up there.

Babbitt: What brand did you have?

Tump: CF

Babbitt: Well, what did you do about your range?

Tump: Well, it was all open range then. And everybody, just homesteaders, you know, they'd homestead a little homestead -they had to contend with them. There was no bootleggers, because they sold whiskey then. (laughter)

Babbitt: But you didn't have any Forest Service....

Tump: No.

Babbitt: (unclear) land or federal claims either at that time.

Tump: No. But after I got married, we went into Huachuca country in <Santa Cruz County>, and they put on the first forest reserve there. If you wanted his name, the fellah that created it, in Roosevelt's administration....

Babbitt: Crenshaw?

Mrs. Freeman: Crenshaw.

Tump: Crenshaw, yeah, that's right.

Babbitt: Would it be too personal if I asked you when you got married?

Tump: Not a bit.

Mrs. Freeman: (inaudible, too far from mic)

Tump: 1900

Babbitt: You'll celebrate your golden wedding anniversary (unclear).

Tump: We celebrated it last January 3.

Babbitt: But your dad was in <Graham County>, as you say.

Tump: Uh-huh.

Babbitt: He built up this outfit, and then you continued on after that, is that it?

Tump: Yeah, well, he passed on, we sold out and finally homesteaders come in and taken lots of the land, and it wasn't [no more?] cattle country much. (unclear)

Babbitt: (unclear) farming country.

Tump: Yeah, more agriculture country.

Babbitt: Do you remember the names of some of the old-timers down there?

Tump: Oh, all of 'em, all the old-timers. [Lefty?] and Walters and Madison and (unclear) had the little store there when we landed in <Safford>. And I. E. Solomon, he was [Farmerville?].

Babbitt: He's the man who really started the Valley Bank, I understand at the beginning of the (unclear).

Tump: (unclear)

Babbitt: When was that now, Tump?

Tump: Well, that's gettin' along a little, when I was about -that was about '89, I think.

Babbitt: Gee, you were an old man then, weren't you, about seventeen years old?

Tump: Yeah. (laughter) I can't keep the dates.

Babbitt: That's right, it's awfully hard. (unclear)

Tump: I don't try to memorize 'em.

Babbitt: You really saw a lot of the early development of <Arizona> coming in, in that early stages. The Indians, of course, (unclear) a lot of people, stole a lot of cattle, too, didn't they?

Tump: Oh, yes, they did, lots of cattle.

Babbitt: And you had no roads.

Tump: No.

Babbitt: In other words, when you talk about going from <Flagstaff> to <Phoenix>, I suppose that was a four-, five-, six-day trip then, wasn't it?

Tump: Well, there wasn't much down there in <Phoenix> then, you know -very little.

Madeline Babbitt: How did you happen to come to <Arizona>?

Tump: Well, there was kind of a boom here, and the country opening up, and it was good climate, we could hear, and Father got tired of the snow in <Utah>, and we had cattle there. Every winter he'd say, "When it clears up, I'm goin' to <Arizona>." So one spring it cleared up, and he gathered what he could gather, and we come to <Arizona>. And we enjoyed it.

Babbitt: How did you come on into <Arizona>? You came on from the north, from <Utah>, through <Lee's Ferry>, on into <Flagstaff>, and then how'd you come from <Flagstaff> on south? You went down over by <Globe>, I suppose? From <Flagstaff> on south?

Tump: Well, we come back to <Snowflake>, and what I would call Fort Apache, and right beyond <Globe>, between Saint Carlos and Fort Thomas, just up the Gila River. That wasn't no road. You'd jump off a rock that high, you know, the wagons go down.

Babbitt: By "that high," you mean about two, three feet high?

Tump: About two, three (unclear).

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear)

Tump: Yeah, that's the road.

Madeline Babbitt: Where did you find Mrs. Freeman?

Tump: She come to me at <Safford>.

Babbitt: I don't think that's very nice. I'll bet he chased (unclear). I'll bet you courted her for some time, didn't you?

Tump: Well, we....

Babbitt: Well, you followed the old military road then?

Tump: Yeah, that was the only road there was, which was the military road. It was from Apache to Fort Thomas, or Saint Carlos. Then it'd go down through the Gila River, and then it'd go down to Saint Carlos. That was down the river, and Fort Thomas was above. Soldiers at Fort Thomas.

Babbitt: In the eighties, Geronimo got on the rampage about '85, didn't he?

Tump: That's the last raid he ever made, when he killed those white boys.

Babbitt: That was right near you?

Tump: Yeah, that's where we lived, right below <Solomonville>.

Babbitt: Weren't you a little fearful of the Indians and (unclear)?

Tump: Oh yes, we was. I never was an Indian fighter. I always tried to keep out of the way. I caught more horse thieves, I guess, than any man in <Arizona>. I got on the trail when they stole the horses. You know, I can travel when they were sleeping. That'll get 'em. (laughter) Won't it?

Babbitt: When you caught 'em, what would you do with 'em?

Tump: Well, some I'd bring in, and some I'd let go -just so we'd get our horses.

Babbitt: Oh, you mean they were stealing your own horses?

Tump: Yeah, they'd steal horses. That was a racket them days. They'd steal horses and take 'em down in <Mexico>, and then steal horses down there and bring 'em back, sell 'em here.

Babbitt: Weren't the old-timers pretty rough on those horse thieves?

Tump: Oh, they was kinda rough sometimes.

Babbitt: Didn't they hang a few of 'em?

Tump: Yes, they did. And they killed a few.

Babbitt: You say you used to trail them. What would you do, follow their tracks?

Tump: Follow the tracks.

Babbitt: You said you'd follow 'em when they were asleep. (unclear)

Tump: Lots of times they sleep a little late in the morning, and we'd be travelling to catch up with 'em.

Babbitt: Did you ever have any shootin' (unclear) with these horse thieves? I imagine they'd be pretty desperate men.

Tump: No, I never tried to have any. Nope.

Babbitt: Once in a while I imagine one of 'em would take a shot at you, wouldn't he?

Tump: Yeah, they would if they get a chance. Oh, I could repeat a lot of stuff like that, but I think it wouldn't be very interesting. (unclear) killin' one. The last one I got after, after we moved to <Santa Cruz County>, they come and got the Arizona Roundup, and McFadden [phonetic], he's running' Billy Yates' cattle outfit, and he said, "Where's Tump?" "Well," (unclear) said, "he just went down there to take some men to hold the cattle on a drive." He said, "I want him (unclear)." So they went out and followed this fellow, and we caught him just before he got to <Calabasas>. He went in Billy Yates' in the Empire Ranch and stole a six-shooter, a suit of clothes, and a horse and saddle, and a slicker, and come by our camp, (unclear) there, and asked (unclear). I had a little tepee tent, the three of us sleepin' in it, and it rained a little that night, and there's Mexican officers in <Tucson>. I said, "Well, the only time you see a Mexican travellin' this time of night" -it was about four o'clock, the cook was just gettin' up -"there's something wrong." "Oh," he said, "you're kidding me. You're always imagining things like that." So we got up and then started out, and we met these fellahs comin' after him. So they got me and we took after him on his track, and followed him clear to [Niles?]. And I picked up his gun. He was travellin' pretty fast, he (unclear) had it stuffed down his pants, it fell out (unclear) to this fellah. So I was ridin' a good horse, and I went on. I had a Winchester. I went right along (unclear) two of 'em. I [throwed my gun down?], he just fell over backwards (unclear) (unclear) pullin' the trigger. I'm glad I didn't. (unclear)

Madeline Babbitt: You got him?

Tump: Oh, we got him.

Madeline Babbitt: (unclear)

Tump: But I'd found his gun and knew what he was after. It fell out of his holster. (unclear)

Babbitt: Well, they dealt pretty summarily with those men, ordinarily, didn't they? -take 'em out and shoot 'em or hang 'em? They didn't monkey around with 'em much.

Tump: Oh, they done that too. But I was never much for hangin' a man 'til he's tried, unless he.... (laughs) (unclear) let him go, (unclear) Huachucas.

Madeline Babbitt: (unclear, too far from mic)

Tump: (unclear)

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear) And come along about sundown, and (unclear). Fixin' my lunch. (unclear, too far from mic) And I said, "Oh, nobody's been by but a lone Yaqui (unclear)." (unclear) "He shot a fellah down here (unclear), after him." (laughs) (unclear)

Babbitt: You were after him.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear)

Babbitt: <Santa Cruz County> somewhere.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear) I have an uncle (unclear).

Babbitt: About what time was that, Mrs. Freeman? What year was that, about when?

Mrs. Freeman: Oh, it mighta been (unclear). We went over there in about 1900, and we went over there to that (unclear).

Babbitt: That was really a lonesome country, wasn't it?

Mrs. Freeman: Yes, (unclear) trail come through the mountains, and they'd come right there back of our pasture. Just like Dad said, they'd steal horses down in <Mexico>, bring on this side (unclear). We got onto a whole bunch of 'em one day, back of our pasture (unclear).

Babbitt: Well, when did you come to <Arizona>, Mrs. Freeman?

Mrs. Freeman: Oh, my folks come about....

[END TAPE 57-34, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

Babbitt: You were really a pioneer family then, too, weren't you?

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear)

Babbitt: What was your name before you married Tump?

Mrs. Freeman: [Tyre, Tyre?]

Babbitt: And you came into the southern end of the state, is that it? I understand Tump said he met you in <Safford>, is that right?

Mrs. Freeman: Yes.

Babbitt: He said you came across him, but I think he ran after you! (laughs)

Madeline Babbitt: I don't blame him.

Babbitt: I don't either.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear) about the time the old Yaqui came by and you come home and said he'd killed another Yaqui down at Sonoita (unclear).

Tump: (unclear)

Mrs. Freeman: No, I didn't shoot him.

Tump: No, the fellah come by. See, that's what....

Mrs. Freeman: Yeah, but he (unclear). I've gotten breakfast for those fellahs that used to steal horses, come by. We had some awfully nice saddle horses, and (unclear). Dad got onto 'em one day and he said, "Well, if you fellahs ever steal one of my horses, I'll sure fire on you." Mexican had one ear off, didn't he?

Tump: Yeah, and a little finger.

Mrs. Freeman: Little finger off. (unclear) (laughter)

Babbitt: No, Tump had 'em buffaloed a little bit.

Tump: Yeah. But I cooked 'em breakfast, and I'd be there alone, lots of times. They'd come and water their horses, but I didn't want them stealin' our stuff. And Harry Saxson [phonetic] was the sheriff. He was sheriff eight years, wasn't he, Dad?

Tump: Yeah.

Mrs. Freeman: And he asked if we ever saw those fellahs. We couldn't (unclear) kill me.

Babbitt: What county was that?

Mrs. Freeman: <Santa Cruz>.

Tump: (unclear)

Babbitt: I thought Harry was sheriff over in <Cochise County>.

Tump: No, he lives over there now.

Babbitt: Oh, I see.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear) that's when he was married, years ago.

Babbitt: Well, Tump, you were talking about coming to <Phoenix>, and there wasn't much of a town. When was that? It must have been the early eighties, wasn't it?

Tump: And nineties. There wasn't much here in the nineties. I don't believe I was here in the eighties. I had to get out and work here and there after the cattle all died. Whatever I could get to do, working the mines, and a dollar a day lots of times. As I said, fifty cents a day, fifty cents a night. Didn't have any pastures, didn't have any corrals, and we had to stand guard, you know.

Babbitt: Well, <Phoenix> couldn't have been probably (unclear) people then.

Tump: Oh, no, wasn't that many. I remember, oh gee, lots of times when they had that old streetcar, the old mule streetcar, pull the streetcar down [Parson?] Street. That was along in the nineties, wasn't it?

Babbitt: It must have been. Quite early, I know, in those times. What would they do around <Phoenix>? I suppose they had a few saloons and a little gambling?

Tump: A lot of gambling, yes.

Babbitt: And there wasn't too much irrigation around the town?

Tump: No, it was nothing like it is now.

Babbitt: They got the water out of the <Salt River>?

Tump: Yeah, I suppose.

Babbitt: They had dams?

Tump: Yeah, and it was pretty high -floods come and wash 'em out. There wasn't much to it, workin' the water nearly all the time.

Babbitt: Well, I've been told there was good range land around Mesa and on up toward Apache Junction. They said there were little streams running in the early days. Is that right?

Tump: Well, I don't think they run. They didn't run steady -only in rainy season.

Babbitt: But the pasturage was a lot better than it is now, range conditions?

Tump: Oh, yes.

Babbitt: In other words, they overgrazed the whole country.

Tump: Well, I don't know as that. I'll differ with you there. I think we just had the rainfall (unclear). Now, you can take out, when it rains over in our country, there used to be a lot of grass, and the grass (unclear). And there's different variety of feeds. There's filaree [phonetic] and Indian wheat that we didn't have in the early days. That come here, it come from someplace.

Babbitt: You didn't have filaree in the early days?

Tump: No, not in this higher country.

Babbitt: I thought filaree was indigenous.

Tump: That's [kalafiafeed?]. They brought sheep in. They claim that that's the way they got the seed in. You don't have it up there, do you, <Flagstaff>?

Babbitt: No.

Tump: Too high.

Babbitt: That's right.

Tump: Now, we were in the Huachucas for -nine years, was it Ma?

Mrs. Freeman: Yeah, nine (unclear).

Tump: I packed it up there on horseback and planted it out in a nice little, where it rained a lot, and it won't grow. (unclear) high country, won't grow.

Babbitt: Well, you know, you talked about <Phoenix> and you mentioned <Calabasas>. I have a book on that town. That must have been quite a place in the early days, although it was quite small.

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: When you were down there, it was just a little community, wasn't it?

Tump: Oh, no, there was quite a little.... What year was we down there? We was there nine years in <Santa Cruz>. Well, anyhow, there's (unclear), there's <Nogales>. Oh, <Nogales> wasn't a very big town on this side of the line. It was bigger on the other side than it was on this side. Then there's <Calabasas>. That was a big ranch, a big adobe building. Joe Wise [phonetic] owned it when I was there.

Babbitt: As I understand, someone from <Boulder> came out in the early days and had pictures of steamboats comin' up the <Santa Cruz> River, and Negroes picking cotton, and that sort of thing. Did you ever hear of that?

Tump: Oh, no.

Babbitt: That was a high-powered real estate development there.

Tump: Yeah.

Mrs. Freeman: That must have been the Colorado River, wasn't it?

Babbitt: No, supposed to have been steamboats comin' up the Santa Cruz River. You never heard of that, did you?

Tump: No.

Babbitt: Well, that's the reason they were selling lots in <Calabasas> at a premium price. It was supposed to have been a metropolis, out of all this farming activity around. I don't believe that ranch (unclear) <Calabasas> (unclear). It was just a high-powered real estate development.

Tump: That's what it was. It's just a little store there for ranchers, you know.

Babbitt: Well, Tump, you got in the cattle business and operated for a long time. I was wondering, Tump, the names of some of your old amigos. Are they still living and operating?

Tump: Yeah. What do you mean?

Babbitt: Rancher friends.

Tump: Men that worked for me and all?

Babbitt: Well, men who had cattle outfits around the state.

Tump: Oh, yes, there's a lot of 'em dead, too. More of 'em dead that there is livin'. Johnny Selaberger? He's livin', you know him.

Babbitt: Johnny Selaberger?

Tump: Zelweiger. [phonetic]

Babbitt: No, I don't know him.

Tump: He's a Florence man. Then the Clemens brothers. They're up there, and they're later on. They come later on. They come from <Idaho>, I think, didn't they, Mama?

Babbitt: (unclear) Clemens?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Yeah, I know [them].

Tump: And Bill Knight and Jack Frazier. And Old Joe Skinner, Phil Nicholas. All those fellahs. I bought Phil Nicholas out, all his cattle.

Babbitt: Do you remember any of the old brands?

Tump: Oh, yes, I know lots of 'em. Did you want to know some of 'em?

Babbitt: I surely would.

Tump: JC.

Babbitt: Who was that outfit?

Tump: That's my boy's. There's Circle "S."

Babbitt: Whose outfit was the Circle "S"?

Tump: That was Shepards. And JZ, Johnny Zelweiger. JP. Oh....

Babbitt: It's hard to remember (unclear) all these different brands.

Tump: (unclear)

Mrs. Freeman: You had the Box "O."

Tump: I had the Box "O." That was a big outfit -not really.

Mrs. Freeman: Ninety-six.

Tump: Ninety-six, that's right. I sold the 96 to Torrey and Schaeffer [both phonetic spellings].

Babbitt: What would you get for a steer in those times?

Tump: Well, I don't exactly -we got about twenty-odd dollars.

Babbitt: Twenty dollars for a steer. That was a pretty hefty steer?

Tump: (unclear) twenty dollars. But I sold lots of steers at six dollars a head -yearling steers. When we was in <Santa Cruz County>, we had quite a lot of cattle. (unclear) eight miles. Eight miles [the lion?]. I drove cattle [for South Cattle?]. My best [three a-lane?] steers (unclear) for eighteen dollars a head. Drove 'em there, a hundred miles.

Babbitt: Oh, my, that's incredible, isn't it? And they were in pretty good shape, too. (unclear)

Tump: They were fat cattle. They weren't corn-fed, but the best meat in the world.

Babbitt: What were they, white-faced?

Tump: Oh, yes, I had white-faced cattle. Never owned a Mexican or a Brahma in the lot. Wouldn't have 'em on the range.

Babbitt: I wonder about these Mexican Brahmas, but the boys seem to think they're all right. (unclear)

Tump: (unclear) But when they're a scarcity, they have a hard time. If you have lots of 'em, you have a hard time fillin' 'em.

Babbitt: Tump, what would you get for your range rights?

Tump: We never had any range rights. The forest reserve is on there. If you have a little patented land.... I'll tell you one trade I made when I left that [Comanche?] country, <Santa Cruz County>. I sold to Verlon Gates and Ashburn, the Clickett Land Cattle Company [all phonetic spellings], $10,000 and they got 1,800 head of cattle and the ranch, horses and everything, went. Ten thousand dollars.

Babbitt: In other words your 1,800 head of cattle, your ranch and all your rights. (whistles "whew!")

Tump: And we was on the forest reserve. They put the forest reserve on us, created that, while we was there.

Babbitt: In other words, there's no such thing as a permit or a [value?]?

Tump: No.

Babbitt: My gosh, now they want fifty dollars a head for 'em, somethin' like that, for the permit rights only. It doesn't make sense, does it, Tump?

Tump: No, it don't.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear)

Babbitt: Well, you came back later on and settled here in <Phoenix> and started enjoyin' life, is that right?

Tump: Well, we had the ranch out there, and the boys helped us make it. We got a nice range. And I give it to the boys -just rode off and left it, right after the war. I said, "Boys, I can sell this ranch. I ain't able to run it." I began to slip then. (aside about refreshments) They said, "Well, we'd like to have it." I said, "Do you think you can handle it?" They said, "Yes." And I just turned it right over. Got two horses left. Had lots of horses and lots of cattle.

Babbitt: Where is that ranch now?

Tump: Thirty miles out of <Florence>, between <Florence> and <Tucson>.

Babbitt: Oh! that's a beautiful country down there.

Tump: That's the Coyote ranch, a big (unclear) on it.

Babbitt: Oh, that's a beautiful country.

Tump: A hundred sections in there. Seven thousand acres cattle land. (unclear)

Babbitt: What do you think about things now, compared to they used to be? New <Arizona> isn't quite like the old one, is it?

Tump: Well, a little thing come up to me the other day. Mrs. Keith come in here and wanted to try to get a little sideline. She said, "Well, if you was facin' the future, what would you do, face the future or go back? If you had your life to go over." I said, "That's easy for me to answer. I'd rather go back over the past." (chuckles)

Babbitt: A full life. Well, what would you do for entertainment?

Tump: Well, I don't know, we just passed the time. Entertainment was different from what it is now. Didn't have shows or anything like that. Wasn't much enjoyment to go out anywhere. There wasn't any shows or anything like that.

Babbitt: Did you have square dances?

Tump: Oh, yes, we had dances, parties, and meetings, and barbecues and such like.

Babbitt: What did you do, have schoolteachers that danced with you?

Tump: Oh, no, never thought about schoolteachers them days.

Babbitt: You didn't?

Tump: No, there's lots of country-fed girls then.

Babbitt: Oh, out on these ranches, huh?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: I see. Your principal enjoyment was just gettin' together and visiting?

Tump: Yes.

Babbitt: Square dancing and that sort of thing?

Tump: Having big dinners, families, different ones.

Babbitt: There was a lot different feeling about money and mortgages and notes and that sort of thing then too.

Tump: There wasn't much of that done -notes and such like.

Babbitt: What if you bought an outfit and didn't pay for all of it, how would you work it out?

Tump: Well, I don't know. Any outfit I bought, lots of outfits, and sold 'em again, but I never had any trouble. I generally paid for 'em and just went along and never went into details like that. Never borrowed much money. If I had, I'd have got rich. My idea is all right, but I didn't ever care to get in debt.

Babbitt: I know what you mean. I rather feel that way nowadays. Hardly don't know which way to jump.

Tump: No, sir, you don't.

Babbitt: You always think that you've hit the top, and my goodness, it doesn't look like <Arizona>'s even started yet, does it, Tump?

Tump: That's right. Look at this town. This town's just a-growin' like wildfire.

Babbitt: There wasn't 10,000 people when you came in here.

Tump: No.

Babbitt: I suppose you could have bought an acre of this agricultural land right near town, probably where you are now, for just a few dollars an acre.

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Do you have any recollection of what acreage sold for (unclear)?

Tump: No, but I had some land.... Well, $25, $50 and $60. Pretty fancy price.

Babbitt: Fifty dollars was. That was probably the best acreage in existence. Well, Tump, I don't want to take any more of your time today. I want to come back and see you again when we have a little more chance (unclear).

Tump: (unclear) my family there in a minute, when we get through.

Babbitt: All right. I'd like to have the names of your boys who are now taking over the Coyote Ranch, you referred to.

Tump: Jack Freeman and Henry Freeman.

Babbitt: And that's down below <Florence>, between <Florence> and <Tucson> there?

Tump: Thirty miles out of <Florence> on the Tucson Road. (unclear)

Babbitt: I want to thank you for your time and kindness, Tump.

Tump: My daughter is in that picture.

Babbitt: Oh, yes.

Tump: There she is.

Babbitt: Oh, yeah, I see. You had the two sons and a daughter?

Tump: Uh-huh.

Babbitt: You were all dressed up there. What was that, your golden wedding anniversary?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Golden wedding. That was last year, wasn't it?

Tump: Yeah.

Babbitt: Oh, my. Where did you celebrate, here?

Tump: What's the name of that place where we celebrated?

Mrs. Freeman: Green Gables.

Babbitt: Well, you were sure dolled-up there, Tump.

Tump: Yes.

Mrs. Freeman: (unclear)

Babbitt: I surely want to thank you, Tump, and Mrs. Freeman, for your kindness and your time. I don't know of any old-timers [who have] seen more about the development of the overall picture of the state than you have. We want to get together later with you and have another (unclear). I wish you'd come up to <Flagstaff> and talk to some of the old-timers, like Ol' C. J. Babbitt, my uncle; old Les Hart, who talks about you very frequently, and several old-timers.

Tump: Is he up there?

Babbitt: They'd love to see you.

Tump: Is he up there now?

Babbitt: No, he's here. We do want to thank you, and we'll say goodbye for today, and we'll get together with you later.

Tump: I'm glad (unclear).

Babbitt: We'll see you later then, Tump. Adios.



