Vaughn Short 

September 9, 2008

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, <Tucson Arizona>



Steiger:  This is Lew Steiger, and this is the River Runners Oral History Project and I’m in <Tucson>, at the home of Vaughn Short.  It’s September 9, 2008, and this is going to be an interview that we’re going to do for the River Runners Oral History Project.  I forgot, I’m going to have to send you a release form, and get you to sign it, giving us permission to reproduce any of this stuff.  And I’m supposed to bring those things with me, but I’m always forgetting them.

Short:  Well, there’s no problem.

Steiger:  Now, the way this goes--and I’m just putting this so I’ve got a recording of it--what we’re gonna do is, this is for the River Runners Oral History Project, and we’ll make this recording, and....  (equipment check)  Okay, we make this recording, and I’ll make a copy of it and send it to [our transcriptionist] and she’ll transcribe it and get it typed up, and then I’ll review the transcript, and send that to you and let you look it over, and you make sure that its okay, and you get to make any corrections you want.

Short:  Oh, it’s gonna be okay.

Steiger:  Well, you get a chance to do that, and then when you say its okay, we make it public, and it’s archived at Cline Library at NAU, and it’s there for anybody to see.  Lately, they’ve been wantin’ to put these things up on the web, on the Internet, so this might show up on the Internet too, and all that.  So just so you know what you’re gettin’ into, if all that’s okay.  And typically, when we do these interviews, I’ll sit and talk to somebody as long as they want to talk to me.  I usually pile up a lot more than what shows up in the Boatman’s Quarterly.  Typically on these things, that’s just the tip of the iceberg.  But anyway, so that’s the preamble, just so you know what you’re gettin’ into here.

Short:  Okay.  Well, ordinarily, I’m pretty windy, so we shouldn’t have any problem there.  I had a rough night, but we’ll work around that.

Steiger:  Well, I want to work with you.  If you’re not feelin’ good, or if I got here too early....

Short:  No, you didn’t get here too early.

Steiger:  Well, anytime you want to stop, anytime you need to, let me know.

Short:  We’re fine.  So eighty-five years ago this spring, way down in the Southeast corner of <Arizona>, a little boy was born.  That boy was me.  As it turned out, it was a wet, muddy spring, and the old Fords and whatnot that they drove in those days weren’t all that dependable.  And the roads had never been put through, really, and they were muddy, and so the doctor was unable to come.  He couldn’t make it down the roads.  So, a lady in the neighborhood, they called her Aunt Dinah, and she was an elderly lady, she rode over the hill and she officiated at my birth.  So that same wet, cold spring, way up in the northern tip of <Utah>, up at <Vernal>, another little boy was born.  And his name was Shorty Burton.  What would the odds be, that down <Marble Canyon>, halfway between the two points, that those two little boys, their names would show up on the same bronze plaque?  I don’t know what kind of coincidence that is, or whatnot, but that’s the way it happened.  So Shorty Burton and myself are practically the same age.  I got him by three or four weeks, or if he was still alive, I would have him [by] three or four weeks.  

The first river that I ever ran was the Rio Mindanao in the <Philippines>.  We were at war with the Japanese, and we were going up the river to engage ’em up there.  I think there was maybe 120 of us in my group, and we were on boats, probably about 20 to the boat.  They were flat-bottomed boats, and they had gasoline engines, and they were up above the deck.  The fellah that ran the boat sat up there.  So we chugged up the river very slow, because we were going upstream and it was very slow going, and the river was in flood, and periodically there would be a dead man floating down, because there was fighting going on up above.  And that was my first river trip.  We were--I can’t remember whether it was three days or four days or something, going up that river, because we were barely chugging.  But that was my first river trip.

As we went up the river, every so often, there would be a little village, maybe just two or three huts on the very banks of the river, and the people would come out of their little grass huts to see us go by.  Some of them--because on the back of every boat, we had a little American flag, I think that was the only American flags I ever saw overseas was on that trip--but these Philipino people would come out, and the men would all snap to attention and salute the flag.  Some of the soldiers with us on the trip thought they were saluting them, and they would come to attention and return the salute.  (chuckles)  At nighttime, we would put into the bank, and camp on the bank, and one night, this old sultan came down because we were in Muslim country.  He came down and he had a whole herd of little boys with him.  There was one little boy that he seemed to be very fond of, and he was hugging him and petting him and so forth, and there wasn’t any of the kids had any clothes on.  But this little boy had been castrated.  He was going to be a eunuch, and this old sultan was really loving him up and making a big deal over him.  The little kid was hugging him back and so forth, but his scrotum was just a scab.  That’s the way it is in other parts of the world.

But anyway, we went up the river for four days, I believe it was, and we came to where the main highway on the island had crossed it, and there had been a bridge there.  The Americans had blown it up, and so there was no longer any highway across there.  We were bringing these drums of fuel, that’s what we were actually doing.  We thought we were going up there to fight a war or something, but we were actually ferrying gasoline up the river.  When we got there, we found out that we were going to get to roll all those drums of gasoline across this yard there and down onto another boat, and they’d haul them across the river.  But that’s neither here nor there.  But that was my first river trip.  And it was very similar to a river trip that you’d take now.  Very similar.

Steiger:  How so?

Short:  Well, you camped on the bank at night, and you had a little food, next day you got up, got on the boat and took off again.  Very similar trip.  But that was my first river trip.

Steiger:  Did you think they might be shooting at you at any old time, were you guys kinda on edge that way?

Short:  No, not really.  There was a lot of cattle, water buffalo, and pigs, different things that were dead and bloated, floating in the river.  Because American soldiers shoot at everything.  They shoot everything, and there were a lot of dead animals in the river, and occasionally dead Japanese.  We stayed there for, oh, maybe ten days or so, and all that time we were rolling barrels. They’d come in overland to where the bridge had been, and then we’d roll them out onto a barge.  Actually, there was a quartermaster company that was stationed there, and they were supposed to be rolling them over, but our good lieutenant decided it was a good way to keep us out of mischief.  So we rolled barrels for about ten days.

Steiger:  He signed you up for it.  (Short chuckles)  Now, I did an Internet search on you, which is how I found the Two Horses book too. And in the course of that, there came up a story by a Mr. Vaughn Short about being a medic.  You were a medic, is that right?  Is that you?

Short:  That’s me.

Steiger:  You talked about this wounded Japanese that came into camp?

Short:  Right.  I was a medic.  I mean, I had a battlefield promotion.

Steiger:  You weren’t trained that way; they just made you one, huh?

Short:  They made me one, yeah.  So, one minute I was an infantry soldier, and the next minute I was a medic.  And that’s the way it went.  Because the colonel, or maybe he was a lieutenant colonel, who was the head medic in our battalion, didn’t much believe in these guys they sent in as replacements.  He liked to pick somebody out of the company and make ’em a medic.

Steiger:  So would he just sit down and line you out as to what to do and all that?  I mean, it seems like that’d be ... I guess you’d have to know a lot, how to stop the bleedin’, get the morphine on board.  Is that right?

Short:  Well, we became medics, there was about ten of us, because the medics had been almost wiped out in our battalion.

Steiger:  So they’d try to get ’em.

Short:  Yeah, and then the medic has to get up and go, they’re not hiding.  If you’re just an infantry man, well you can just crawl in the ditch and lay there.  But a medic, he has to go when they call for him.  But I became a medic because our battalion, especially C Company, had just been almost obliterated.  They were replacing people, and they called us in, and we went into this tent.  The battalion surgeon came out and talked to us very briefly and told us what we had to do.  It’s all pretty simple, I mean we weren’t transplanting organs or anything like that, it’s all pretty simple.

	So we were selected on IQ.  I happened to tag along with that bunch.  But as it turned out, I was the best medic of the whole bunch that they rounded up.  Not to be braggin’, but I was.  And consequently, I had to work a lot harder than the rest of ’em because when they needed a medic, they always sent me.  Maybe I’m exaggerating here, I don’t know.  But anyway, I went through the war as a medic.

At the end of the war, and it did end, I returned to <Bisbee>.  I was working in the mines, and they put a curfew on miners, they weren’t draft-eligible at that time.  So I was just a kid, and we used to go down to the draft board and volunteer and all of that stuff, just showin’ off, because they wouldn’t even look at us.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  They wouldn’t take you.  Because they needed what you were mining.

Short:  Yes, they needed the copper.  We weren’t draftable at that stage of the war.

Steiger:  Did you want to go?

Short:  I don’t know.  Probably not.  I kind of enjoyed being a miner because I was a good one.  Not many things I’ve been good at in this life, but I was a good miner.  So, at that time in <Bisbee>, they were sinking the Campbell Shaft, and everybody down there wanted to be a shaft miner because they paid more.  I never did volunteer, but the day came when they took me anyway.  So, I worked down there sinking that Campbell Shaft, and it was going down right astraddle of a watercourse.  The water was coming up, and all the time I was down there, I never did see the bottom.  All you could see was water coming up.  When you would drill a hole for the powder, then you’d put a piece of two-inch pipe on the end of your drill and sink it a ways and there’d be threads, and you’d thread it.  So finally, when you had enough holes, then you would unthread ’em and cram the powder down it and blast.  All the time I worked down there in the shaft, I never saw the bottom.  And whenever you’d go to muck, to clean it out, we’d blast and then we’d go in there to clean it out.  Your head went underwater every shovelful you took.

Steiger:  You were standing that deep in the water?

Short:  Yes.  I mean, the water was coming up with such a velocity that they couldn’t--they had big pumps there, but they couldn’t stay ahead of it.

Steiger:  And so they just made you guys get in there and dig anyway.

Short:  Yeah.  We drilled it out, blasted, and then we’d go in there to muck and every shovelful, your head went underwater.  You’d have a shovel, just like a garden spade, only the handle had been cut off, and you only had about a six- or eight-inch handle, or however long you preferred it.  Maybe a foot.  But you would stick this shovel on top of your foot and then you would work it until you got a load of rock in it, and then you’d raise it up and throw it in the car that was waiting there.  But you never saw the bottom.  After every shovelful, you went all the way underwater.  That was something.

Steiger:  Yeah, I hope they did pay you.  You know usually when I do these things, I ask if you could give me a thumbnail picture of--and I know a little bit more of your circumstances before you ever got into river running--just how many brothers and sisters you had, what your parents were doing when you were born, and just kind of what your growing up was like.  Just to really put your river experience in perspective.

Short:  Well, my parents were homesteaders.  My ancestors were pioneering people.  They came all the way across the continent.  Pioneering is what they did.  So finally they ended up in old dry, dusty <Arizona>, because that was the end of the road.  (chuckles)  But my dad, his mother died when he was just a little kid, five or six, and they were living in <Texas> then.  So his mother died.  My granddad, who was kind of a strange fellah in a lot of ways, they had land there that would later on become very valuable.  It was down around <San Antonio>.  My granddad traded very valuable land there in <Texas> for two hunting dogs.

Steiger:  Those must have been good dogs!  (laughs)

Short:  He loaded the family on a wagon, and he set out for <New Mexico>.  The very first time he took those dogs hunting there in <New Mexico>, one of them was killed.

Steiger:  Was the dog killed by whatever it was they were huntin’?

Short:  Yes.

Steiger:  Would that be a bear or something like that?

Short:  I think it was probably a mountain lion, but I’m not sure on that.  But then my granddad, he was a meat hunter for the railroad there in <New Mexico>.  [Cloud crawl?]  He was a meat hunter there for the railroad.  He remarried a girl, who was about sixteen or so, and she turned out to be meaner than heck, I guess, because she literally ran my dad and his brother who was older than him--and some younger kids, but she didn’t treat them bad--but my dad and his other brother, she literally ran them off.

	My granddad was the kind of a guy who’d put up with anything, I guess, I don’t know.  But he let her run them off, and he purchased a herd of goats.  He took them up on the mountains there in <New Mexico>.  He put these two little boys to herding them, and they were about, oh, eight and nine, probably.  And every two weeks, he’d bring them groceries.  Other than that, they herded goats.

Steiger:  That was your dad and his brother.

Short:  My dad and his brother.  They herded goats.

Steiger:  Never mind going to school or any of that.

Short:  Oh no.  But my dad went to school there in <New Mexico> for a couple of years before he got ran off, and he told some pretty wild tales about going to school there.  One of the boys that he went to school with was Sidney Malden [phonetic].  Bill Malden, that was his dad.

Steiger:  Bill Malden was the guy who was a cartoonist?

Short:  Yes, he was a cartoonist.  My dad knew him when they were little kids.  Anyway, my dad, after he got some older, he went off down to <Galveston Texas>, and he got employment there in, well, I guess they called them insane asylums then, or something or other.  But anyway, he got employment there as a nurse.  He was not too much beyond being a kid.  He was living there in <Galveston>, and he bought him a set of law books, and he was studying law.  Then, my granddad had some kind of a crisis there in <New Mexico>, and so my dad was to go, I believe is was, to SMU that fall.  He had his money all saved up and was all ready to go.  And my granddad had some kind of a crisis with his second family.  Some of the kids needed an operation, or tonsillitis, or I don’t know.  But they needed something, and so he had to give them his money that he had saved up to go to school on.

	When I was a kid, he still had his law books.  They were in our front room there on his shelf.  He used to take them down and read them and whatnot, but he never went back to school or anything.  He homesteaded there in the Chiricahuas and then he went into World War I.  When he came out of World War I, he went back to his homestead and finished homesteading, and he married my mother.  And they had the homestead there in the Chiricahuas.  My dad was a smart man.  He never had any education or anything, but he was a smart man.

Steiger:  When he was homesteading, was he raising cattle, or crops, how did that work?  Did you just raise what you needed to live on?

Short:  Well, he had a half-section of land, but it was grassland and it was good land.  He had some cattle, but what he really got into was chickens.  He had pedigreed chickens, and he sold eggs at a premium.  He managed to do quite well at that time and under the circumstances.  One thing that really rankled with him all his life and that really hurt him, because when he came back from World War I, he had to go to Tombstone and swear that he wasn’t ashamed to wear the uniform before they’d okay his homestead.

Steiger:  I don’t even understand why they’d even--that doesn’t make any sense at all.  If he was ashamed to wear the uniform, why would he have even gone?  I don’t get it.

Short:  Well, you were drafted, you know.

Steiger:  Yeah, so he didn’t have a choice.

Short:  No, that was something that among the big ranchers there, they were trying to scare the homesteaders off.

Steiger:  So they just made him do that just to slow down the....  So you grew up on that place?

Short:  Yes, I lived there until I was twelve years old.  I had my brother, one notch above me, and then I had a sister who was about six or seven years younger.  There was no place to send us kids to school.  That is, they had a grade school there at <Rucker Canyon>, but there was no place to send us beyond that, and my dad and mother were dead set on us kids getting a college education.  So they sold the homestead and moved to <Tucson>.  And at that time we had a fine flock of chickens.  I don’t know how many hundreds we had, but that was our main income was our chickens, because they trap nested and every egg was marked.  They were pedigreed chickens.  And that’s how they were making their living.  Then they moved to <Tucson>, and thought that they were going to go on with the chickens.  They bought this chicken farm, it had all the houses on it and all this, that, and the other and then they got to <Tucson> and they found out that it was too hot for chickens.

Steiger:  They just didn’t do well down there?

Short:  They just didn’t do well.  We made that move when I was twelve.  It broke my heart.  I didn’t want to leave the farm.  I had a horse and I rode that horse up and down those hills, and across this, that, and the other.  It broke my heart when we moved to <Tucson>.  I never was happy there.  So we went to school in <Tucson>.  I was way ahead of my grade that I should have been when we moved to <Tucson>.  I started high school--when I should have been about sixteen--I was thirteen.  And, it was a big mistake, because I never was happy in school there.  My brother, he was older.  The whole thing of it was that we was going through with one set of books.  So, whatever he took I had to take.  My parents messed up big with me.  But, maybe I was a mess anyway, I don’t know. 

Steiger:  Was that on account of you not wanting to study what your brother studied?

Short:  No, I was a very obedient child.  Whatever they wanted, I wanted, but I wasn’t happy.  And my brother, he went through college, got his degree in mining engineer[ing].  He traveled the world; I think he worked in fourteen different countries.  He was one of the first ones into <China> when they opened <China> up.  He had dinner with the premiere or whatever they called him, the head guy.

Steiger:  Was that that guy Mao [Tse-tung]? 

Short:  Probably, I don’t know.  But anyway, my brother was a huge success as a mining engineer.  I think he worked in fourteen different countries--some of them numerous times.  And me, when I got out of the army, I went back to <Bisbee>.  Went back to work in the mine.

Steiger:  Now you said that when you were working in the mine, they couldn’t draft you, you were off limits.

Short:  Yeah.  But there toward the end of the war we suddenly became draftable.  

Steiger:  They changed their minds.  They needed men.

Short:  Well, yeah.  So I was drafted ... (equipment check)  Anyway, I worked as a miner there for a few years.  Then I bought a place on Ruthrauff Road there in Tucson Farm.   And it was all in mesquite.  So I grubbed it all by hand.  I grubbed it and had me a farm and I had cattle.  My dad came down and helped me and toward the end, we were selling tamale corn.  That was our cash crop.

	Then I went to work out at Arizona Portland Cement.  And I think I was out there for thirty-one years.  During that time I did a lot of running around up on the river and here and there and everywhere.

Steiger:  Do you remember the first time you ever saw the <Grand Canyon>?

Short:  The first time I ever saw the <Grand Canyon>?  Yeah.  It would be kind of hard to put a year to it, but the first time I ever saw <Grand Canyon>, why, it was a family trip.  Then I became a member of the Southern Arizona Hiking Club and we used to hike across that sucker.

Steiger:  Rim to rim, kind of deal?

Short:  Yeah, rim to rim.  I don’t know when the first boat trip I took [was].  I would have been on <Glen Canyon> before I was ever on <Grand Canyon>.

Steiger:  When you saw the <Grand Canyon>, do you remember what your first impression of it was?  Did it strike you--sounds like if you grew up on a ranch and were in a hiking club and all that--sounds like you spent a lot of time trying to get away from town anyway.

Short:  Oh yeah, I never was around town much.  We used to hike across <Grand Canyon>--it was a yearly thing--we hiked across it in one day. 

Steiger:  Rim to rim in one day?

Short:  One rim to the other rim, yeah.

Steiger:  That’s pretty good.  What trails would you [use]?  Just the Kaibab all the way?

Short:  Uh, no.  Now darned if I remember, but I know I crossed the Kaibab all the way, and then I crossed at Bright Angel.  So I don’t know.  But I always went from south to north.

Steiger:  And then would you come back the next day, or would somebody come get you on the other side?

Short:  Well my wife would drive around and pick me up.

Steiger:  Yeah, I’d say one time across there would be enough for me I know.  I have friends that used to go rim to rim and then back without stopping.

Short:  I did too but....

Steiger:  Man, that’s a long way

Short:  Yeah that’s a lot of hiking.  So ... how did I get started again with Ken Sleight?  My wife saw and ad in Desert magazine.  He was having a trip, hiking up to Escalante.  And my wife saw his ad in the paper and she thought it might be something I’d like to do, and she called my attention to it.  And so decided if I was going to go up there and hike, that I might as well do <Glen Canyon> while I was there.  So I actually signed up for two trips.  

	We went to the town of Escalante.  And no Ken anywhere, nobody there had ever heard of him--or at least they wouldn’t admit it.  (chuckles)  So I went to the motel there and inquired around and they said, "Well,"--this was to be a pack horse trip--and they said, "Well, if he was going to go on a horse trip, he’d have to rent horses"--from somebody there.   So the fellah there at the motel went with me to where they had horses, and sure enough that’s where Ken was getting his horses, but they hadn’t seen a sign of him or heard anything from him.  ’Course later on I wouldn’t have thought anything of that.  So I got connected with Ken there after dark that night.  He’d driven in from <Salt Lake>.  So Ken and I went into a motel.  He put these people up in motels.  

The next morning we found the horses--mules it was--we found the mules and we got them packed up.  He was all alone, he had no help, and if I hadn’t have been on that trip, it would never have gone--never would have gone.  I helped him get the mules all packed and everything all set up.  And we took off up the <Escalante River>, and I guess that turned out to be the most exciting trip I was ever on.  It was a booger.  We had mules down   to where only their ears were sticking out.  But we kept dragging ’em out.  So at the end of that trip, he told me, "From now on, you can go on any of my trips, no charge.  From now on, whereever I go, you can go."  So that’s the way we hit it off.

We made the trip up the Escalante and it was an adventure all the way.  It had been raining, the creek was flooding, and it was an adventure which I thoroughly enjoyed.  And then at the end of it, we went over and put on to do the....

Steiger:  <Glen Canyon>?

Short:  No, not <Grand Canyon>, <Glen Canyon>.

Steiger:  Yeah, <Glen Canyon>, yeah.

Short:  I have these lapses.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  That’s all right, I understand.  I do.

Short:  Yeah, so then we put on with boats and we did <Glen Canyon>.  And that was in ’61.

Steiger:  Do you remember what he charged you for the Escalante trip?

Short:  Ninety dollars, I believe.

Steiger:  Lot of money then too.  A lot more than it is now.

Short:  Yeah, (chuckles) a lot more than it is now.  But it was a several-day trip, it wasn’t....  So after that, bang, bang, bang, I ran trips with Ken, and we explored all over that Escalante country, leading a mule, and....

Steiger:  When you said the mules were up to their ears, was that in water or mud?

Short:  Yeah....

Steiger:  Well, if it was mud, you wouldn’t have gotten them out, would ya’, if it was that deep.

Short:  Well, slime, let’s put it that way.  Oh yeah, we had mules go under.  So that started my adventures with Ken Sleight.  I suspect that I made over fifty trips, probably, with Ken.  I made a lot of trips with him.  We went all over that Escalante country, that back country that nobody went into.  We also went over....  [unclear] and went down....  Oh boy....  Well anyway, we made a lot of trips together.

Steiger:  Did he know where he was going?  Like on that first trip, had he been there before?

Short:  No. 

Steiger:  So he set himself up to be the guide when it was a first for everybody.

Short:  Yeah, most all his trips were exploratory trips.  He was supposed to have had help on that trip and they chickened out on him at the last minute.  That’s why he showed up there all alone.

Steiger:  That’s how you got your big break 

Short:  Well, I don’t know (laughs) I guess so.  Ken, he’s a great guy.  He has a lot of faults, but he’s a great guy.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Yeah, I never have done a trip with him, but I sure remember seeing him there.  And I’ve seen him at a couple of these deals.  I went up there to Pack [phonetic] Creek.   We had one our little meetings there.  You might have even been there, that was one of those where....

Short:  No.  I’ve never been up there.

Steiger:  Up there, yeah.

Short:  I was at <Pack Creek> once but....

Steiger:  We had a river guide convention up there--you know, one of our sessions.  Boy, that was quite a good time.  It was good that we weren’t in a public place.  (laughs)

Short:  Yeah.  Well Ken and I, we just sort of drifted apart, and it was mostly, I think, that Udall woman that drifted us apart--Morris’s wife--after they parted ways.

Steiger:  I didn’t know much about that.  She was married to Mo Udall and then got with Ken Sleight?

Short:  Yeah, after they got divorced, why, she took up with Ken Sleight.

Steiger:  There’s a pretty big change, right there.

Short:  Yeah, probably was, I don’t know.  But old Ken--she used to fly an airplane, she was a pilot--and ol’ Ken he’d hide out and she’d try to find him.  He’d park under big trees and in garages and everywhere, and she’d fly all over the country tryin’ to find him.  But she didn’t like me at all.  She was very possessive of Ken.  He finally....  Then Ken kind of went to the bad, turned into a drunk.  It’s sad.

Steiger:  Well, that’s easy to do too.

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  I guess we’re all different, but if you’ve got it in ya’....  I know I’ve sure seen that too.

Short:  Now, where are we?

Steiger:  Well, what do you remember about that first [river trip]?  You went down <Glen Canyon> and shortly thereafter went down the <Grand Canyon> with him, as far as river runnin’?

Short:  As far as river running....

Steiger:  I’d be interested to know how that first trip went:   Just what you guys had for boats and what you recall of your earliest days river runnin’.  How’d it feel to you, kind of what was the routine?

Short:  Well, he ran a triple-rig always.  

Steiger:  I remember that boat where you had a little motor on the back, but you could also row it.  Was he usually motoring it, or did he row it as well?

Short:  He probably had more motor trips than he did rowing trips, but he did have some rowing trips.  We went down the canyon there when the low water or no water or whatever it was that year.  We had a trip, and I think that’s in the book there.

Steiger:  Yeah, that’s the one where you wrote that verse.   And you guys hiked out, right?

Short:  Yeah, Ken and I did.

Steiger:  Yeah, I heard about that from Brad Dimock and Stu Reeder [phonetic]--different angles of it.  Sounded like quite a trip.

Short:  Yeah, it was quite a trip.  The reason that I hiked out is because I had a job.  When we got so many days late, I had to bail out.

Steiger:  Sounded pretty wild.

Short:  Yeah, that was quite a trip.  Back in those days, Ken never did do too good on the <Grand Canyon>.  <Crystal> was his bugaboo.  That was his bugaboo.  

Steiger:  You said you had started with him in ’61.

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Did you go down the <Grand Canyon> before <Crystal>?  Before it became--you know, my understanding is that it got bad in ’66.

Short:  Yeah, I suspect I did.  I ran pretty heavy with him through the sixties.  And maybe even up to ’75 or so, but then after that....

Steiger:  Well, it seems like that’s about the time that he gave it up anyway.

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  My understanding was that when they said you couldn’t have camp fires it pissed him off, and so he decided he was gettin’ out.  I don’t know how true that is either.

Short:  Well, that’s probably true.  Yeah, he was havin’ problems.  He was havin’ problems.  He was startin’ to drink heavier and all of that.  

Steiger:  When he ran that triple rig, did you guys have tables?  These days, there’s all these fancy kitchens and good tents and good gear that we give to everybody.  I imagine when you guys started out; it wasn’t like that at all.

Short:  No, and he was always a couple of years behind anyway.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  What did you like about going with him?  What were your favorite times with him?

Short:  Oh, I just loved being out in the outdoors, and old Ken was a heck of a swell fellow too.  He’s a heck of a good guy.

Steiger:  I know he liked to sit around the fire and tell stories. 

Short:  Oh yeah.  Yeah, he used to like to sit around and talk and dump everything off on me.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Did he say it was all your fault or make you recite poetry and stuff?

Short:  No, I mean as far as getting the meal together and feeding people.  He’d be talkin’ to some girl, you know, and time would....

Steiger:  ... slip away, and you’d end up cookin’ dinner.

Short:  Yeah, well....  Oh yeah, I mean, he leaned pretty heavy on me.

Steiger:  Being as how you were comin’ along for free and everything.  (Short chuckles)  Did he finally start paying ya’? 

Short:  No.  He never had any money.  No, he wasn’t payin’ me, he was borrowing from me!  (laughter)

Steiger:  ’Cause you had a job.  (laughs)

Short:  Yeah, I had a job.  

Steiger:  Then you did a bunch of Moki trips too, huh?

Short:  Well, yeah.  I ran with Walt Gregg [phonetic] for a while there.  And Walt, he bounced around from outfitter to outfitter, but he always took me along with him.  So I don’t know how many trips I ran with Walt Gregg, but he was one heck of a nice guy too.  Then I ran a trip or two with Mark Sleight, and I ran a trip or two with Cross.  Oh gee, I don’t know, I’ve been with quite a few different people.  Then I found a home with Moki.

Steiger:  When’s the last one you did?  Are you still going?

Short:  Me?

Steiger:  Yeah.

Short:  Oh, I’m not able to go.  I barely get out of bed of a morning, you know.  I’m eighty-five years old, and I’ve led a pretty rough life and....  No.  They’re good people, those Moki people.

Steiger:  I’ve been wanting to talk to Clare forever and he won’t talk to me.

Short:  He won’t, huh?

Steiger:  Well, I’ve gotta....  I’ve asked him two or three times, you know, and if I could record an interview for this deal....

Short:  No, he wouldn’t. 

Steiger:  He said no, he didn’t want to.  I’ve talked to Bob; I just need to pin him down.  He’s a little more talkative.

Short:  Yeah, well he’s a different person.  Yeah, old Clare and Richard, they came down this spring and they got the coolers goin’ on my house here, and did a lot of work around.  They do that for me.  Old Clare, he’s a heck of a good guy.  That Jeep that’s sittin’ off there in the brush, it belonged to my step-son--he’s incapacitated, he can’t do anything anymore--and he parked the Jeep there.  It’s been there for about a year or so.  This spring he decided to give it to Clare.  So Clare’s gonna come down and pick it up when the river season is over.  Tow it up to Marble.  He said they’d run around over rocks in it.

Steiger:  Oh yeah, take it out to Badger Point.  (both chuckle)

Short:  Yeah, I made an awful lot of trips with Moki, and they’re good people.

Steiger:  How does it strike you, what do you think of the direction the business has gone in?  Did you ever think we’d get....  I mean, that’s a long time from....  Do you remember when the last trip you did was?

Short:  The last trip I did was probably ten years ago.  I mean, my wife had cancer surgery, and that’s when I quit going.  And since then, she’s had....  Well, at first she had breast cancer.  Then she fell and broke her hip.  Then she had hip replacement.  Then she had knee replacement.  Then she had a lung removed.  This last 10 years, I’ve just practically been a nurse maid.  I don’t know how much longer I would have been able to....  Here you two dogs are under my feet.  But they’re pretty good dogs.

Steiger:  When you did that last trip, did you think that was going to be your last one?

Short:  Probably not.

Steiger:  Yeah, I think that’s something that we all go through.  Or we all dread the idea that we won’t get to go there again.

Short:  Yeah.  So I suspect--and I mean this is just a very rough estimate, rough guess, but I’ve probably made about a hundred river trips.  No, I take that back, I mean about half of them are overland trips.  Mule pack trips.

Steiger:  And those were with Ken?

Short:  Yeah, those were all with Ken.  Because I used to be his right-hand man.  Bailed him out financially.  Bailed him out on the river.  Bailed him out, bailed him out, bailed him out.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Can I ask, when did you start writing poetry?  How did that come about?

Short:  When I was a little kid, we took the Kansas City Star.  Way out there in the country, and we were the only people, I’m sure, in that end of <Cochise County> that took a newspaper.  But we took the Kansas City Star, and in it they had the "Katzenjammer Kids."  My brother and I--we were just learning to read then--but, we practically worshipped the Katzenjammer kids.  And they all talked with "these" and "them’s" and "those," and we started talking like that, and my mother, she blew up.  Any more of that kind of talk, and there’d be no more newspaper.  So, then they came out with "Alley Oop."  In "Alley Oop," there was this Foozey [phonetic] he was the grand wizard.  He had a little skinny guy who was always there with the king and old Foozey talked in rhyme.  He always, everything he said was rhyme.   And so, I don’t know, I was probably four, maybe five.  I started reading at a very early age.  I started talkin’ like Foozey.  I rhymed everything I said.  I guess that was better than the "these" and "those" the Katzenjammer kids used.  I got by with that one.  So, once I started to school, I wrote a lot of poetry--very heroic stuff about George Washington and all of those type of people.  I was writing all of this poetry--school boy poetry.  And the kids there at <Rucker Canyon>, what their dream was--all of them, I think, without an exception--was to be a trapper in the White Mountains.  Back in those days, you know, to be a trapper in the White Mountains.  And so I kind of caught the trapper fever, I guess.  And I decided that writing poetry was kind of sissy stuff.  I was going to be a trapper in the White Mountains.  So I took all my poetry, and I rolled it all up--and I had a lot of it--and I put it into old baking powder cans--KC Baking Powder cans, they were metal cans--and I put it in them.  I took it out in the pasture and buried it.  No more poetry.  So, in school, on different assignments and whatnot, why, sometimes I’d write a poem.  I’d write ’em for me and I’d write them for my brother who didn’t no more know how to write a poem than anything.  He’s strictly an engineer.  But anyway, I buried all those poems and they stayed buried.

But when I was overseas--and maybe it’s in one of those books or something or other; or it’s in something I did.  Anyway, I wrote a poem about this Japanese fellah that staggered into camp and died.  Did you read anything about that?                                         Steiger:  I didn’t read the poem--I didn’t run into the poem--but, I did a search for ya’ on the Internet on my computer.  And, there was a link to a Vaughn Short and it was some kind of public radio story.  And I read that story that you told about him, but I don’t remember if they....

Short:  Yeah, well....

Steiger:  Is the poem in this book?

Short:  No.  Well that story....

Steiger:  If I could get you to tell it here, that’d be good to have it on this recording.

Short:  Okay, if I could....  This fellah that did that piece that had the poem on it, why, he wasn’t entirely honest, because the fellah came into camp and he died.  And so the sergeant said, "You killed him"--because I had been doctoring him while he died.  And he said, "You killed him, you gotta bury him."  And I said, "Oh no, I didn’t kill him."  I said, "It was that damn food from the kitchen that killed him."  And so anyway, he delegated these fellahs to take him out and bury him.  And so I wrote this little poem, and let’s see if I can come up with it.

Unknown, unwanted and unwept,

Far from Nippon’s cherry skies,

In a grave shallow and unkempt,

My worthless carcass lies,

May the demon imps of hell,

As they shovel the burning coal,

Know that I served them well,

And have mercy on my soul.

And so we put that on the wooden box--knocked one end out of the wooden box--and wrote that on the wooden box, and put it for a headstone there where we buried him.  And so when I told that to this fellah that came around, why, he changed the story.  He didn’t change the poem any, but he changed the story.  And he had me all broken up over the fact that this guy died, which I wasn’t, because our feelings weren’t all that sympathetic with the Japanese, you know.  Of course, with the fellah dying there, we treated him good.  But, the poem was kind of nasty, I guess.

Steiger:  I did read that, it was in there, now that you mention it, now that you say the poem; it was in this thing that I read.

Short:  Yeah, but I was kind of ticked off at the guy that changed it around.

Steiger:  ’Cause you didn’t feel a bit bad about it.  Just for this document--and if I can find that again when we get this transcript--I’ll paste in what I found.  There was a Japanese soldier?

Short:  Yes.

Steiger:  And he came staggerin’ into camp, near half dead, and you tried to nurse him, and....

Short:  Yes

Steiger:  What was it?  You had fed him a little and then he....

Short:  Yeah, I laid him down there and I had his head in my lap and I gave him some nourishment.  Probably gave him some pills--we had aspirin and a thing or two.  We didn’t have a lot in our packs.  But anyway, I did the best I could by the guy, but he died.  But, I mean, I wasn’t all broken up about it like the guy....

Steiger:  Yeah.

Short:  I mean, I might feel a little different about it now than I did then too, because we’d been fighting those devils.

Steiger:  Well, and that was one they started too, I guess.  I mean, the whole war, they attacked us; it wasn’t like we attacked them.  Although I don’t know the particulars there.

You said you were a good medic.

Short:  Yes.

Steiger:  What made you a good medic?

Short:  Because I think I am conscientious.  If somebody’s ailin’, I did my best by him.

Steiger:  Did you have to go out there when you were getting shot at, a lot? 

Short:  Well, some, but I think that, looking back on it, I probably got looked after better than most of the medics, because, well, I was better than they were.  And the doctor there, he wanted me there instead of some of those other guys.  And well, maybe that’s self-serving or bragging a little.  But, I was a better medic that those other guys were.  All my working life, whatever I’ve done, I’ve always tried hard to be good at it. I’ve always tried hard to be good at it.  And that’s....  Well, the big end of it is just being....  All my working life, whatever I’ve done, I’ve always tried hard to be good at it.

Steiger:  Well, you sure have done a good job with your poetry.  That’s all that I know about.  I sure have enjoyed it.  I really have.

Short:  Yeah, well let me....  Let’s see, you have this book, I’m sure.

Steiger:  I do.  I have it, but I was trying to find it.  I’m not sure where the heck it is.  I wanted to find it and read it before I came down here.  I definitely have it, but I couldn’t find my copy of it.  I did a search to see if you’d written anything else, and I found that Two Horses book there in <Prescott>.  This guy, Dan Cassidy, had a copy that I got from him.  And I just read that.  

Short:  Yeah, well this picture here and I’m sure there’ll be one come through, that is going to school there on Rucker, and I’m five years old.  We had a two-and-a-half-mile ride.  People see that picture and they have a fit.  "How come your stirrups are let down so low?"  Well, it’s let down so low ’cause that’s the way we climbed on the horse.  We had to jump up and grab the stirrup and then climb up on the horse.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  And it had to be let down that low so you could get a hold of it, ’cause you couldn’t reach any higher.

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Oh, that’s a great picture.  That one we’d definitely want to put in there too.

Short:  Yeah.  I like to say....

Steiger:  And both of you guys are sittin’ in that saddle.

Short:  Yeah, we’re both in the saddle.  Well, we’re just little guys.  I like to say that I turned my cap around backwards--and that was eighty years ago--I turned my cap around backwards and they’re wearing them that way to this day.

Steiger:  Yup.  I guess you kind of had to so that you wouldn’t be running into your brother there.

Short:  I don’t know.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Yeah.

Short:  Yeah, but I’m the one that had to shinny down and open the wire gates and climb back up again, and he’s the pilot.

Steiger:  He had the good job, yeah.

Short:  He’s got the good job.

Steiger:  Was there a lot of gates that you had to open?

Short:  Two.

Steiger:  Yeah.

Short:  Two barbed wire gates.

Steiger:  Well, back to the river.  Of all those trips that you did, was there an adventure or a story that sticks out most in your mind?  If somebody said, "Tell me what was your most memorable time down there?,"  is there one that leaps out at ya’?  Or a favorite time?

Short:  I think, of all the trips I took, I think the very first one where we went up the Escalante, because that was one adventure from the word "go."  

Steiger:  Do you remember who the other customers were?

Short:  Well let’s see....

Steiger:  Or how many of them there were?

Short:  There was a girl named--girl?! (chuckles)--there was a lady named Eunice.  She was a librarian.  Let’s see, was Edna Fridley [phonetic] on that trip or not?  She was on an awful lot of them.  And there was a group of four:  two men and two boys.  One of them was fairly young, like ten years old or something.  Gee, I don’t know.  I might have their names somewhere.  But I think that was my most memorable trip.  And that was on the Escalante.

Steiger:  And that was ’cause it was, just was it tough goin’?  I’ve never been on the Escalante so as far as all that goes....

Short:  It was a son of a gun, because it had been storming!

Steiger:  So it was muddy and everything was runnin’?

Short:  Everything was running, right.  And we came up near the end and we had to climb the mules way up and around and over and down.  If it had been six foot more, we’d have never got around there. (chuckles)  It was just that close.  Let me look here for a minute.  I need to stretch these old knees anyway.  Oh, my.  Look out little dogs.

Steiger:  Let me know if I can help you.

Short:  No, I’m fine.  I’m fine.  (very long pause)  (Min. 98:53)  Here.  I’m going to give you this book.

Steiger:  Oh my!  Oh yeah.  (looks at book, laughs)  Oh yeah.  Oh, I didn’t see this!  Oh yeah.

Short:  Now that book was a disaster, and I wrote it for a reunion.  And I fooled around and instead of sending it to where I usually have my books printed; I sent it over town here.  And it was all set to go.  And what did they do?  The darn outfit, they printed it so darned fine.

Steiger:  Yeah, it’s tough to read isn’t it?

Short:  Yeah, it’s tough to read.  They printed it so darned fine, and they mixed chapters up, and they left chapters out.

Steiger:  Oh no!

Short:  Yeah.  It’s still a pretty good book, but it’s all messed up.  And there’s quite a little picture section.

Steiger:  Yeah.  (looking at pictures, laughs softly)

Short:  And there’s the old Escalante, crossing it.

Steiger:  Oh yeah, and there you went.  That one, oh yeah.  I didn’t even realize it was that wide of a river.  So you were constantly having to go across it?

Short:  Yeah, it probably says in there that we crossed it, something like seventy-some times, eighty-some times.

Steiger:  Yup, I see.  (looking at pictures)

Short:  I’m probably three years old, maybe, in that picture, I don’t know.  But that was strictly a family book.  It never was put out on the market.

Steiger:  Well, now when you say "give it to me," you don’t mean to keep, do ya’?  Or do ya’?

Short:  Yes.

Steiger:  Do ya have other copies of it?

Short:  Yes.

Steiger: Well thank-you very much!  I appreciate it.  I look forward to reading this.  I really do.  That’s a nice picture there too.

Short:  That’s on the Hole-in-the-Rock Road.

Steiger:  Was this one of those trips?  This is one of your Ken Sleight....  Boy you guys got a pretty good load on those animals.  

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Yeah, they were earnin’ their keep there, weren’t they?

Short:  Yep.

Steiger:  So everything would go on the livestock, and the customers didn’t have to carry but just a little tiny bit, huh?  That must have been the deal.

Short:  Yeah, that’s their personal....

Steiger:  You just led them by hand, you were afoot yourselves?

Short:  Yes, we were afoot.

Steiger:  That’s an interesting....  (looking at picture)

Short:  There’s not a whole lot of difference between a boat trip and a mule pack trip.

Steiger:  Except you don’t get to sit very much do ya’?  (chuckles)

Short:  Well, I don’t know.  They’re very, very similar trips.  You stop and unload, and cook supper, and you know....

Steiger:  Yeah.

Short:  And then load up again and....

Steiger:  That almost looks like a--that must have been a Cross boat.  Or was it?

Short:  No.

Steiger:  It looks like those tubes are up.

Short:  Oh?

Steiger:  Well, I’m just lookin’ at that side tube there.  Maybe you guys were....

Short:  No.

Steiger:  I’m thinking....  I see you’ve got a Moki Mac tee shirt on.

Short:  Yeah, that’s a Moki boat because if I remember right, Matt Herman took us up there.  We got on there; he just wanted to take the little girl for a ride.  We went upstream a ways and turned around and came back.   

Steiger:  (looking at book, laughs)  Well, thank-you very much.  Now you said--you know when you were talking about you and Shorty Burton--did they put one of your verses on that little plaque that’s down there?

Short:  Yes. That’s why my name’s on there.

Steiger:  Yeah, but did you know him?  You were there in time to meet him?

Short:  Uh, ya’ know, I didn’t know him, but I believe I met him one time.  And I think we--Ken and I--went into the café there and Ted Hatch--and I can’t remember whether he was going on the river or coming off of the river with his crew--but he came down to pick him up.  Or brought him down, one of the two.  They were in there eating and we came in and they all stood up and we shook hands all around.  And I believe Shorty Burton was in that group, but I can’t swear to it.  And it may have been the trip that he drownded on.  I don’t know.  The year is right, but I don’t know whether....

Steiger:  Yeah, was that ’67?

Short:  ’67, yeah.

Steiger:  I think Carol Burke was with him, was on that trip, I’m pretty sure.

Short:  Yeah, but anyway, we shook hands all around, and I’m just assuming that he was on that, but I didn’t know him.

Steiger:  Well, when it comes to river runnin’, do you even think of it now that you’re not there?

Short:  Oh, all the time.

Steiger:  What do you think of when you think of it?  What do you remember about it?  What were the best parts of it for you?

Short:  Oh, all of it’s good.  All of it’s good.  Yeah, I mean, I probably had another....  Well, I must have been sevnety-somethin’ when I quit, but I think I would have gone another three or four years before I would have been unable to hold my end of it up.

Steiger:  When you were goin’, would you go several times a year, or was it just like a trip a year kind of a deal?  You know, it would have had to be several times a year if you do the math on that.

Short:  One year, toward the end, I did every motor trip Moki had.  I went on all of 'em.  The next year, I went on every other one.  But....

Steiger:  Was Clare on all of them?

Short:  Oh, no no.  But, Clare was on some of them.  Yeah, I liked to run with Clare.  But, I remember one trip with Bob Quist and Ronnie, the Walapai.

Steiger:  Ronnie Beecher [phonetic], yeah, he was on my first trip.

Short:  Oh?  Yeah, mostly I ran with a lot of different boatmen.  I went down there when Michael died.  I was on that trip.

Steiger:  I remember that.  I remember seeing you guys just after that.  I was down there and you passed us.  We were somewhere a little ways below, and we crossed our paths.  I think I was--I don’t remember who I was working for, maybe Arizona River Runners or maybe the Dories.  I can’t remember--but I remember when that happened.  That was a tragedy.  I feel so bad for Clare and everybody at Moki.  Just the luck of the draw losing Michael that way.  Then I know they had a--there was a young boy who fell up North Canyon, same kind of deal--one of their customers.  I don’t know how you avoid that.

Short:  Well, it was real sad about Michael because it....  That trip we had doctors.  And a couple of them was just absolutely pricks.  That’s what they were.  And they wouldn’t follow orders.  They didn’t....  And Michael was the trip leader.  Clare was on the trip.  Clare and Pam were on the trip.  But Michael was the trip leader, and they weren’t doing what Michael would tell ’em or....  He was upset.  Michael was really upset.  The night before, he was off climbing alone.  And then the night that he fell, he was off climbing all alone up there.  But, he would tell them, you know, they would want to take off, and he would say, "Well, stop at certain such a place, because we’ve got to get together, you know, for night," and this, that and the other.  And they’d no more pay attention to him than nothin’.

Steiger:  So he was probably going off himself just to blow off steam a little bit.

Short:  Yeah, that’s what he was doing.  He was very upset.  Yeah.

Steiger:  They just had somebody fall there at <Stone Creek> last week, a customer who didn’t make it.  I don’t know how that transpired either, but all it takes is one loose rock.  

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Well, I’m at a loss for an intelligent question to ask ya’.  I feel like I’m not doing a very good job of being an interviewer here.  

Short:  Well, I can’t help you out too much, I’m telling you.

Steiger:  I know what’s going to happen is I’ll pack this stuff up and I’ll head down the road and then I’ll think of what it was I should have asked.

Short:  Well, you can always phone me back.

Steiger:  With your poems, do you have a favorite one of those that pertains to the river?  If you were pressed on to pick, could ya’?

Short:  Oh, I don’t know.  Maybe that one "When Maggie Smiled at Me."  That might be ... that’s one of ’em.

Steiger:  And what is it about that one?

Short:  I don’t know.  I don’t know, it’s just a good poem.  Most of ’em aren’t.  Ouch!

Steiger:  Oh, I wouldn’t say that.

Short:  Cramp there in that leg.  And I think that "Elves’ Chasm" is a pretty nice one:

Seldom Seen and his macho crew,

They say the river can’t be run,

The water’s down, it can’t be done.

But if anyone can shoot it through,

It’s old Seldom Seen and his macho crew.

So load on the Coors, lash it down,

Might as well be happy if we’re going to drown.

Roll up the bow line, push out the boat,

With all this beer, it may not float.

But the boats stay up; we’re on our way,

Will we see House Rock by the end of day?

At <Badger Rapids> the boatmen curse,

The rocks stick up and it couldn’t be worse.

So they walk the banks and they fret, they rant and swear,

They shake their heads and they tear their hair.

Then they jump in their boats and bounce on through,

But one hangs up, now what’ll we do?

We push and shove and heave on rope,

The water pours in, there’s not much hope.

We pull and tug ’til the boat’s unstuck,

With a little work and a lot of luck.

Next we come to old <Salt Creek>,

The boats, they bounce, and the oar locks squeak.

The boys row hard and make their run,

But the sun hangs low and the day a’ most done.

There were Kim and Mark, the Crumbo two,

A couple of Bobs and a guy called Stu,

Making up that macho crew.

And a kid named Coke was swampin’.

On we pushed to old House Rock,

Every one climbs out and it’s quite a shock.

The boatmen say "We need time to think,"

Let’s stop here for a night to drink.

Early in the morning, to the boatmen’s despair,

The water’s still low, and the rapid’s still there.

So they ponder and study and fret and stew,

Then climb in their boats and row right through.

The days, they pass and the going slow,

The wind is up and the water’s low.

We stop at the Little Colorado to take a swim,

Our time’s half gone and it’s looking grim.

At <Carbon Creek> we feed the pet raven Sam,

While we curse the bureau and we curse the dam.

Swamper throws a mud ball at that old black crow,

Stewart says, "Now we’re jinxed for down below.

Shove off next morning with mileage to make,

But the bureau is stingy, won’t give us a break.

We’re way behind schedule, but little is said,

Until someone yells, "There’s a rapid ahead!"

Mark goes first, rowing right on track,

Then he turns around and he shouts back,

"To the right of the standing wave, then take it straight,"

But the skipper goes aground and the problem’s great.

There were Kim and Mark, the Crumbo two,

A couple of Bobs and a guy called Stu,

Making up that macho crew.

And a kid named Coke was swamping.

The boatmen row back and the going’s tough,

The rocks are big and the water is rough.

They all pitch in and they tie on rope,

The boat swings free, once more there’s hope.

Six days gone, we’re still at Hance,

The people swear there’s not a chance.

But the boatmen do it, possible or not,

Shoot their eight-foot boats through a six-foot slot.

Eight days gone and the girls get prettier,

The beer tastes better and the men are wittier.

But time is running out and the food is low,

I’m beginning to think it’s time to go.

Old Seldom climbs out and so do I,

Left before sunup before sayin’ good-bye.

Climb the walls of that canyon Grand,

Left the people sleeping there on the sand.

What happened to the people down below?

I can’t say and I may never know.

They might have pushed right on through,

In the able hands of that macho crew.

It might be they stranded way up high,

Top of a rock where the water rushed by.

And sitting there, I greatly fear,

They slowly perish for want of beer.

There were Kim and Mark, the Crumbo two,

A couple of Bobs and a guy named Stu,

Making up that macho team,

That rowed the boats for Seldom Seen.

That’s where I first met Brad Dimock.

Steiger:  Yep.  That was quite a year.

Short:  Yeah, it was.

Steiger:  That was a rocky son of a gun.  I don’t remember....  We had a couple of years there where we were doing science and it got back down there low again.

I’m at a loss.  I don’t usually like to have a big list of questions because it diverts me from what somebody might really have on their minds that’s important to tell me.  Like I say, I don’t know what to ask.

Short:  Well, I’m not being much help.

Steiger:  There’s so much history that you’ve seen there.  How about Glen Canyon, did you miss that?  If you ran that in ’61 you were privy to all that when they dammed it up and all that.  I guess when you first did it; you knew it was gonna go under.

Short:  Oh yeah, they were buildin’ the dam down there, it was goin’ up.  They hadn’t closed the gates yet.

Steiger:  I wonder if there’s anything that we ought to say about that.  If there was anything....  What was it about those first trips that you did on the river that made you want to come back?

Short:  It was just the adventure of the whole thing.  I mean, that was what I liked to do and so I did it.

Steiger:  So through the sixties and seventies, I get the sense that you were still workin’, and that would be your vacation and you’d come when you could get a little time off to go do it.

Short:  Yeah, well I had a kind of a job where I could get time off.  I mean, when we would go from day shift, I guess it was, to midnights, we had quite a bit of time off in there.  By taking two days off, I could get seven days.

Steiger:  Uh-huh, by the way your shifts went.

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Let me ask you this, when you sit and think about it now, what comes to mind when you think about river running?  You said you think about it all the time.  I mean, do you have a mental picture?  What part of the canyon do you see?  What aspect of it do you think of?  What holds over for ya’?

Short:  Well, I don’t know, I think a lot about the old Escalante.  Because that’s where I first went on the river and there wasn’t anybody else runnin’ it really.

Steiger:  You ran that, just runnin’ the river too.  Did you do more than just pack alongside of it?

Short:  We packed up the middle of it.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Just right, uh-huh, right up the middle of it.

Short:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Pretty country.

Short:  Yeah.  This Raging River, Lonely Trail starts off with something about <Alaska>, because that’s where old Ken, he read the book, and he agreed to it, he liked it.  Everything was going fine.  Then he took up with that Udall woman and she pretty well had him by the nose, I guess.  I don’t know.  But, she said that I couldn’t use him in the book.  The first one on there was the "Ballad of the Canyon [unclear]" and so she just pulled the rug right out from under me.  It was already printed; it wasn’t bound yet. 

Steiger:  So you had to shuffle that back?

Short:  So that’s why that <Alaska> poem is in the front of it there.  But, she didn’t like me.  She didn’t like me from the first day we ever met.  She was very jealous.

Steiger:  I don’t understand that.  I truly don’t.  Maybe I better get you to....  "The Little Things."  Would you mind just reading that for me?  It’d probably be a good idea just to get the sound of your voice reading that on here.

Short:  As I look back over times that are past,

And fine memories I recall.

It’s the little fleeting things that last.

Important things are usually small.

Dreaming back through many years,

Of both happiness and despair.

The taste of salty tears,

A caress on silken hair.

Laughter on a moonlit walk,

Over some silly little rhyme,

Time when there was no need to talk

A hand tucked snug in mine.

A twinkle in mischievous eye, 

Above a wrinkled nose,

Memory of a tender sigh,

Sweet breasts that fell and rose.

So the things that I recall,

The sweetness and the pain,

To some would matter not at all,

They think of worldly gain.

Should someone ask, "What have you done?

What accomplishments are there to see?"

Why, I saw a boater rapid run,

And Maggie smiled at me.

Steiger:  Yeah, that kind of does, says it all right there doesn’t it?  That’s a hell of a poem.

Short:  You just take that book with ya’, it’s coming all apart, but I got a lot of them layin’ around.

Steiger:  Do you mind?  I’ve got one, but I honestly couldn’t find it, and if you don’t mind....

Short:  Now you’ve got two.

Steiger:  Good.

Short:  But that one’s comin’ apart.

Steiger:  Well, that’s all right.  That’s just the one I want.  I appreciate it.  I really do.  Well, I’m gonna get out of your hair then.  I sure appreciate your talking to me.

Short:  Well, I’m sorry that I didn’t do better than I did.

Steiger:  Oh, you did great, don’t be.  Please don’t be.  It’s nice.  It’s a great privilege for me to get to just kind of relive some of this stuff.  What we’ll do is, I’ll go make a copy of this and I’ll send it off to get it transcribed and that will take a while because she’s got several of them in the hopper.  Actually, I’ll send it to her and I’ll ask her to put it to the front of the line.  But it will still be at least a couple of months before she gets to it.  And when she does, I’ll get you a copy of it.  Then we can go from there.

Short:  Here stick that in here.  (hands something to Steiger)

Steiger:  You’ve got another one of these too?

Short:  Oh yeah, I’ve got all kinds of them.

Steiger:  Okay, I can scan that.  ’Cause I can get that back to you too if you want it.  (looks at pictures, makes a few admiring compliments)  That’s a nice one too.  Oh, that’s a good one.  Those are dandies.  That’s a nice sketch.


