FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Mrs. Clyde Johnson DuVall

Interview number NAU.OH.28.57



 



Mrs. Clyde Johnson DuVall, who is a native of <Flagstaff>, and now lives in <Miami Arizona>. Interview conducted by Susan Rogers Ash on September 13, 1976. Transcribed April 18, 1996. Transcriber: Nancy Warden. 



 



Outline of Subjects Covered in Interview 



 



Tape 1, Side 1



 



Mother’s personal history 



Cora Maynard Shellman 



<Joplin Missouri>, came to <Flagstaff> in 1897 



Husband worked is lumber camp 



Marriage arranged by parents, ended in divorce 



Worked as cook in lumber camps 



Married second husband, Louis Johnson 



Worked for Forest Service 



Father 



Louis E. Johnson 



Managed County Hospital 



Born in <Mississippi>, served in Spanish-American War 



Children in family 



Mother’s accident 



Started Coconino Dairy 



Flu epidemic, 1918 



Delivering milk in <Flagstaff> 



Experiences living in County Hospital (building is currently Pioneer Museum of Northern Arizona) 



Elderly patients 



Turnip story, jack-o-lanterns 



Christmas 



Family quarters upstairs 



Mr. Schmidt’s home remedies 



Saved arm of patient 



Women patients 



Morphine addict 



Baby, scalded in water 



Freedom on inmates brought from jail 



Other staff, cook 



Doctor’s – Felix and Tom Manning, Dr. Raymond 



Structures on premises 



Living at Coconino Daily 



East of <Flagstaff> 



Delivery of milk in town 



Downtown area 



Traded at Nackard’s Department Store 



Closest neighbors, Greenlaws 



Friends



 



Tape 1, Side 2



 



Rode horse and buggy to school – Emerson 



Rode horse and sleigh in winter to school 



Emerson school 



Walking into school in the snow 



Hitching rides from people they knew, when weather was bad 



Spacing of children in age, due to frequent deaths in family 



Teachers – Bullard, Jones, Kinsey, Francis 



Weatherford Hotel, discussed briefly 



Family entertainment 



Oddfellows, Rebecahs 



Chautauqua – traveling cultural events 



School events 



Methodist Church 



Crimes 



Murder of Mr. Colter, sheep vs. cattle 



Marsha Slipher, Lowells 



Flu epidemic 



Father and mother with patients at County Hospital, Emerson School 



World War I, ending celebrations



 





SUSAN ROGERS: This interview is being conducted with Clyde Johnson Duvall. Is that how you pronounce it? Who now lives in <Miami>, <Arizona>, but was born and raised in <Flagstaff>? It is taking place in the office of the Northern Arizona, Pioneers' Historical Museum on September 13, 1976, and the interviewer is Susan Rogers Ash. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, Mrs. Duvall, you want to tell me a little bit about what your mother's name was, and where she was born, and how she came here. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. My mother was born in <Joplin Missouri>. And came out here. Her name was Shellman, at that time. It was Cora Maynard Shellman. And she and her folks, the Fernando Maynards that settled at <Bellemont> came out here in 1897. And they left <Joplin Missouri> in October and landed in <Flagstaff> in January. Why they ever left in October, I've never been able to understand. But, ah, she lived here, and her husband worked in the lumber camps. And she had three children, Laura, Grace, and Clarence Shellman. And, she was one of these individuals that believed in freedom. Seems that the marriage has been arranged by the parents like they did in a good many cases in those days. She was seventeen when she left to come out here, had a baby that was six months old. And, ah, she was one of the women that had the courage to get a divorce to get herself out of an unpleasant situation. And she left with the three children and worked as cook(?) and keeper in the lumber camps around for a good many years. 



 



And that's where she met my father. He was working in the Forest Service at that time. He joined Forest Service in 1906. The first record we have is in 1906, but he had already put in six months probationary. That was just a year after the Forest Service had been transferred from the Interior Department to the Agricultural Department. And he worked there; went in as Deputy Ranger, and then as Ranger, and then as Lumberman. And worked there 'til approximately 1910 or '11. I don't know the exact date. But he was… or his title at the time… but I know he used to estimate the timber. Not only here, but there were trips clear down into <Arkansas> that was under this division that he was in charge of. Because at that time, of course there was no telegraph and telephone down in there, but he was taken for a "revenooer" down there lots of times, in that area. 



 



But, he returned from one of those trips, and I was about two and a half or three years old. And, ah, when he came home, I run right past him and said I was going to go meet "Daddy Cooper". That was the father of some children that lived next door. Well, it really hurt him, and he went in and wrote in his resignation from the Forest Service to where he could stay at home and be around the family more. And, ah, it was around in 1911 or '12 that they took over the management of the County Hospital. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Let me interrupt just a moment. What was your father's full name? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Lewis E. Johnson. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. And, was he born around here...? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No, he was born in <Mississippi>. 





SUSAN ROGERS: And how did he end up here? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, he was discharged from the Spanish American War, as he had had typhoid and pneumonia when he was in there. And they had given him six months to live. But he started west to see what part of the world that he could see in what time they'd given him to live. Well, he went to… up around <Cloudcroft New Mexico>, worked in the lumberyards there. And then came over to <Arizona> and joined in the Forest Service in outdoor work. And he enjoyed it very much. He'd been a teacher before that. But that's how come him in this part of the country. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, fine, okay. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: But, ah, right off the record, I don't know the exact date of their marriage, but it must have been around in 1907. And, ah, they had seven children. Two girls, myself and one girl older that died, and then five boys after me. Ah, one of them was born here in the hospital, Joe. But he didn't live too long. My mother was taking the meals to the jail, which they used to have to furnish the meals to the jail. And she was driving a horse and buggy in to take the meals. And, ah, the bellyband came loose off the… from under the horse, and the horse run down Pollack Hill and turned over. It hit the livery cart that was driven by Decker Williams at the time. And it threw her out. 'Course she was confined for the rest of the time, but we lived here; Joe was born here in the hospital. 



It was about 1914, '15 or '14 when we left here. And we bought a ranch, two miles east of <Flagstaff>. And they started the Coconino Dairy, which delivered milk all through here. It was during the time of the, soon after we started out there, 'course the First World War was on, and, ah, then the flu epidemic in 1918. And we had a good many experiences during that time. My father was put in charge of the Emerson School that was turned into a hospital at that time. So it left my mother and us children to run the dairy and deliver. And the biggest part of the delivery was due to, that we were capable of doing at that time, was due to an old bay mare that knew all the routes around and where to stop. And she would take them the route, and even knew people and delivered the milk where she would stop. 



 



But we left here then in 1923 and moved to <Glendale>, <Arizona> and then on to <Miami>, where my parents remained until they had died. Dad died in 1944 and my mother in 1959. But, or course, the children are all gone except me. All those, the five brothers that were younger and all. I have the two half sisters that are living in <California>. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Let's go back to when you lived here when it was the County Hospital. Ah, tell me about how your living conditions were. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, to me, it was, it was wonderful. Because at six years old, I guess, everything is. We were free to run over the mountains and had donkeys that we could ride. And out here where the playgrounds are now is where they used to raise all their vegetables and, of course, we had cows and horses. And the old men, those that were able to do anything, lots of them liked to putter in the, out in the garden. They didn't have to work out there. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Then, who was working the garden? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, us children. And Mom and Dad when they had time. And, I think we had two or three hired people. I don't remember. When you're that age, you just take a lot of things for granted. 





SUSAN ROGERS: So it was more or less your own farm, yeah. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: But, ah, they had the cows that furnished the milk. And, ah, we used to raise turnips and corn and, oh all kinds of smaller vegetables, peas and beans and things like that. And, we children would help in the preparation for, you know like breaking the beans and, it was a family project in running it. Just like any big family. But, ah, the old men seemed… then it was nearly all men; we had one or two women, in that I can remember. But, ah, they were nearly all-elderly men, but they used to go on walks, and us children would go with them. And they had my brother spoiled rotten, because he was, you know, the only small child, really small child around. And he'd scoot down those stairs to the entertainment of all of them. And, I've slid down the banister many a time out here. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me about the turnips that you told me before. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, those turnips. They were marvelous. We'd have big ones that we would scoop out and make jack-o-lanterns. Sometimes the old men would help us. In fact, I think it was one of them that started it. Old Timothy Timmons. He was an Irish gentleman. Real white hair, I can remember. Always had something for the children to entertain us, and, ah, around Halloween, we'd have turnip jack-o-lanterns all around, setting all around on the posts to the hospital. And decorations, lots of times they'd help make. To help pass their time, and gave us something. It was a relationship between the generations that was good for them and good for us. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, how did you celebrate Christmas? Did you have a great big celebration with the men? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, we did. We always had a big Christmas tree that was with them. Of course, we had our own private little things. This room back here, I (?) figured that we used to use as a dining room, the family dining room. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, this is part of the caretaker's house now. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Uh huh. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Right, okay. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And, ah, we usually had a small tree in there, but we had a big tree out in the front lobby for the old folks. 





SUSAN ROGERS: And, you said that your living quarters were upstairs, is that correct? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, uh huh. 





SUSAN ROGERS: You had how many rooms? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, we had three rooms up there. They look awfully small. 





SUSAN ROGERS: I know. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And there were five children and my mother and dad. And we must have had some other space available. It seems like my brother had a room some place else. But that's pretty hard to remember all the details. But I remember that from there on back, those small rooms on the side were usually filled with patients. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, would there be one patient to a room or two? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, uh huh. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Just one. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Just one, usually to a room. Each had their own room. They really aren't very big. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh uh, not at all. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: By the time you put a bed and something else in there. 





SUSAN ROGERS: How many men were, or how many patients were there here on an average? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well that would be pretty hard for me to say, but the best that I can remember, you just don't pay attention to things like that. There must have been around fifteen or twenty most of the time. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Were there some men that stayed here year after year? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, yes. Yes, this, ah, Timothy Timmons did. He had been here for a good many years. Oh, the names slip my mind. I guess the reason I remember him was because he was always doing something with us children. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. And then, were there a lot of people that came and would just spend one night and then leave, or did most people come to stay? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Ah, not very many. Now, when there was someone hurt in jail, or something like that, they brought them out here for medical attention. Or something that was the county, but it wasn't ah, you know, just open to everyone. But, I can remember the bringing people in that had been hurt or been sick that ah, they just stayed a short time. But there was a good many of them that stayed. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me about that old German man that you were telling us about? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. It was a Mr. Schmidt. And he had some very strong beliefs and old time remedies, and one thing and another. And one man's arm was saved, because of ah, some turnip poultices and bread and milk poultices that my folks put on as a recommendation of old man Schmidt. And ah, Dr. Tom Manning, which was a doctor. Felix Manning was the medical; Dr. Tom Manning, the surgeon out here. And there was an appointment to have this man's arm removed, for gangrene had set in, and, or at least bloody infection (?) from a bite that he had gotten when he was in jail on his middle finger on his right hand. And they were going to have to remove the arm. It was so swollen and all. And this old man said, well, it won't hurt anything to try it. So my folks went along with him. And they set up all-night and made bread and milk poultices and grated turnip poultices, hot. And applied it to this man's arm. And when Dr. Manning came to operate the next morning, the man's arm was down to normal size and all the poison had been drained out of it, to where he didn't have to operate. The man had a stiff finger was all. The leader(?) was some how cut or bitten through. And that was all the damage, instead of losing his arm due to this old man. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Huh. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: One of his remedies, the things that he followed, was to take soap for a laxative. (Both laugh.) I can remember it had, sometimes had very disastrous results. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. You were also telling me a little bit about different women in the… 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well we had one woman here, that I remember, that was a morphine addict. And she was here; she was pregnant. And she was brought out here for the delivery of her baby. She was here… it was rather a pitiful thing, but I can remember her screaming and taking on. Of course, I guess they were trying to cure her as they say "cold turkey", now. And there used to be screams in the night, and all that I can remember and associate with her. But she had a Latin lover. Well, I think she was a Mexican woman at the time. But she had this lover that used to come out and serenade her under the window. Every night he'd come and sing 'til quite a few of the old men got tired of it and complained to the folks. And I can remember my mother took a pitcher of cold water and poured down on him. It kind of cooled his ardor. 



 



Then there was another baby I can remember distinctly that was born out here. It was a small baby that had fallen into a tub of boiling water to where you could see the heart beat under his arm. The flesh had come off. And ah, of course, my mother or dad were neither one trained nurses, but Dad had nursed a great deal when he was in the Spanish-American War, and she had done nursing at different times. And was I guess, they call an "LP", now; she'd done a lot of deliveries; maternity cases and things like that, to where they had a lot of understanding of medicine and everything. Well, at that time, they used a red ointment; it was made from bugs from <South America>. I don't know what the name of it was, but I know we used to get it in big cans. And she kept that baby just swathed in that red ointment for weeks. And it healed. That mother was so grateful. She would stay here with us. And she was so grateful that whenever mom would meet her after the child had grown up, oh nine or ten years old, Mom would meet her in town, and she'd strip him down and show that the only place he had a bad scar was under his left arm. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Huh. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And they didn't think that he was going to live. It would just seem like a miracle that he ever pulled through. But those are things that I distinctly remember as being associated when I lived out here. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, any other stories about different inmates. Did you call them "inmates"? Do you know if that term was in use? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, we just, we just… I don't really know. I suppose it was, but we just knew them by their names. 





SUSAN ROGERS: By their names. 'Cause we've had people ask why they were called "inmates". 'Cause "inmates" usually sounds like a jail type. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Uh huh. Oh well, well they weren't. They weren't in jail. Now, of course, some of them would ah, would get a little bit unruly if somebody would bring them in some whiskey. They weren't supposed to drink on the premises. But they'd always have a friend sometimes that would slip them a bottle, and ah, they'd get a little bit unruly. Or if there was something definitely wrong where they had to be confined. But that will happen in any hospital. But they were free to roam over the grounds. And I remember this Timothy Timmons used to take us up, they were building the old reservoir up here over on the other side of this mountain, the reservoir for <Flagstaff>. And we used to go up there. He used to take us up there, and we watched them work on the reservoir. And ah, any of them that wanted to go for walks, of course they weren't… you could tell by their personality whether they were going to try to get away. But most of them were very contented to stay here. It was their only home. 





SUSAN ROGERS: But, now, did they have to apply to live here or did their families put them in, or do you know? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, now, that I don't really know, because, as I say, I was quite small. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. Okay. Let's see. Tell me a little bit, was there any staff besides your parents that was actually living here? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, there was the cook. And then we had oh, of a few come in that would help with the gardening. You know at certain times that they would hire. I can't remember any of them living here, other than the cook. 





SUSAN ROGERS: And the cook had his own quarters in the back. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. But then, as I said, it was kind of a family project. My sister helped, the oldest one was about seventeen or eighteen, and she would help in the kitchen. And we all helped, all had our chores and things. It was like a big home with a lot of grandpas. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, exactly. Okay, now, there was no doctor in residence. How often did the doctor come out here, just when some thing was needed…? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, he was out quite often. The doctor Mannings were the ones, Mannings. Dr. Felix was for medical and Dr. Tom Manning was for the surgery. And then their father, the elderly Dr. Manning, had had it before them. But I can't remember any other doctors in particular associated with… 





SUSAN ROGERS: You don't remember Dr. Raymond? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. There was a Dr. Raymond. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, there was a Dr. Raymond. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, any others? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: But, it was, it was usually the Mannings. I think the Dr. Raymond was early when we first came out here. But I remember a "Dr. Raymond". 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yes. Well you saw his picture in the _____ just by his equipment and stuff. Ah, well did they come every day almost or…? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: If there was any need. There was constant contact. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Was there quite a bit of surgery at one time? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No, not a great deal. No, just occasionally, and it was usually on patients that were brought from the, from the jail, or something like that. Emergency things. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh, uh huh. What was this office used for at that time? Do you remember? Or was it part of the operating room? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, it was part of the operating room. It was the storage room for medicines and equipment and things of that sort. I know this was one place we were never allowed in. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, especially if the medicine… 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, uh huh. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, ah, now were both of the barns back that are here, at that time? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, uh huh. 





SUSAN ROGERS: And, were they both used for the same thing, or did they have different functions? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, the equipment, the buggies and things like that, and the… were kept up in the front part; the front barn. The one that is the "Art Barn" now was where the cows were. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, were there any other buildings around? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Not that I remember. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Was that root cellar here? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, we had a root cellar. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, there is a root cellar. Do you see that? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, because they used to store the carrots and things… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Put them in there. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Put them in there, and to keep them cold, it'd store over the winter. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you think of anything else in particular you want to say about when you lived here at the county hospital? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well nothing, except… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Do you have any little stories you remember? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No, not particularly. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, what kind of porch did you have on the front? Do you remember, is it pretty much the one that's there now? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: It was, yes, uh huh. Now this has been built up… 





SUSAN ROGERS: This is a reconstruction of the original is what it is. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, it's a… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, it seems like that the original was a little bit wider. Of course, remembering back that long. But that was the first impression I got this morning when… And it used to be wider. And, of course, the roadway has been built up. And the steps were higher. That roadway has been built up there where you circle down around in front of it. And ah, of course, where the flowers are and everything, that wasn't there at the time. It was just, you know, just the rolling hill and grass and wild flowers down there, and the old fence. And ah… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Did the men used to sit out on the front porch quite a bit, or was it too cold? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh yes! A great deal. No, they'd sit out there. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, was there a balcony at that time or not. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, there was. That's what I was thinking this morning. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Upstairs on the cowboy wall (?) there, you can see where a door went out. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: That's right. There used to be a balcony up there. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, were you allowed to go up there? Were the men allowed? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, see, we lived up there in those three rooms, and we could go out on the balcony. 





SUSAN ROGERS: So it was your own; the family's balcony, more or less. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, uh huh. We… it was from there that my mother poured the water. (Laughs.) 





SUSAN ROGERS: Oh. Of course. Okay. Okay, and then after that, you said you moved and you lived on a farm in the Coconino Dairy. Do you want to try to tell me a little bit better where that's located, or what was there? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, at that time, ah it was two miles east of <Flagstaff>. It was two miles from the city limits. But, I don't think it's two miles, now, because they have straightened out all the dips and cut down the hills and filled up the dips, and it's more straight. But ah, where our house was, our barn was approximately where the Whiting Brothers' service station is now. And our house was where their motel… more of less in the parking area. In relation… I can remember the location because of the bridge that goes under the railroad track. And its relation to Elden Mountain, and things, you know, that I know haven't been moved. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yes. (Laughs). Okay. And ah… 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: The barn that… we had a big barn, dairy barn, with a sign "<Coconino County>, Lewis E. Johnson, Proprietor", that was there about where the station is now. And it burned after we left here in about the late 1920s; we left here in 1923. And ah, the barn burned several years after that. It was, oh about fifty feet wide and one hundred feet long, with a cement strip down the middle about twenty-five feet wide. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now do you remember about how many cows you had? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. We had about twenty-five. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Of cows. And then we had quite a few horses and a bunch of pigs. In fact later on, after they quit the dairy… see that was during the time of the First World War. And the folks had to ship in all of their feed in from <Phoenix>, which was terribly expensive. And we had a lot of deep snows that they had to fight against that, to where the dairy just wasn't too successful. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Did you have… were you in competition with anybody else. Were there other dairies at the time? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, yes, there were other… the Garing's Dairy had been here years before we were. And it was out in the other direction from <Flagstaff>. 





SUSAN ROGERS: It was west. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: West, I think, yes. Ours was east. But they had been there before we, before we started our dairy. And I think there were other small ones around. But ah, we delivered an awful lot of milk. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you deliver into the main part of <Flagstaff>? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh yes. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Or did you have quite a lot of neighbors around? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No. We delivered into the main part of <Flagstaff>. We used to deliver… but we had, when the snow was bad, we had a big, flat sled and four horses that they drove. But, usually, it was a red delivery wagon with the two horses. And, as I say, the horses knew the route as well as anybody. And you could just tie the reins onto the brake handle and just jump from either side, wherever the delivery was. You jumped just as they slowed down, and you caught it just as they were starting out. It got to be quite an art to jump on there and off. Of course, we had the milk bottles at that time and not the cartons. 





SUSAN ROGERS: And did you go on the route daily, pretty much, like in the summer time or…? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, yes, a good part of the time. But I was too small, really, to be of much use. But I grew up... 





SUSAN ROGERS: But you grew up. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yeah. My brother and older sister used to do that; Grace and Clarence Shellman used to do a good part of the delivery. My older sister never did live at the ranch. She had worked in… she had left home when she was eighteen and was working at Marlars, the drug store and coke fountain in <Flagstaff> at that time. And she stayed with Dr. Salt and went to school. But she never did live at the ranch. But ah, Grace and Clarence did the milk delivery. But I would go with them. After school, I used to wait at Alma Dickinson's, the… she was a friend of mine; her dad owned the Dickinson Hotel. I see the building, saw the building as I came in. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Possibly the Pine Hotel). But I… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know which one it is now? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: I don't know which one it is now. And the Nackards, we used to trade at the Nackard Department Store, which is Joe's Place, I think now, was the sign I saw on it. But ah, we traded with Mr. and Mrs. Nackard for years, or my folks did. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. And you said you went to school with Fred Nackard is that true? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, uh huh. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Ah, now did you have neighbors close by at all when you were out there? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Or do you remember any of… 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, it was a mile or so between neighbors. The Greenlaws were the closest neighbors on the… there was just a lane between their place and ours. 





SUSAN ROGERS: That's what I thought. Now did you do much with them; were you friends with the girls or were they your age? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, now, my older sisters were with the girls, but I wasn't. But ah, with Agnes Switzer, and it was Alberta Kinsey. I have no idea where she is or what her name is now. And ah, then there's Alma Dickinson. 



 



END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2 



 



(something is missing here, she seems to be talking about a horse that took them to school) 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And, we would tie her to one of the posts. I saw it this morning. Still there on(?) the telephone posts. 





SUSAN ROGERS: At the Emerson? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: There beside the, at the Emerson School, that was before, she was going there even before the addition was built on to it. And we'd cover her with a blanket in the wintertime and go out and feed her with a nosebag at noon. But when school was over, and we took the blanket off, there was one thing about it, we went straight home. She would take us; you could not make her turn a different way; you could pull her head clear back to the side, and she'd still go right straight on down the road. And we arrived home, we just simply couldn't do anything about it. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Your mother never had to worry about it. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: That's right. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Well, how many of you would ride her at one time? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well the… we had a buggy. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, you had a buggy hooked on to her. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: See we were, we were spaced in our ages. Now, ah there was Clarence; Grace and Clarence and I went to school at one time. You know we were in school at one time. And then there was a skip of five years, and then Alan(sp) and I went, when we lived at the ranch, we were the only two. There would be a skip between… there would be one child born that would live two or three years. Seemed like every other one of Mom and Dad's children died while they were small. And ah, but there was never more than two or three of us at one time. But we had ah what, they called a "cutter", it was one of these sleighs that was shaped like the ones you see on Christmas cards now. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yes. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And sleigh bells and everything. And, ah, we used to drive that in with old Beauty when the snow was so deep we couldn't drive the buggy. But we had a spring buggy with spring seats on it. Very much like some of these that you have out here, that we would drive to school. If we didn't ever ride the horse, there was just usually more than more than one of us going at a time. But ah, she really took us home. 





SUSAN ROGERS: How long would that take, if you had to walk that? That's quite a walk. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, we walked it ah, a good many times. And in fact, some of the times, when the snow was so bad, we'd walk it on the railroad. My dad would break the trail from… see the railroad was cleared with the snow shovels before the highways were. Of course that was dirt road at that time, too. And, if the highways were cleared, it was still mud. But ah, it would take us, oh, I really don't know how long. You just started, and you got home. Sometimes you'd fool around, and other times depended on the weather, you know. And lots of times we'd… someone would come along and give us a ride. I have thought lots of times since I've been grown and away, and the way things are now, what could have happened to us, you know, with people picking us up on the highway to take us to school. And, there was never any incidents. Of course it was mostly neighbors, you know, that, people that lived on out at Doney Park or someplace would come into town to, or going home, we usually knew. Mrs. Heckethorn, she was an elderly woman that lived out beyond us, that had known the folks for a long time. And we'd hitch a ride with her sometimes. But there was no bussing at that time at all. But we got to school however we could, whether it was to run by the… down the railroad. 



 



I nearly froze my hand one time, and my brother sent me home. He gave me his… I had my mittens and his mittens, and we were throwing our arms to keep warm, but my hands still got so cold, and by the time I got back home, they were just blue. My hands were blue. And I can remember, of course, it was that time… they don't do it now, but, at that time, they would rub them in snow, you know, 'til they got circulation back in. But, there was quite a few experiences along at the time that you could run into. And, you got to look and dream a lot and… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Okay. Tell me a little bit about Emerson School and about your classes, your teachers. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Hmmm, I started out with Miss Bullard(?) as a kindergarten teacher. And then there was a "Miss Jones"; Miss Pancake(?). 





SUSAN ROGERS: I've heard about her before. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And Miss Lura Kinsey was our fifth grade teacher. Now she was, she was the teacher for all, I think she had all of us. And, Miss Francis, I never did have Miss Francis, but the older children did. And Mrs. Kennedy was the principal of the school, the Emerson School at that time. And there was some man, what was his name? I don't really remember what his name that was principal of the school at one time. But those are all very… And, when I was in the seventh grade, I got my foot broken. I remember having to learn to go up and down stairs, 'cause our classrooms were upstairs. I had to go up and down stairs on crutches. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Then how many kids were there in the class? Did you share a class, or did you have a separate? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No. It was usually only our grades, you know, in the classrooms. Sometimes they had the two grades, I would say about sixteen to twenty, as well as I can remember back. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. Joe brought in a question here on the Weatherford, I assume he's talking about the hotel. I think somebody in town's doing some research on it. What do you remember? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: I remember that it was the… I saw a picture of it upstairs. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: But, ah, actually, I don't remember a great deal about it, except that it was there, you know. It was the Weatherford Hotel. And, ah, we didn't go to the hotel an awfully lot. But I remember that they had a dining room, because there were the stairs down beside. The dining room was down stairs. And there was a elderly Negro couple that used to cook. And they had the reputation of serving the best meals ever there. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did you ever eat there, your family? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. We did eat there at one time. I can't remember what the occasion was. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Something pretty fancy, though. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, it must have been really something, but it was quite a fancy dinner. But ah, my mother and dad, both, belonged to the Oddfellows and Rebecahs here, and were very active. In fact, my mother joined when I was six months old. And, at that time, they took all the children to the hall, and the oldest child that was there took care of all the babies while the business was going on. And, that, that, the Oddfellows Hall was upstairs over one of the drug store down there. I think it still is… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Was it Moore's Drug Store? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, I believe so. 





SUSAN ROGERS: The one that's cater corner from Babbitts'? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yeah. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. That's Moore Drug. Upstairs in there. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Uh huh. And, of course, Babbitt Brothers, you grew up knowing who the Babbitt Brothers were. And, in fact, one of my nephews, when they moved up here years afterward, they saw "Babbitt Brothers this and Babbitt Brothers that", and he asked his mother, "Do they have a Babbitt Brothers' Church here, too?" (Both laugh). 





SUSAN ROGERS: Ah, what else about what type of entertainment that you and your family did? Did you come into town very often, or did stay on at the ranch? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, ah, not too much. My dad always managed to get tickets for the whole family to the Chautauquas that used to come through. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: They were the travelling cultural centers. And we got… that way we got to see, oh the carnivals, you know, and things would come with it. But ah… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, how often would things like that come to…? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, it would come through, I think it was, every few months. See, it was scattered through the year, and different things. And you would buy season tickets. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, I see. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: For whatever was on. William Jennings Bryan was here one time for a lecture. And, ah, then I can remember an all girl orchestra played at the Orpheum Theatre. They played the "Anvil", ah let's see, what was it, Anvil something. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh. C: And, I can remember that so much. And, "Smiles". That's something that… I must have been, I just happen to think about that. I must have been about eleven or twelve years old. But it was very impressive. Mostly violins in that all girl orchestra. But, ah, I didn't go to the picture show very often. I can remember my brother, he would come back home, and he took me. He was nine years, no he was six years older when I was. And, ah, he took me to the theatre one time. But they used to have lots of school things, and entertainment, the Rebecahs and the Oddfellows put on all different things. On Washington's Birthday and all patriotic, it seemed like there were more patriotic things by far at that time. And my dad and mother were both, well, you were strictly American, and you believed in the Constitution, and you saluted the flag, and you respected your elders, and you respected your schoolteachers. There was no "ifs" and "ands" about it; you didn't talk back to your parents. They would listen, and they would, to reason, but ah, well a lot of it was, children were listened to when it was necessary, but other wise, you just sat and listened. You didn't speak out very much. But, Dad always managed to get season tickets for the family for the Chautauqua. And there would be plays like "Down East" and vaudeville things that would come through at that time. But it was the regular tour from back east that would go to countries. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Do you think that one reason <Flagstaff>, maybe you got a lot of that was because of the railroad? Did they used to come in on the train? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: I think so. I think that was one thing that helped, because it was on straight through transportation. 





SUSAN ROGERS: You said the school had different entertainments, too, now what types of things…? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, ah, oh dances and parties; the class parties and, of course, the football games and everything like that. And we were always very active in everything that went on at school. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. You'd come in at night again from your ranch quite often? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes, quite often. And the church, there was… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now what church was that? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: It was the Methodist Church. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Methodist Church. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And, ah, the young people would have parties and things of that sort. And, ah, oh sometimes it got pretty lonely. We weren't, what you would call a "high society", you know, and it would get pretty lonely, but I always had a big imagination that would keep me busy making things. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Are there any other, oh any other old timers around town at that time, you remember. Do you remember Sandy Donahue, or any of that? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: I remember the name. 





SUSAN ROGERS: But you don't remember him. Any other particular old timers that you remember? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, there's names when I hear them I recognize them with my folks. But, actually to know them, I can't say that did, or that I remember. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. What about when you were a child, were there any big crimes in particular that you remember? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Ah, when we lived at the ranch, I remember a Mr. Colter(sp) that was killed. He was, I believe a sheep man. He was a large, real fat man, and he used to pass our ranch going out to his ranch. And, he had a bright red car with brass trimmings on it. And he always looked so peculiar sitting up there in that front seat. It wasn't… I guess it was a Ford, but it was bright red. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Where was his ranch located? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, it was out east of ours. I don't know where it was. It was out somewhere out in that direction. But he was killed. It was quite a thing, it was during the cattlemen and the sheepman difficulties when they were trying to decide what to do. And I can remember ah, Marsha Slipher, the son(?) of Sliphers from up at the observatory, the Lowell Observatory. We used to go up there and coast down the observatory hill. And ah go in and roast marshmallows and what not with Marsha, afterwards at parties up there afterwards. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Now, is she still here? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: I really don't know whatever happened to Marsha. But I know her father was associated with the observatory for years after we left here. And the Lowells, that was always quite an event when they would come out from <Boston>, I believe, or some place back there. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, <Boston>. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: And they had a large touring car. That, see, it was bright red and had the red leather upholstery in it and all brass trimmings. And, ah, the top would let down. It was, what was called a "touring car". But they would… I guess it was canvas or leather or something that they would put up over. And that was always quite an event. They lived in a big house up there about half way up the observatory, hill. But that was quite an event to see that big car coming in. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah ______. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: It was really showy. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I think. Oh, I guess we have just a little bit more tape left. You were talking about the flu epidemic. Can you tell me a little bit about how it affected <Flagstaff>? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, dear, there was an awfully lot them here that died. They would, and the ground was so frozen at the time in the wintertime, that they couldn't dig graves. There wasn't enough people, well to dig graves to bury them as fast they died, or to fix caskets, just plain wooden boxes. And I know that, I have heard my folks talk about it, of how they were just stacked, you know, the caskets, were just stacked one on top of the other in the basements of the hospital or… I know Mother… as I said my dad was at the Emerson School in charge of that, and we didn't get to see him. He didn't get to come home, you know. And we were confined, and they wouldn't let any of us children come into town. 





SUSAN ROGERS: How long was that, about? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, it seemed like there was several months when it was so bad. And, ah, of course at the time, what seemed long then… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Would not be. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Wouldn't be so long now. But, ah, I know it was for several months there that it was just real bad. And it wasn't only there, in fact they had hospitals, you know, in the other schools as well as the hospital that were established, you know, that belonged to the town and county. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Did your father ever tell you any experiences that happened in Emerson when he was there during that, in particular things? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, nothing, other than that, you know, that there were so many dying. He was so busy, and he was so struck by… he was a very kind and gentleman. And, ah, it was quite a shock that they couldn't do more to save more people. And so many friends that, you know, that he knew, had known for years that died in that epidemic. Because it was really bad up around here. 





SUSAN ROGERS: None or your neighbors around here, though? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: No. None of our family, our particular family got it. Our hired man got it, and was just sent to the hospital. But, ah, he didn't die. It seemed like that people that were over weight, it seemed to hit them harder than it did those that were up in good shape. That was a remark that was made, I know a good many times. If you were overly fat, it just seemed like that you just didn't have a chance. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you remember the ending of World War I? Was there a big celebration? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. I do. And, I was lying in my bed upstairs, and I heard the whistles begin to blow. And, ah, I came down stairs, and the folks said I wonder what in the world that is. And I said, "The war is over." I was just young, but I was so convinced. Now we hadn't gotten word that it was. But, we had a telephone, one of these, you know, that cranked on the wall. And, our ring was two rings. Well, it was a party line. But, of course, it wasn't very long until everybody knew, because, when they'd rang, you know, why other people would get on. That's how lots of the gossip started, and somebody else listening in. And things like that. But, oh yes, there was a tremendous celebration with bells and the whistles and the people in the streets. And, it was really something. 





SUSAN ROGERS: A big parade. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Yes. Parades and… 





SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. I think you've covered quite a bit here. Is there anything you think I've missed, or that you want to add about <Flagstaff>? 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Well, no. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Think about it, or, how much it's changed since you've left, I suppose. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Oh, it has changed so much. It's much larger. What used to be fields… it's just like every place else in the state, now houses. But, there's a good many places that are still familiar, and, oh, you know, fields that are still open that I used to roam on. But it's wonderful to get back up here, take a bath in this nice soft water. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Right. 





MRS. CLYDE JOHNSON DuVALL: Breathe all this wonderful air that we have up here. 





SUSAN ROGERS: Well, thank you very much. 


