Mike Denoyer

July 1, 2006

Sound file:  "Mike Denoyer (addendum).mp3" 128:02 min.

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



STEIGER:  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is Lew Steiger, and I’m here at Mike Denoyer’s house in <Kanab Utah>.  This is an addendum to an interview that we started in 1998.  We’re going to add onto that for the River Runners Oral History in general, and we’re going to also attempt to do a little chunk of this for the Grand Canyon National Park Foundation’s Historic Boat Project"we’re gonna talk about boats and stuff like that a little bit.  (aside about recording equipment)  The date is July 1, 2006.

We got a fairly good description of the Whitewater boats in that one, but that was sort of taken for granted, I think, that everybody sort of had the picture of that in their minds.  Maybe if I could ask just kind of what the boats looked like that very first trip that you did"your first trip in <Grand Canyon>"and then how they sort of evolved over your career.

DENOYER:  I guess the one thing that stands out, just by looking at the past trips, the pictures of the boats, say, from our first trip, was that they had side tubes on 'em, snout rigs, but they were rounded snouts.  They didn’t have the point like we have now.  They always had the blunt, rounded snouts on those side tubes.

STEIGER:  The Whitewater boats did?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Some of 'em were straight, like the Tour West side tube is now, and some of 'em were curved up a bit, but they were rounded, not pointed like they are now"which is a very obvious difference there.  If you look at a boat, physically, just the first thing that’ll stick out in my mind, you’ll see a 55-gallon drum of gasoline sittin’ there instead of a fuel tank.  They at least took the gas out of the larger 55-gallon tank and dumped it in the 6-gallon tanks, and ran off those.  And that’s the way they did it.

STEIGER:  So were you siphoning, or just pouring it?

DENOYER:  Pourin’ it, yeah.

STEIGER:  Was there like a spigot on there or somethin’?

DENOYER:  Yeah, there was, actually.  Yeah, we’d screw in like a little hose bib, screw that in there and let it flow.

STEIGER:  Wow.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  But the boats, I’m tryin’ to think, the first trip I did, were very similar to what they were when I started working for Henry"the big steel frames, the heavy wings slid into the main frame and pinned.

STEIGER:  And they went clear across all the rubber.

DENOYER:  All the way across, so 15 feet wide, basically.

STEIGER:  And they were big boxes right on the outside, weren’t they?

DENOYER:  Right.  They had a front deck on 'em, and they were like four big orange boxes on either side.  Then there’s a plywood floor right in the center between the boxes, and all the duffle was piled on top of that.  Put a tarp over that duffle and just strap it back and forth, and that’s how the duffle was held in.  They had two frames, front and back frame, and the back frame carried ice boxes, spare motors, boatman’s box, a bunch of tools, and everything you can think of was in that boatman’s box.    And that’s what was on the back frame.  Of course the flex zone in between the two.  And then because there was an open space between the two frames, lookin’ right down to the river, that’s where Henry had the tables carried.  We had plywood tables at that time, folded in half, big hinges, and just laid it right down the center of it, keep people from fallin’ in.

STEIGER:  Like half-inch or three-quarter-inch plywood?

DENOYER:  It was probably three-quarter-inch plywood.  It was heavy stuff.

STEIGER:  Painted orange.

 DENOYER:  Yeah, painted orange, or course.  Just tied down.  The scary part of that was when we’d pull into camp, of course we’d take those tables off and set 'em up for the meals and such.  As you come on the boat, there’s this big open gaping hole right in the middle of it.  Time and time again, boatmen would step in there, forget the table’s gone, or have one too many beverages, and there you went.

	But the boats were big, they were heavy.  I think on the negative side to that, they had that high center of gravity, which rather than havin’ a smooth, cruisin’-through-rapids-and-waves type of motion, these would break through and snap around"just kind of a very jerky motion to 'em, as opposed to a smooth ride in a rapid, more of a graceful run.  For a motor rig....  The "S" rigs were, to me, very graceful for a motor rig.  The Whitewater boats were just jerky, man.  That high center of gravity caused things to snap, the back would whip up, the front would whip up, and if you weren’t holdin’ on hard, why, you could get thrown around.  Whereas the other boats with the lower center of gravity were, in my opinion, more graceful than the larger....  Henry’s rig was very similar to a Western rig"kind of that high center of gravity.  In fact, I’m sure Henry got a lot of his ideas from Jack Currey.  He worked for Jack initially, and then he started runnin’ his own boats, and they were basically made the same way.  Except, of course, Jack had all the "J" tubes goin’ across.  Henry still used the center doughnut and then side tubes on it.  But he strapped a big frame on top of all the rubber.  Rather than having a basket frame go down in, everything was on top.

STEIGER:  Well, and also, wasn’t there a tube in the middle of that doughnut?

DENOYER:  Right.  Yeah, he put a tube in the middle, right under the flat frame that stuck out maybe four feet, the very front of the frame, just to fill that hole in there.  But the deal was, it was up high, with the boxes up high, so the weight up high, high center of gravity, which is not the way you want to go.  I mean, I didn’t know any different, I thought it was great.  Wonderful boats, thought.

STEIGER:  Plus, you guys had a lot of weight.  (laughs)  How many people was a standard load?

DENOYER:  I want to say twenty.  I think twenty was the standard.  Yeah.  Twenty folks on one of Henry’s boats.  Yeah, he loaded 'em up pretty well.

STEIGER:  How long were the big boats?

DENOYER:  They were 37 [feet].

STEIGER:  Right from the git-go.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Where was that rubber?  Were they just military surplus rubber, or did somebody make 'em special?

DENOYER:  Initially, they were all surplus.  We had the side tubes.  After a while, we bought the regular 22-foot snouts.  Then we cut the back chamber out of each one, and butted them end-to-end together, sewed 'em and glued 'em together so we had a pointed stern, pointed bow, and the side tubes.  That’s how we made our sides, we made 'em ourselves in the shop"as far as putting two together.  The doughnuts were initially surplus.  And then after a while, Henry ordered 'em from"I think Moravia started makin’ some for us.

STEIGER:  That’s right.  They were like white or something’.

DENOYER:  Yeah, white, yellow.  They had a rough time with Moravia initially.  Seams would always come apart, and they’d blow up like a big balloon.  Just all of a sudden, you come back to your boat, and there it is, a big ol’, looked like a huge ol’ fluffy doughnut floatin’ around there, the seams were all shot.  I think they made one long tube, and then they’d just fold it into a doughnut shape.  Where all the creases were, they put seam tape around there to hold the creases together.  You’d go down there and have your boat sitting at <Havasu> in the hot sun, you’d come back and those seams all gave way, so it was just a big poofy thing, just kind of blew up.  Moravia did a number of boats initially for him, and then after a while, he got Demory [phonetic].  Demory made some boats for him.  (aside about helicopter noise, recording paused)  I think after a while, Henry got to be where he just had Demory build some boats for him after that.  We still used military surplus for side tubes, and then had Demory make the doughnuts, center tubes.  The ice boxes got a bit better.  Boxes were always plywood, ’glassed around the edges, no corners.  Big and heavy!  It was quite a rig.

STEIGER:  Now I remember lookin’ at this other transcript.  You were talkin’ about riggin’, you’d have to go down and tie all the ropes just right and do the twang test.  Now, were those ropes nylon?  Grass rope?  How did that all....

DENOYER:  You know, initially Henry, for some reason, used a lot of nylon rope.  He’d go to a military surplus store and get all this parachute cord that was cut and rolled up in a big ball.  It was like green stuff.  And we’d tie everything down with that green cord initially.  That’s what we always used, that green parachute cord.  We had that stuff strung all over the boat, holdin’ things down.  And then after a while he got the regular ol’ polypropylene.  This stuff had no give to it at all.  It’d snap eventually.  The sun would get to it after a while.

STEIGER:  Like that yellow stuff.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  I used a lot of that.

STEIGER:  Or no, it was black and orange, wasn’t it?

DENOYER:  It was the black and orange for the bow lines, polypro bow lines.  But then the stuff that held the boxes down, he had to have that yellow polypropylene.  It was quarter-inch polypro.  Bow lines were like one-inch black-and-white striped stuff.  He just always swore by that rope.  That’s the type of rope he wanted to use.

STEIGER:  Was there a preferred knot that you guys had to tie, or was it just "figure it out and make it tight."

DENOYER:  Yeah, it was fun.  You just started talkin’ about twangin’ the ropes and such.  You’d go down there, and Henry would fly in the morning of the trip to get in there and ready to go, but we’d rig his boats for him.  And he had this polypro rope goin’ back and forth between the handles of the boxes, down in the frame, back up the handle, back down to an "I" ring on the frame.  You’d have to get it really tight, and he’d use a trucker hitch on that.  Probably used to tie everything with the trucker hitches initially.  And you’d get that thing as tight as you can, and tie it off just right with a couple of half-hitches.  Then Henry would walk up and he’d twang the rope.  If it didn’t make the right sound, you had to re-do it, it wasn’t tight enough.  So you’d sit there hopin’, waitin’ for Henry to come down, sayin’, "I hope it twangs just right, so I don’t have to retie this thing."  But it was, yeah, the trucker’s hitch.  I think everybody used that initially for tying things down.

STEIGER:  How were the frames tied to the boats, to the river?  What was goin’ on there?

DENOYER:  On each corner of a frame, you’d have a chain goin’ down, with a snap link, and that’d snap onto a "D" ring, so you had two chains headin’ at a 45 [degree] angle up under the tube, and then snap it into a "D" ring.

STEIGER:  Not even goin’ all the way around?

DENOYER:  No, just into the "D" ring itself, just part-way down on a tube.  Same thing in back, had a chain goin’.  Of course that chain would rust initially, and then the rust would eat away at the boat.  Just happened, it’d saw through it after a while.  So you’d always have to put water patches where those chains were laid down.  Then on the sides he always had straps coming from the bottom of the boat.  There was a "D" ring on the bottom of the boat, and come around the side tube and up to the wings that came off the frames, and that’s what held the side tubes in.  And the side tubes were also chained to the main rope.  Used a lot of chain, rather than strapping and rope and stuff.  It was heavy stuff, chains wouldn’t break.  That was the one way to put a boat together and keep from comin’ apart.

STEIGER:  Okay, so gas, 55-gallon....  How many of those drums would there be?

DENOYER:  Eventually, we ended up taking ... I’m tryin’ to think ... we ended up takin’....  You know, after you’ve started making fuel tanks, instead of taking the drums"he had some fuel tanks made"and he would take a 47-gallon fuel tank, and a 17-gallon fuel tank.  So what’s that?  64-65 gallons of fuel.

STEIGER:  Which his about....  But the 55-gallon drums, you’d have a couple of those per boat?

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And they were full?

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And how did you get 'em on the boat, when they were full?

DENOYER:  I think what we’d do is we’d just use the tables.  Put a table from the ramp up on the bow, and just roll 'em up, initially.

STEIGER:  You guys didn’t even have a chain hoist"or did you?

DENOYER:  We did after a while.  After a while we got the hoist, the sliding "I" beam with the hoist on it, with an electric winch on it, so we could winch things on and off.  Those initial years, just brute strength, roll 'em and lift 'em.  The same with the boxes, roll 'em and lift 'em.  Then after everybody’s back was shot, we wised up, "Let’s use a hoist for these!"  Yeah, it’s an interesting deal.  You just realize, all the years ago, all the heavy lifting everybody did.  It was always awkward lifting.  You’d just be lifting and lifting and lifting.

STEIGER:  Every day.  But then especially the rigs and the de-rigs.  We were laughin’ about how we’re gonna do one more of those GCE de-rigs, where you take the whole boat apart and put it in the truck, and then that’s gonna fade into the pages of history.  And how sad that’s gonna be!  (laughter)

DENOYER:  Thank goodness, huh?!

STEIGER:  But we were rollin’ Fern and Glenn down there, and I was goin’, "Ah, shit, this is no big deal.  Look, we got this chain hoist to get this in."  Because I remember workin’ for Fred where we’d roll the boats, and then we had to lift 'em into the pickup.  Rollin’ 'em was like the least of our worries!  I don’t know how we did it.  We’d have a two-boat trip, and there’d be three guys and the truck driver"you know, four guys to lift a boat.  I mean, did you guys have that?

DENOYER:  We did!  We had to lift 'em actually into a big truck ourselves.

STEIGER:  You just kind of get it stood up and then flop it over.

DENOYER:  Just get as much muscle as you could under it.  And we were a lot younger and a lot stronger then too.

STEIGER:  Oh, God!  Yeah.  And then what about like early on, what was the story on the motors?  Just Whitewater motors, were they Johnson 40s, is that what they all were?

DENOYER:  Johnson 40 Evinrudes, yeah.  Forty horsepower, big and heavy.

STEIGER:  Oh, man!

DENOYER:  Of course at that time, we could pack one around ourselves, no problem.  And change one yourself.  Can’t do it anymore.

STEIGER:  Really?  I don’t remember ever havin’ to do that, thank God.  So that’s what you’d do?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Yeah, we’d pack 'em around and change 'em.  Worst thing, I think, about the Evinrudes, in my opinion, or the Johnsons"the shear pins.  You’d go through some driftwood, and there went your prop.  You’d have to try your best to stay away from anything.  Touch that propeller on anything, the shear pin would snap off.  So you got pretty fast at changing shear pins after a while.  Did you run Johnsons or Evinrudes ever?

STEIGER:  Well, I did that time with you.  And then Fred, there was a year where we had these Evinrude 25s.  Did they have shear pins on 'em?

DENOYER:  Probably did.  I think all the Evinrudes did.

STEIGER:  I can’t remember.  How did that work?  There was the shaft, and the prop went on there.

DENOYER:  Prop went on, and then there was a hole through the hub on the prop, and then a hole through the lower unit shaft.  And so you’d stick a pin, which is about a quarter-inch pin or whatever, through the prop and through the lower unit drive.

STEIGER:  Did it go clear through the outside of the prop?

DENOYER:  That went to the outside.  Then you had a black plastic cap that fit on top of that, with a cotter pin through that to hold it on.  That’d keep the shear pin from falling out.  Soon as the prop hits something, the shear pin was somewhat softer, and it’d break that instead of the drive shaft.

STEIGER:  And save the motor.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And so your prop might be fine, but you had to put in a new pin.

DENOYER:  Exactly.  And in time, if you never hit anything, just by runnin’ that motor, if you ran that same motor all season long or whatever, eventually that shear pin would just shatter apart.  It actually would fall apart.

STEIGER:  So you’d take a whole bunch of those.

DENOYER:  You always had 'em.  You always had your channel locks and some kind of a fancy channel lock holder everybody made in the seventies.  Everybody was wearin’ channel locks, wearin’ cut-off Levis.  One pocket’s full of shear pins and cotter pins for the prop.

STEIGER:  And the channel locks were right there.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  I remember the channel locks, the pliers.  I mean, bein’ a scrawny little sixteen-year-old kid, I was proud to have mine, because that was the only way that anybody would know that you were a boatman!  (laughter)  And the way I remembered it, was it was, yeah, kind of for helpin’ to untie ropes, and then dealin’ with the pots and pans on the fire.

DENOYER:  Exactly.  Yeah, channel locks or pliers were used for everything.

STEIGER:  I was talkin’ to Stuart last night, who did his first trip in 1965.  He pointed out that there was another very important use for the pliers or the channel locks, and that was opening the beers, which didn’t have pop tops.  Do you remember that?  I don’t remember when pop tops came along, but he was like, "Yeah."  He was rememberin’ his first trip with Don Hatch, and it was like a Girl Scout trip or somethin’"Boy Scout trip.  He said, "Yeah, those guys had their pliers and stuff, and they were openin’ their steel beer cans with their channel locks at eight o’clock in the morning."  (laughs)

DENOYER:  Perfect!  When I started, I think they were usin’ pop tops then.  I don’t remember.

STEIGER:  Seems like they were.  They just didn’t stay on the can or somethin’.

DENOYER:  Right.  You’d always pop and stick 'em in the can, throw 'em on the beach.

STEIGER:  In the river.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  How do you think those Johnson 40s compare with the Honda 30s that are bein’ used now"for the weight?  About the same?

DENOYER:  I’ll bet they’re very similar as far as weight goes.  The new Hondas are heavy.  They’re a heavy motor.  And the Johnsons were a heavy motor too.  But of course the Johnsons were a two-stroke and a hell of a lot louder"real loud.

STEIGER:  Real loud.

DENOYER:  More fuel consumption, more emissions, the whole shot.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Okay, so how’d that evolve from then until now?  Did Henry’ boats change much in all that time?

DENOYER:  Henry’s boats really didn’t change much"they really didn’t.  Initially, of course, we were cooking on wood.  So the way we packed then was we just started takin’ propane, that type of thing.  But the boats themselves, the basic concept of boats has always been the same.  In fact, we still have a number of those boats over in the warehouse.  Same wooden boxes, same iron frames.

STEIGER:  Really?

DENOYER:  Did you see all the stuff stacked behind the warehouse down at GC?

STEIGER:  Yeah.

DENOYER:  I think when we acquired the company, we got six boats with it"four or six, I can’t even remember.  I think it was six boats.  Probably four full rigs.  So we have all the boxes, all the frames, all that stuff, the rubber.

STEIGER:  If they ever get it together to make this boat museum, they’d better put one of 'em in there.  Seriously!

DENOYER:  Yeah, they’re pretty interesting boats.

STEIGER:  Oh, they are!

DENOYER:  I keep thinking all that iron out there is probably just rusting away.

STEIGER:  It’ll go for a while longer probably.

DENOYER:  Oh yeah.  There’s a lot of iron.

STEIGER:  That iron will outlive us!  (laughter)

DENOYER:  That’s right.  But his boats really didn’t evolve much over the years.

STEIGER:  Okay, so fast forwarding, now you bought GCE.  We gotta talk about that, just the difference.  Not to pick on Henry....

DENOYER:  Oh, Henry can take it.

STEIGER:  Well, just for a segue into Ron Smith and Grand Canyon Expeditions and this kind of boat, my sense of it is, basically when everybody started, everybody had their own rig, and there were similarities between each, but there were also a lot of unique differences"just because everybody was figuring it out, everybody was inventin’ the wheel.  And nowadays, my sense and overview of it is there’s a certain kind of frame that you see over and over and over again, and it’s the Ron Smith frame.  And there’s a certain kind of "S" rig that’s kind of filtered down.  Everybody still puts their own little spin on the rigs, but by and large, this aluminum basket frame ...

DENOYER:  Yeah, I think everybody’s using it.

STEIGER:  ... is pretty darned ubiquitous, and you gotta say that that was Ron Smith’s deal, and we gotta give him credit for that.  I should shut up here.  What’s your take on that, on how that evolved, just from knowin’ Ron and movin’ over to these boats, how did that strike you, and what do you know about how all that came about?

DENOYER:  And there’s a lot of it.  Of course I’m not familiar with a lot of the facts on it, but it’s my understanding that Ron came up with the aluminum basket frame.  It was his idea to use aluminum on the boats themselves, on the rafts.  People were using wood and whatever other materials they could use to make a frame.  And Ron came up with this nice, no maintenance, light design of using aluminum.  The majority of the outfitters thought he was crazy spending that kind of money on a frame.  You can get a bunch of two-by-twelves and bolt 'em together and make some kind of a drop frame in there.  But Ron decided to do the aluminum basket frame, and it worked great.  There’s actually no maintenance on it, it was light and easy to rig, easy to de-rig.  And as far as I know, he came up with that design.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Do you have any idea what one of those cost back then?

DENOYER:  I don’t.

STEIGER:  When I visited him"I’ll just put this on this tape"for years everybody I knew, and I in my own mind, thought that it was Dean Waterman, who has a welding business here, who kind of invented that frame and welded 'em up and stuff like that.  And then I was visiting Ron and talkin’ to him about it, and he showed me this fiberglass frame that he had built, because he was tinkerin’ with the design.  He thought of the basket frame, and he built this thing out of fiberglass, and he said it was a prototype and he built it out of fiberglass because that was a lot cheaper than aluminum, but he always wanted to make it out of aluminum.  And he said the way that he met Dean Waterman was, Dean was drivin’ the delivery truck, delivering the resin for the fiberglass, and they struck up a friendship.  And Ron sent Dean Waterman to welding school so Dean could weld these frames up for him, out of aluminum, the way that Ron wanted them.  Does that ring a bell?

DENOYER:  Yeah, that’s what I remember hearing from Ron also"same story.  I do know that Dean was a chemist, actually, because his background, education, he was a chemist, and that’s why he ended up being in this resin deal.  So he was at a resin factory, that’s how Ron hooked up with him"exactly, yeah.  And you’re right on that, too, the first one he did, prototype, was fiberglass.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  So here’s this guy, Ron Smith, and he started out runnin’ with Georgie [White], and then he decides to get his own company, him and McCallum.  And they go from learnin’ on Georgie boats....  Well, did he work for Jack Currey too?

DENOYER:  I don’t know that Ron ever worked for Jack.  Maybe he did.  I don’t know on that one, Lew.  I just remember him talking about, mentioning Jack.  Jack’s style was different than Ron’s.  Jack’s style was all bravado.  He was like, "Okay, men! let’s get together and let’s run this rapid!"  It was a big macho thing, you know.  A lot of machismo goin’ on there.  That just wasn’t Ron’s style.  So I can remember if he actually worked for Jack or not.  I don’t know.  But I know he ran some trips for Georgie, for sure"went with Georgie.

STEIGER:  And to go from that to....  My sense of it is that then he thought up this, "Okay, let’s put the weight inside and down.  Let’s have a basket frame so nothin’ will fall out.  Let’s make it out of aluminum so that we only have to build it once and never have to maintain it again."

DENOYER:  Just a lot of great ideas, yeah.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And he gave us the nylon boats, I think.  I mean, didn’t he go back there with Rubber Crafters, "Hey, we need you to build....  Never mind these cotton...."

DENOYER:  Right, he got tired of the surplus stuff and the problems it had.  And my understanding, again, is that he went back, hooked up with"I guess I’m gonna say Rubber Crafters, or maybe it was Uni Royal"one of the rubber companies.  He designed boats specifically for <Grand Canyon>.  In fact, we have a brochure in the office I gotta show you one time.  He had a brochure where he was selling these various rafts/boats that he was designing, like the <Yampa> and the Green River and the Colorado, and all these different types of rafts.

STEIGER:  Oh, he had one called the Colorado?  Is that Clare’s boat?  Is that what those are?  The Moki boats?

DENOYER:  Well, the big <Grand Canyon> rigs.

STEIGER:  Oh! That’s the Colorado!  That’s like the GCE doughnut"that’s the Colorado.

DENOYER:  Right.  We’ll have to get the brochure to clarify it, but they all have their names on there.  And so we went back, and he designed the boats, and the bows, and the sterns, the bow set-up, the "D" ring placement and all this stuff, and went back, had a manufacturer do it, so Ron had a bunch of 'em built.  And then eventually Ron started sellin’ these boats to all the other companies"whether they be rowin’ boats or motor rigs.  You’d like to see this brochure.  I have it in the office.  You’d like it.

STEIGER:  Yeah!  Yeah, that sounds definitely like a good thing to make a copy of to give to the archives.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  There’s anything from, say, "D" ring placement to diaphragm placement, bows, the types of bows, and just the upturn of the bow, how much upturn to put on the bow or the stern.

STEIGER:  On both the doughnuts and the snout tubes.  Or no, the snout tubes....

DENOYER:  They were still surplus at that time.

STEIGER:  Are they now?  Are these ones that you guys got....

DENOYER:  We’re still usin’ surplus, too.  We buy 'em from Demory [phonetic], but we had just a pile of 'em.

STEIGER:  Out there.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  So we’re just usin’ those still, and they work fine.  They’re still good rubber.  It’s a money deal there, too.  We buy 'em for 250 bucks apiece, where if you get Demory to make 'em, you’re lookin’ at $3,500 probably, for a side tube.

STEIGER:  Yeah, and those surplus ones are holdin’ up pretty good.

DENOYER:  Yeah, they’re tough rubber.

STEIGER:  There’s some debate about....  Well, that’s a digression.  I was talkin’ to Stuart about it.  When Jack Currey accidentally bought all those side tubes, and he didn’t know what to do with 'em.  Paul told a little bit about that story.

DENOYER:  Sewin’ 'em together and makin’ tubes out of 'em.

STEIGER:  Yeah, makin’ 'em into a "J" rig.  But Stewart said it was Jake Luck that....  Stuart said that he had heard Currey and everybody was like, "Oh, my God, what are we gonna do with these tubes?!"  And Jake said, "Oh, we can make these into a boat, no problem."  He said it was Jake who....

DENOYER:  I don’t know.

STEIGER:  I don’t know either.  Did you see that?  Did we talk about that, in that interview?  I don’t think we did.

DENOYER:  No, we didn’t.  I know that Paul worked for Jack long before Jake did.  They were doin’ the "J" rig then.  So I would have a tendency to....

STEIGER:  Before Jakey, so you’d have a tendency to believe Paul, yeah.  (laughs)

DENOYER:  Yeah.  But you know, who knows?

STEIGER:  I can’t remember what we said.  I can’t remember any of those.  It’s a good thing I’m writin’ this stuff down!  (laughter)

DENOYER:  Yeah.  I think the "J" rig was goin’"I almost want to say before Jake started workin’ for Jack Currey, but I don’t know.

STEIGER:  Uh-huh, that that was happenin’, yeah.

DENOYER:  Runnin’ with Jake was a lot of fun.  He’s a character.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  You ran with him for what"how long was that, a couple three years?  Or more than that?

DENOYER:  Yeah, more than that.  We ran all through probably the late seventies, I guess.  I’m not sure when Jake stopped workin’ for Henry.  Because we did <Belize> together, also, with Jake.

STEIGER:  He went down there too.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  I’m guessin’ probably ’81 or so, ’82, is when Jake stopped workin’ for Henry and went to weld for....

STEIGER:  For Dean, yeah.

DENOYER:  But boy, he was quite the character, runnin’ down there with him.  I remember we used to run into Jake when he was runnin’ Western rigs.  They’d have their folks helicopter out above or below <Lava>, and then he’d be dead-headin’ down to get off the river, and he and Peggy would be comin’ down.  He’d have two motors on a Western rig"two 40-horse Johnsons on a Western rig.  We’d be camped at 220, and Jake would pull in.  He had a peanut can in his hand, and of course Henry always had a bar on a trip, so he’d fill that peanut can up with whiskey, and Jake would take off downriver, drinkin’ that can of whiskey.

STEIGER:  Oh, empty peanut can because you couldn’t have any alcohol on the river.

DENOYER:  No alcohol on a Western rig, yeah.

STEIGER:  So Jake would just pull in and get a little toddy.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And Henry was okay with that?

DENOYER:  Oh yeah, he just let it go, it was fine.

STEIGER:  So Jake was the first guy to twin up?  Could that be?

DENOYER:  I don’t know that, but he definitely"he always liked to make a big call about bein’ able to get airborne in 217 Mile.  I said, "Jake, you can’t get those things airborne."  He said, "We get quite a bit in the air."  So he went and blasted up the top wave in 217, get as much rubber as you can up in the air.  He was quite a deal.  I really liked him.

STEIGER:  I remember just bein’ in awe of him.  I mean, he was such an imposing figure.

DENOYER:  Oh, he was, he was.  We were down there runnin’ trips with Jake, and here you are, trip leader on a trip.  There’s Jake Luck with you.  Well, Jake’s pretty much gonna do what Jake wants to do.  There’s nothin’ you’re gonna do about it.  But he was great.  People loved him down there.  And he’d pull off the most incredible things, and tell the most incredible stories.  I just enjoyed the guy.  He was a lot of fun.  Had a heck of a temper.  I remember one time with Jake, we were pulled in at <Havasu>.  We just got off the boats, Jake was still down by boats, and I was takin’ the folks up to go for a little hike, and I think it was Tour West that came in.  I guess they slammed into the side of Jake, ripped out a bow, blew out a section of his boat, then they pivoted off his boat and went down around and pulled into the lower pull-in at <Havasu>.

STEIGER:  He was tied in the middle of the rapid, or at the mouth?

DENOYER:  Middle of the rapid.  And then the boatman came up and was tryin’ to give Jake a valve and some patch and rubber, to apologize about running into his boat.  (recording paused for passing aircraft)  So the Tour West boat came down, slammed into Jake, of course blew out a side tube and tore some valves out.  And I’m up hikin’ with the folks, and Peggy, Jake’s wife, starts runnin’ up to me.  She always called me Mikey.  "Mikey, Mikey, better get down to the boats, quick!  Jake’s gonna kill somebody!"  And she was all scared.  So I said, "What happened?"  "Tour West ran into the boats, and the boatman wants to talk to Jake, and Jake’s threatening him with a knife."  So I go runnin’ back down to the boats, and there’s Jake, bigger than hell, he’s got a knife in his hand, but he’s just workin’ on rubber is what he’s doin’, he’s not threatening this guy.  I can’t remember which Tour West boatman it was, but he come up and he was tryin’ to apologize to Jake, and take him a valve and patch and rubber.  I told the guy, "You’d better just stay away from Jake.  He’s a little hot right now."  And I go down, see Jake, and say, "Jake, how’s it goin’, Bud?  Can I help you with this?"  He said, "Yeah, you keep that little son of a bitch away from me!"  (laughter)  I just started laughin’.  I said, "Shit, Jake."  So we patched the boat.  The guy had a temper on him.  He did, he got hot.  He got hot.

STEIGER:  So you and him ran together for several years?

DENOYER:  Yeah, we did a number of years together.  He was just quite the character.  He always had these little poems that he’d recite.  I can’t remember....  One of 'em was "Face on a Bar Room Floor."  Is that a Robert Service [phonetic]?

STEIGER:  I don’t know, I’m not much on those.

DENOYER:  I think it’s a Robert Service one.  He’d recite that all the time.  And then, gosh, what’s the other one he’d always recite?  It was great.  I’ll think of it here in a bit.

STEIGER:  I’ll make a note of that.  I’ll bet we can find that.  "The Face on the Bar Room Floor."  So he read poetry?

DENOYER:  Actually, he recited it.  He had it memorized.  And there’s this one about....  That must have been "Face on the Bar Room Floor."

STEIGER:  Did he teach you much about runnin’ boats?

DENOYER:  Oh yeah.  Jake was an outstanding boatman"outstanding, as far as running boats.  Actually, when we first started going, I wouldn’t be leading the trips, Jake would lead the trips.  I’d just follow Jake downriver.  Just little nuances here and there that he’d just figure out.  He’d talk to you about spinnin’ boats and backin’ down, and just little things here and there.

STEIGER:  Did he do that a lot?  I guess you had to, when it was low, huh?

DENOYER:  Yeah, low water, you did.  Certainly.  Dubie, <Upset>, those types of things.  I think he was a straight-on runner in <Hance>.  I don’t think he spun <Hance>"I think he took that one straight..  Of course he’s been runnin’ those "J" rigs forever, and he had it pretty wired.  I just remember he was so mechanically inclined.  He could fix anything, no matter what it was.  If he never saw the thing before, he’d figure out some way of fixin’ it, no matter what it was.  He was great.  Old fellah from <Vernal>.  The stories that guy could tell!

STEIGER:  Yeah, that was really good that you made me sit down and talk to him when you did.  I wouldn’t have done it, either, if you hadn’t pointed me in that direction.  I’m really glad, really glad that we did that.  All it cost was a little headache the next day.  (laughter)

DENOYER:  A little Jim Beam?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  We sat under his orchard, out there in the orchard.

DENOYER:  Did you get a chance to visit with Peggy at all, his wife?

STEIGER:  Just a little bit.  What was she like?

DENOYER:  She is a character herself.  She was a character.  She called him Big ‘n’ Ugly.  That’s how she always referred to Jake, as Big ‘n’ Ugly.  "Say, Big ‘n’ Ugly, what you doin’?"  She always referred to all the other guides and the swampers on the trip"all the guides that worked for Henry, she’d call her "hairy legged boys."  (laughter)  That’s just the way she was.  She was quite the character herself.  That was a good match-up there, those two.

STEIGER:  And so she came with him pretty much all the time?

DENOYER:  Yeah, she did.

STEIGER:  So was that like you and Roxanne, and Jake and Peggy?  Is that how that went?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  We did a lot of trips together.  Actually, Peggy was down in <Belize> with us, too"Jake and Peggy, and Roxanne and I, down there runnin’ those trips.  So yeah, we definitely knew each other quite well.

STEIGER:  When we first did this, I didn’t really appreciate....  Now I’ve been to <Belize> and now I sort of appreciate a little better what a great adventure that had to be, and just headin’ out to sea out there"my God, that whole deal.

DENOYER:  That was pure ignorance, is what that was"headin’ out there, didn’t even have a compass.  It was fun.

STEIGER:  And we didn’t get on tape"that’s somethin’ you talked about one time.  One time you told me a story about goin’ out there, and we didn’t get it in this transcript, about how you guys got adrift, you drifted across this coral reef.  You want to tell that?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  We had to go get some supplies"take a group back to <Belize>, from the island, 60 miles into <Belize> City.  So we took a group out, got 'em into <Belize City>, and we picked up extra groceries and soda pop, beer, and such, and we had just the one boat.

STEIGER:  And "we" is you and Roxanne on it?

DENOYER:  It was myself, I don’t think Roxanne was on that boat, but it was myself, this fellow we referred to a lot as Joe"Joe Greeno [phonetic]"remember that name, you’ve heard it through different interviews.

STEIGER:  Yeah, definitely.

DENOYER:  So Joe Green was on that one, Henry’s mother and father were on it.  Maybe Roxanne was there too"might have been Roxanne.  And anyway, we’re goin’ out and tryin’ to get across that blue.  Of course the thing I do is I double-up on the motors, so I’m puttin’ two 40-horse Johnsons on a jackass on a Whitewater rig, headin’ across the ocean.

STEIGER:  You could put two of 'em on one jackass?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  I thought you could, I’ll put it that way.  So we put two on there, and just makin’ 'em goin’ across.  So we got through a certain area, broke through a reef, and headed to where Henry and Grace and the rest of 'em were waiting for us, and got out there in the ocean.  The jackass broke, both motors went in the ocean.  Of course that was my spare motor too, I had.  I had two motors"the spare I doubled-up with.

STEIGER:  So it was just chop, and the jackass just....

DENOYER:  Shattered.  Those were pop metal jackasses then, and they just shattered.  And so we had a safety rope on 'em, but both motors were in salt water.

STEIGER:  Wet.

DENOYER:  Wet, yeah.  And so I pull 'em both up, and we’re out just floatin’ on the ocean, headin’ back towards the reef.  So I’m up there, pull the motors apart and take the flywheels off, and try to air dry everything out, makin’ sure the points are dry, and pulled the plugs and got the engine somewhat dry.

STEIGER:  Oh my God.  How on earth did you even pull 'em back in, for cryin’ out loud?

DENOYER:  I had a rope on 'em.  Joe and I would just pullin’ 'em up.  We had a safety rope on 'em.

STEIGER:  Whew!

DENOYER:  So anyway, we got 'em up and tried our best to dry 'em out, with all the humidity and stuff.  Pulled the flywheels and got the points and everything going, dried as well as we could do.  Couldn’t get the motor started, it wouldn’t start.  So we started driftin’, and we’re hearin’ waves breaking on the reef, and we started drifting back into this coral reef out there, and the noise is getting louder and louder.  And again, we’ve got rotten cotton down there.

STEIGER:  So if you go onto that coral reef, it’s gonna just shred ya’.

DENOYER:  Shred the boats.  And so we started goin’.  We have a generator with us and a bunch of equipment and such, but we started driftin’, getting closer to this.  I’m talkin’ to Joe Green, I said, "Joe, we’re gonna lose this whole boat, we go over that reef.  No way we can stop from doin’ it."  And so we drift up on, a wave comes in, grabs the boat, launches it up, and drops it right on the reef, so we’re high and dry, right there on the reef.

STEIGER:  You’re sittin’ on the reef?

DENOYER:  Sittin’ on the reef, sharp coral, elk horn coral, stag coral, all this stuff is just"we know it’s gonna tear the boat up.  And so Joe Green and I get a shovel and we had a long pole or somethin’.  Maybe it was a rake handle or somethin’.  So as the next wave comes in and pushes us, we’re pushin’ off this coral.  We try to get across this reef, because we know once we get inside the reef, it’s gonna be safe in there.  But we’re trying to help push it across so it doesn’t tear the boat up.  So we’re leanin’ over the side....

STEIGER:  You guys are standin’ there....

DENOYER:  We’re layin’ on the side of the boat, over the side.  The waves were breakin’ this way, as the waves come in, lifts up the boat, we start pushin’ on the coral reef to try to help the boat across.

STEIGER:  And there’s like 20 people on here?

DENOYER:  No, it’s just Henry’s mother and father....

STEIGER:  So there’s like six, eight people on there.

DENOYER:  Yeah, I think there’s probably maybe five or six people on the boat.  Maybe Roxanne was there, I don’t even remember.  But Joe Greeno and I were there, for sure, Henry’s mother and father, and it must have been Roxanne too.  So as we’re pushin’ ’er, I’m leanin’ over the side of the boat, waitin’ for the next wave.  Joe’s leanin’ over the side.  But we look at each other, and we just start laughin’, "Man! we’re gonna die on this thing!"  But we just started laughin’.  So we keep pushin’ this boat across.  And then Henry’s father was in the military, in the navy, and he got some serious stuff in World War II, got blown off a ship into the ocean, on fire, and had a very horrendous experience in World War II.  He about died on it.  I think his father started reliving this stuff.

STEIGER:  He’s havin’ flashbacks.

DENOYER:  I think he’s havin’ flashbacks, exactly.  So Joe and I are sittin’ there, tryin’ to push off, and he sees Joe laughin’.  This is Joe Falany, now, Henry’s father is Joe Falany.  So Joe Falany starts gettin’ mad at Joe [Greeno], starts yellin’ at Joe, "Stop your smilin’!  Let’s get some serious stuff done!"  And by this time, Joe Greeno’s losin’ patience.  He said, "Aw, you shut up!  I’m tryin’ to get this boat off the reef!"  Everybody’s losin’ patience.  So they get up, and Joe Senior’s screamin’ at Joe Greeno, and they start gettin’ into fisticuffs.  And I’m sittin’ there tryin’ to get this boat goin’.  And I said "Right in the middle of this disaster, you guys wanna start fightin’?!"  So I had to settle 'em both down, and Young Joe’s threatenin’ to kick Old Joe’s ass.  "You think you can kick this old man’s ass, come on, bring it on!"  I can’t believe this is goin’ on, right in the middle of this disaster.  So finally I get them calmed down, and the boat actually does wash over the reef.

STEIGER:  You guys pushed it over, it didn’t get shredded.

DENOYER:  Right, it didn’t get shredded.  It got a couple of holes in it, but we got over there.  Finally we threw an anchor out.  Once we got inside the reef, we threw an anchor out the boat would stay there, without blowin’ anywhere else.

STEIGER:  So you had a pretty decent, real live....

DENOYER:  We had a couple of anchors.  We tried throwin’ one earlier.

STEIGER:  What do they call those boat anchors?  Connie has one.  I forget.

DENOYER:  So anyway, once we got inside the reef, threw the anchor so we wouldn’t be driftin’ anywhere else.  By this time it was startin’ to get dark.  And so we have a generator with us, and a long pole with a drop light on it.  So we start this generator, and the light kind of comes on at times, so people could find us.  Because I know Henry and Grace are waitin’ for us.

STEIGER:  They’re gonna go, "Wait a minute, those guys are out there."

DENOYER:  Yeah, "Where are they at?"  And so the next morning, sure enough, we had a Zodiac on this island, one of the locals, a local fisherman that was working for us came in with a Zodiac and found us.  They knew exactly where we were driftin’ at, found us.

STEIGER:  They knew where you’d go, on account of the current.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Hooked us up with another motor, and we made it in.  We made it all the way back, and things were fine.  But in the meantime, Joe and Joe aren’t talkin’ for life now.  They can’t stand each other.  I keep thinkin’ about Joe Greeno and all the BQR interviews I’ve read, and people talk about Joe Greeno, and he did a lot of trips with Whitewater.  He was always swampin’ for Whitewater.  I don’t know that he ever ran a boat for Henry, but he was always out there swampin’ on trips"just a character, just a great guy.

STEIGER:  What do you remember about him?  What jumps to mind?

DENOYER:  His energy.  I mean, he was always smilin’, always had this great smile on his face, always jokin’, a lot of energy.  Played a mandolin, loved to play the mandolin.  When we first started working for Henry, we had a little trailer down in <Fredonia>, right behind the warehouse, we all lived in, in the winter.  None of us had any money, so we were down there, and Joe would be playin’ his mandolin.  He’d be in there, just keepin’ everybody smilin’, because he always had these jokes he’d tell, and just a great sense of humor.

STEIGER:  That’s pretty good if you guys could sit there and laugh in the middle of that deal.

DENOYER:  Oh yeah.  I mean, he was just a wonderful guy, and just funny.  I mean, he’d just keep you laughin’.  No matter what the situation was, he could get you laughin’.  I understand after a while, I think he became a golf pro or somethin’, started teaching golf.  His brother was quite a musician, played guitar and mandolin and fiddle, and actually played with John Denver for a while up in <Colorado>.  So there’s a lot of music goin’ around that family.  Then he got off on the golf thing and was a golf pro.

	Anyway, Joe Greeno.  Once in a while you pick up the BQR or you hear a story and they talk about Joe, Joe Greeno.  Funny guy.  I don’t know where he is now.  He’s probably in <Florida>, <Aspen>, I don’t know where he’s at.

STEIGER:  Boy, you look at all these companies, and you get these casts of characters that cycle through each one.  I remember, yeah, boy, in Whitewater there was a pretty good list of people:  you, and Q [Richard Quartaroli], and Bear, and Jake Luck, and Gloeckler, and Bruce.  Didn’t Rebake [phonetic]....

DENOYER:  Rebake, of course, was a GCE guide, but he did a trip with us.

STEIGER:  Just one.  Was it just one?

DENOYER:  Just one trip.  It was another epic trip, though.  It was a great one.  Molex is a company that makes electrical connections, computer stuff, all throughout the world.  It’s an international corporation.  And they wanted to do a corporate trip with us, and I don’t even remember what year it was"don’t even remember what year.  But anyway, they brought all their presidents from their different businesses all around the world, and all the higher-ups in this company, and they all came down"just to get to know each other, a team-building type experience for the company.  I think they had the president from Japan, president from Switzerland, and the president from the States, and all over the place.  These guys wanted to have meetings.  They’d pull into camp, sometimes they’d want to get into camp early.  They’d have chalkboards set up, they’d give little talks and diagrams, just talkin’ about the business.  And all these guys would sit around and just talk about the business and what they’re gonna do to improve it and get Molex goin’ to be a very good worldwide, high-level corporation.  And so a lot of times we wouldn’t pull out of camp until, say, noon.  We’d leave camp at noon, because they wanted to have these talks.  Then we’d pull into camp again early, and they’d have more talks.  And they didn’t want to hike anywhere.  We couldn’t get 'em to do anything.  They just wanted to have these talks.  And after the talks, of course they wanted to have their toddy, we had to have a cocktail hour.  I don’t know if you remember or not, but Henry ran what he referred to as these super deluxe trips where he’d always have a bar on the trip.  So I was running one boat.  I can’t remember, maybe it was Q running the other boat.  I can’t remember who was running the second boat.  Maybe it was....  I don’t know, we had another guide running a raft also.  Hell, it might have even been Bear.  I’ve got to think of who the other guides were on there.  But we needed a bartender and musician for the trip, and I’d know Michael Rebake for a lot of years, I knew he played guitar, and it just happened we needed a bartender too.  So we asked Rebake to come on this trip, and he said, "Sure."  Henry’s gonna pay him, so he paid him to play the guitar, because these guys wanted some music in the evenings, and also we needed a bartender, so we had Bake as a bartender.  Of all people, you don’t want Rebake as a bartender, man.

STEIGER:  Because he’d drink all of the....

DENOYER:  Drink all the booze, man, exactly.  But anyway, we set this bar up each evening, and the folks, after they finished their talks, then they’d have an hour of cocktails, then we’d feed 'em food, and then they’d go to bed.  And one night we were down there, and everything was done, food was cleaned up, it was just Bake and I and the rest of the crew down on the boat, and we’re sittin’ on this"one boat we had the tiny [rig?], and one whole boat was just for the bar"it had all the hors d’oeuvres and all the booze, and everything"all the mixes and stuff, and the ice on this boat.  And we’re sittin’ there, "Better have us a drink."  So we started breakin’ into the booze, and just havin’ some fun, sippin’ some whiskey and whatever we wanted to indulge in at the time.  And then Bake got pretty liquored that night.  He was walkin’ around this Whitewater rig, and all of a sudden he just falls in the creek, comes around over the side of the boat into the creek.  And Bake, he’s just as funny as hell too, he’s just a great character.  All of a sudden he comes up, he serves [us?] one time.  He says, "I got my chew!"  The only thing he was worried about was his chew.  So he held up this tin of Copenhagen and said, "Ahh!  Saved it!"  But we got him back in the boat, and it was just funny.  One of those funny experiences, the way it all happened.  He was quite the character too, Rebake.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  A lot of them guys.

DENOYER:  I think that was the only trip he ever did with us.  Oh yeah, on that same trip, we had some problems somewhere, someone got hung up in a rapid or whatever.  We ran <Crystal> and ended up camping above <Tuna> on the left there.  Usually some people stop there for lunch or whatever.  We actually camped there with this group.

STEIGER:  This is how many people, would you say?

DENOYER:  Well, I’d say it was two boats.  You’re probably lookin’ at about thirty-six people, and we packed 'em in there"with the bar!  We’re tired, and these guys just wanted to put some miles on, didn’t want to hike anyplace.  I said, "I’m gonna camp there, because it’s time to get these guys havin’ their little talk, and havin’ dinner and cocktails and whatever."  And Mike said, "Well, Mike, you know it’s gonna be low water in the mornin’."  I said, "Yeah."  So we hit <Sapphire> down here.  He said, "You wanna watch out for <Sapphire>.  There’s that hole in there, and that rock might be stickin’ out a bit."  I said, "Yeah, I knew that, Bake."  And so we have our dinner, get up in the morning, sure enough the water’s down.  And we go through.  We’re running a Moravia this time.  It’s a brand new, white, Moravia boat.  And so we line up for <Sapphire>, go through <Sapphire>, right off Adolph.  I go right over that rock!"the rock that Rebake told me about the evening before.  And so we hear this big ol’ "bam!"  I put about a nine-foot crack/slice right in that boat, on the main doughnut.  I have the picture in my library someplace of Bake down there.  He’s got his whole head stickin’ in there.  He looks at me and says, "I’ve never seen a hole this big in a boat before."  So we didn’t bother patchin’ it, we just kind of threaded it back together, and kept the boat from comin’ apart, and just kind of laughed that one off.  Nothin’ we could do about that.  The whole section was shot, but we could keep it together with more of this....

STEIGER:  That was the one good thing about havin’ a lot of tubes under there.

DENOYER:  Right.  And so we kind of laced it back together with more of this parachute cord, and went on with the trip.  Then we got down to <Lava>, and I was gonna run <Lava>.  My concern was is this thing gonna come apart goin’ through <Lava>.  And Bake said, "That’s the only time I walked up to scout <Lava>, because I thought I’d watch your boat go through, because I just knew it was gonna come apart."  The only reason he ran up there, because he said, "I’m gonna see me a wreck here in a second!"  Anyway, it held together.  That’s another thing that happened on that trip.  Michael Rebake.  I think he’s buildin’ furniture, or custom log cabins.  I haven’t seen him in a number of years.

STEIGER:  No.  But I remember him"pretty flamboyant.  (aside about recording equipment, recording paused)  So we were talkin’ about all the characters.  But yeah, just to go back, because on my little notes, that was somethin’.  On the earlier transcript, you just mentioned that that first trip was an epic trip, and that you met Roxanne on there.  I just wanted to hear a little bit more about that.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  That was, of course, my very first trip through the canyon.  Everybody’s first trip has got to be an epic trip.  I mean, just a wonderful, wonderful experience.  The trip started the end of March ’73.  I think it was a nine-day trip with Whitewater River Expeditions.  The guides on that trip were Rick Hilseimer [phonetic], the trip leader.  Stan Jantz [phonetic] was the follow boat.  We had a guy named Monk was a swamper for Rick.  Monk was a taxi driver out of <Aspen>, just kind of a different type of guy.  And the other swamper was a guy by the name of Rod Richardson, swampin’ for Stan.  Rod Richardson’s daughter was married to Henry’s brother, Robin, so that’s how the connection was there.  Rod Richardson was just a great guy.  He’s passed away now.  We called him Sea Daddy, because he reminded of when I was in the military, this old first classman on a trip, who’d been around for twenty-five years in the military, and he was always referred to as the sea daddy on a ship, because he had all these stories to tell, and all the experience, and took care of everything.  And Rod Richardson was like that too, an old guy, and just a character.  He loved to drink beer.  He just slammed down the beer.  Also very nice, very gentle guy.  In fact, after probably my fourth or fifth trip or something like that, he was on the trip with me, and he gave me a signal mirror"first signal mirror I ever had, it was years ago, and I still have that same signal mirror that he gave to me.  Anyway, that was Rod"called him Sea Daddy.

	Anyway, we were on a, I believe, nine-day trip, and just a fun thing.  At that time Roxanne and I knew each other, but we weren’t girlfriend and boyfriend or anything.  Roxanne, myself, and my roommate, and a guy named Jerry Lenz [phonetic], and another individual from Evergreen State College drove down in my van to <Lee's Ferry>.  Actually, we stopped at the campground above <Lee's Ferry> there, we had those little shade things.  They didn’t have those shade deals in there then.  But we camped down.  We went over the Kaibab.  I remember we just barely made it over the Kaibab, because there was a ton of snow on the road.  We stopped in the middle.  It was probably midnight.  We were drunker than skunks, and just throwin’ snowballs at each other.  Bailed off the other side, the trip was leavin’ the next morning.  But we spent the night at the campground up there.  Tip Ladiel [phonetic] stayed up all night, just drinkin’ and playin’ and havin’ a good time.

STEIGER:  So you guys would have been mid twenties or somethin’?  Or you were?

DENOYER:  I was like twenty-one then.

STEIGER:  So you’d been four years in the navy, and you were....

DENOYER:  Yeah, got out of the military two years before that.  It was my second year out of the military, yeah.  So we were just sittin’ there, havin’ a great old time, and then got up the next morning, went down to the Ferry, and Henry Falany and Grace were there.  I didn’t know 'em at that time, but I know they were down there.  Our [Falcon?] members were all down there.  All the students were there.  And it started snowin’ on us.  And Henry and Grace want to delay the trip because of the snow.  And Linda Kahn [phonetic], who we refer to as Dr. Hon.  Do you remember?  You know Dr. Hon?

STEIGER:  Yeah, absolutely.  Maybe we should just explain the "Dr. Hon" real quick, how that came about.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Of course her name is Linda Kahn.

STEIGER:  And she was your professor, and she put together the trip.

DENOYER:  Right, she was my professor, first year at Evergreen.  Second year at Evergreen she was also one of the faculty members.

STEIGER:  Environmental studies or somethin’?

DENOYER:  She was actually a neuro-zoologist"that was her field"but biology was her field of interest.  So I took a lot of biology classes from her, a lot of labs and such.  And so she put this trip together"organized it through Henry Falany and brought the students down.  Of course this is years ago.  That was ’73.  Now here we are in ’06.  I’m gonna say probably sometime in ’94-’95, Dr. Hon, Linda Kahn, started comin’ down and doin’ river trips.  We started doin’ dory trips about, oh, I’m gonna say fifteen, sixteen years ago.  I can’t remember the exact number of years, but we started doin’ dory trips, and Linda wanted to get involved with these dory trips, so I brought her on down to do trips with us.  And she’d always come down, just had a great time.  She got to be what I refer to as a dory snob.  She won’t go back on a motor rig now, she loves the dory thing, so she wants to continue doing dory trips.  She comes down every year on a dory trip.  And one time we were just down there, just chattin’ and carryin’ on and havin’ a conversation with somethin’, and I looked at her and said, "Okay, Hon, will you put that life jacket on, we’re goin’ down there."  And she looks at me, because I called her "Hon", and says, "Well, that’s Doctor Hon to you!" because she had her Ph.D.  Since then, we’ve always referred to her as Dr. Hon, H-O-N.  Anyway, she’s just a wonderful, beautiful person, just a great character, in love with the canyon.  She’s involved with the Grand Canyon River Runners Association, she’s on the board of directors for that, helped put that thing together with Pam Whitney from the git-go, and Maury and all the others that got involved with that.

	Okay, so we’ll go back to ’73 now.  She’s down there on a trip, and Henry and Grace want to cancel the trip because of the snow"or delay it a bit.  Linda says, "No way!"  Linda’s pretty strong-headed.  She’ll get her way, one way or the other.  So anyway, the trip goes, and it’s snowin’ on us at <Lee's Ferry>.  So we put on the river, and another thing I remember about that trip is we thought that they furnished beer for the trip.  It ends up they didn’t furnish beer.  So I just took a six-pack of beer with me, thought I’d be in great shape.  It got me through lunch the first day.  We’re out of beer.  "Where’s all this beer you guys used to furnish?"  Ended up, they didn’t furnish beer.  Of course most of 'em were college students, under age, and they didn’t want to furnish it anyway.

	Anyway, went down, just a wonderful, wonderful experience.  Some of the things that stick out in my mind, I’ll pick out a few camps.  I remember camping at <Nankoweap>.  That was one of the main camps, at <Nankoweap>, we camped at.  I always have a tendency to somewhat remove myself from the group at night.  We’d sit around, we’d play and enjoy, but when I set up my camp, I kind of find someplace off.  I remember laying my sleeping bag down in some area, back behind the trees at <Nankoweap>, and I had this wonderful odor, the smell from the canyon.  I don’t know if it was sanperbina [phonetic] or there was some plant.  I don’t know what it was, actually, but I bet it was sanperbina.

STEIGER:  Well, if it’d been snowin’, I guess it probably had been wet, everything got a drink.

DENOYER:  Oh yeah, everything got a drink.

STEIGER:  Because it must have been raining everywhere"or at least rainin’, if it was snowin’ on you guys at <Lee's Ferry>.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And I just remember sleeping in this all night long, this great smell from the canyon, just wonderful smell of the camp there at <Nankoweap>.  Never forget that one.

	Another camp I remember, we camped also at <Fern Glen> one of the nights down there, and hiked all the way up <Fern Glen> with my sleeping bag at night.  I went all the way up, and I got up to where the Falls camp is coming in, and I put my sleeping bag behind the falls, that ledge that’s back there.  And that’s where I spent the night.  The problem I had....  It was a wonderful experience, I just went up there by myself.

STEIGER:  Frogs?

DENOYER:  The frogs.  The whole shot was just a great experience.  But what bothered me, I was afraid, because it was in a dark canyon, I was afraid I wouldn’t know when it was gonna be light, what time I had to get the hell outta there.  So I kept wakin’ up in the middle of the night, wonderin’ if I should head back down to the boats to get ready to take off.

STEIGER:  You didn’t have a watch.

DENOYER:  Yeah, I had a watch, but I just kept wakin’ up and checkin’ to see what was goin’ on, just thinkin’ I should get back to the boats.  But I figured it out finally and got back in time.  But I do remember just packin’ everything up there, and just having a wonderful night sleeping back there by the falls, that little seep that comes down the very back as far as you can go.

I think I’ve said this in a previous interview/discussions, but I was very impressed by Rick Hilseimer, Stan Jantz, and the crew"just how professional they were, and how they took care of everything.

STEIGER:  Did Henry actually go?

DENOYER:  Henry wasn’t on the trip.

STEIGER:  He just put it on?

DENOYER:  He put it on, yeah.  He wasn’t on it.

STEIGER:  You said it was Rick’s third trip, and Stan’s second trip?!

DENOYER:  Yeah, I think so.  That’s what I recall.

STEIGER:  That’s incredible.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  That was in those days.  You just go down there, and you just ran the boats and figured it out as you went.  Then, we just had to figure it all out.

STEIGER:  What do you suppose the water was runnin’?

DENOYER:  I think it was big water.  Early ’73, I think we had big water then.  I’m sayin’ 20,000-30,000 [cfs], someplace in there.  Dr. Hon gave me a full box of slides from that trip"I mean, a big pile of slides from that trip.  And I remember it was big water.  ’73 was a low-water year, but it wasn’t until later in the year when the water dropped off.  In the beginning it was high, they were releasing quite a bit of water.  Maybe we can [unclear 69:58] we can take a look at the slides, just to see"look at 'em by hand, see if we can figure out what we think the water level might have been.  But I’d say fairly high, big water.

	I don’t know, that trip, to me, was just a tremendous experience.  Again, like I said, I took six-pack of beer with me, which was gone by lunch.

STEIGER:  So then you did the whole thing completely sober.

DENOYER:  No.  No, we had this little stash of whiskey here and there, and various things goin’ on.  I had a friend of mine, named Daniel Harrid [phonetic].  He was on the trip with me, and we were very good friends.  A guy named Jerry Lynn Scrapiron [phonetic], another really great guy, was on this trip.  And we just all bonded and had some great times together.  We’d sip a little whiskey at night.

	Another place we camped was Bass Campground, by the main Bass Camp.  Pulled in there, and dinner was done and whatever.  So myself, Daniel, and another couple of friends, we hiked up above that rock where you can overlook camp.  There’s kind of a sandy area, and I decided that’s where I’m gonna sleep tonight.  We’re gonna sleep right up here in this area.  And we’re sittin’ there with feet hangin’ over the ledge, passin’ this whiskey jug back and forth.  And we’re lookin’ down, checkin’ out the girls down here on the beach, and all the girls kind of are sleepin’ together, a big gaggle of 'em over there, sleepin’ together.  And we started talkin’ about girls and puttin’ our eye on 'em and sayin’ how cute they were and such.  That’s the day I put my eye on Roxanne.  I said, "I think she’s awful cute, and I’d sure like to hook up with her."  Again, we weren’t girlfriend and boyfriend then.  And so that’s when I first had the idea that I’d really like to hook up with Roxanne.

	We’re goin’ on, Bass Campground, the place where I know I really connected with her.  She didn’t know who in the hell I was.  So at the end of that trip, that’s when we pulled into Separation, had dinner, put everybody back on the boats, tie all the boats together, push out in the current, cut the motors off, and just float all night long, and hopefully wake up somewhere close to Pearce Ferry.  We just had a great party, that was just a wonderful time.  People were fallin’ in the river.  I thought it was great, just a hoot of a time.

	And so we started talkin’ with the boatmen.  Stan and Rick"Rick didn’t drink all that much, but Stan enjoyed his whiskey"and they were kind of out of their stuff.  I still had a little bit left in my jug, so I shared it with Stan.  We started talkin’.  He wanted to know if I could help him out with his de-rig, because all the rest of the folks were gettin’ off, and they were headin’ their own ways.  I said, "Well, I’ll just stick with you guys while these folk take off, and I’ll help you de-rig and all."  So I stayed around with the guys, havin’ a great time down there, de-riggin’.  It was hotter than all get-out, but it was still hard work also.  I helped 'em de-rig.  When the truck was loaded and all, we got in the truck and they drove us to the intersection of the main highway goin’ to Vegas and the Pearce Ferry Road, whatever that intersection was there.  Myself and about six other students stayed there that night, because we had to send another vehicle around to pick up my van, which was at <Lee's Ferry>.

STEIGER:  You had to do your own shuttle, that was it.

DENOYER:  Right, it was our own shuttle.  So someone went around, got my van, brought it back.  About four o’clock in the morning they showed up with the van, so we all loaded in the van and took off to Washington State, another 24-hour drive up to <Washington>.  Later that evening is also when Roxanne and I kind of hooked up.  We started talking and kind of befriended each other, and just had some nice conversations, and I just really appreciated talking to her.  Then it went on as we got back into school.  Of course she had a boyfriend and I had a girlfriend at that time, in our own separate places.  Then we ended up breakin’ up with those individuals, and then she and I hooked up.  When I started doin’ river trips, she came down and did every river trip with me.  She’d start comin’ down"after I got to be a guide, she’d come down and swamp for me on my trips.  So she’d do year after year, trip after trip.  Coming down here as a team, we really enjoyed.

STEIGER:  I remember you guys worked so hard, there was so much to do. I  remember the trip that I did, Roxanne ran the whole camp deal pretty much.

DENOYER:  Yeah, [unclear 74:21].  I’d be runnin’ rapids all day, and gettin’ all the glory as this great big river-runnin’ kind of guy, and pull into camp and I sit back and start slammin’ down some beers with the folks, tellin’ stories, and there’s Roxanne, bustin’ her butt, doin’ all the kitchen stuff in the camp.  Yeah, she worked hard, very hard.

STEIGER:  Good situation.  That’s kind of rare, that kind of man-woman team.  I mean, those must have been good years with you guys and Jake and Peggy, because that’s somethin’ that you didn’t see very often.  I mean, I’m tryin’ to think how many successful couples I’ve seen, who managed to navigate all those waters together.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Lucky passengers, to get the benefit of that, I would think.

DENOYER:  It was a wonderful thing.  It really was a good experience together, we grew together.  She’s a hard worker, just did it, just did it"put up with my baloney, still puttin’ up with my baloney.

STEIGER:  Yeah, it’s been a while.  But you knew on that trip, that first one, you decided you were gonna do this.  Was it forever, or did you just decide you were gonna do it next, that was gonna be....

DENOYER:  That was the thing I wanted to do.  "I want to do this.  I want to learn how to do this river thing."  I didn’t have a clue, had never been on a river trip before, didn’t do much in the way of camping prior to that.  I was just amazed by the whole scene.  The whole thing totally blew me away.

STEIGER:  Do you remember, was there a moment when that hit you, that you wanted to do it?

DENOYER:  Oh, I can’t say a moment.  Nothing really sparks me there.  One thing I do remember seeing, when I was in school, before this trip even started, it must have been Dr. Hon who put this clipping out of a newspaper or magazine up on the wall, up on a bulletin board in school, saying about a whitewater rafting trip through <Grand Canyon>, about signin’ up for it.  I remember seein’ that picture, and the same picture I saw in National Geographic of these people goin’ down in these rubber rafts with orange lifejackets and muddy water, and I thought, "God, that looks neat!"

STEIGER:  Yeah, the Mae Wests, the big....

DENOYER:  Yeah.  It was so appealing.  And then once you got down there and actually did it, I’d never accomplished or experienced adventures like that before.  So that was a whole new episode in my life, and a great one, too"still continues.

STEIGER:  I remember talkin’ to Karl Kovalek last winter, and he was talkin’ about Wilderness World’s glory days, and he was telling me about this trip that him and his dad and one of those old classic Wilderness World crews did on the low water of ’77.  And he mentioned your name.  He was talkin’ about how these guys rowed these boats down, and it was just unbelievably low.  And how him and his dad kind of led the way, and it wasn’t such a big deal for them because they’d done all this California boatin’ where you just go and bounce off this rock, where you learn how to say, "I’m gonna bounce from this rock to that rock," you know, bank shot off of here, off of there.  And nobody in the <Grand Canyon>"the crew that had just grown up in <Grand Canyon> had a hard time with that, because they weren’t used to hittin’ rocks.  They didn’t see it.  When they first were lookin’ at things, they didn’t realize that that was even an option.  They were sittin’ there lookin’ at Badger, going, "Well, this is gonna be unrunnable."  And then he stopped and he scratched his head and he goes, "And then we were down there, and we saw one of these motor guys"was it Denoyer or Bledsoe?""he couldn’t remember.  But I think it was you.  Didn’t you do one of those super-low....

DENOYER:  Yeah, we did a number of trips....  (equipment adjusted)

STEIGER:  So ’77, that one....  This must have been, I believe this was spring of ’77.  Wasn’t that when the water got so low, and then they....

DENOYER:  Most of ’77 was a low-water year, actually, wasn’t it?

STEIGER:  Yeah, but I remember goin’ off for a while, because they shut us down for like a month, because it was so low.

DENOYER:  They wanted us to stop running May trips.

STEIGER:  But you got caught down there.

DENOYER:  Henry wasn’t gonna stop his trips.  A lot of people cancelled their trips.  Henry said, "I got the money, I’m not gonna cancel these trips."

STEIGER:  "We’re not givin’ that money back."

DENOYER:  Exactly.  So the park service, not wanting him to run, he went ahead and ran the trips.  And I just remember we’d take off from <Lee's Ferry>, and we’d go upriver.  Our first night camp was up at Three-Mile Bar or someplace.  We wouldn’t even go downriver.  We’d head upriver, set up a camp.  Of course we had the bar there goin’, and musicians, so we’d just set up there and play horseshoes.  The folks had cocktails, and we’d feed 'em.  And we wouldn’t leave until"we’d get out of Three-Mile Bar by noon the next day, we finally passed <Lee's Ferry>.  We’d have lunch up above, and then we’d come on down.

STEIGER:  Now, was that because you were launchin’ on a weekend?  Was it to get around the Sunday water?

DENOYER:  To get around the Sunday water, exactly.

STEIGER:  Because you’d launch on Sunday.  Never mind that, just wait ’til Monday.

DENOYER:  Yeah, exactly.  You couldn’t get by the Paria, it was that bad.  And so then we’d wait until about noon the second day of the trip, we’d pass <Lee's Ferry>, headin’ downriver.  It was low and rocky.  Actually, Henry was on this first trip we did in ’77.  And we got to Tanner, ran <Lava>-Chuar, pulled in over on the left and camped.  And we spent two days there.  And that’s when Earl Leisberg was comin’ in at that time, or Buzz was, every day, to see how we were progressing.  Henry asked them to check on us every day.

STEIGER:  And what was Henry’s plan if you guys were stalled out?

DENOYER:  His plan was to get helicopters in.

STEIGER:  Oh, if he had to bail.

DENOYER:  Right.  It ended up we made it that far and we had to bail.  So we had helicopters come in, got everybody out from <Lava>-Chuar, and that was as far as the trip went.

STEIGER:  But he didn’t have to give the money back.

DENOYER:  Didn’t have to give the money back!  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Because in his mind, "Hey, we got five days in the <Grand Canyon>." 

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And so then it was just....  Well, Jake was on that trip too, so it was myself, Jake, and Henry.  We ended up goin’ on through.  It took us, I’m gonna say, another three days to get the boats through, just the three of us.

STEIGER:  And how did that go?  How on earth....

DENOYER:  It was fine.  We just went down there and figured out the runs.

STEIGER:  Did you back down everything, or most of it?

DENOYER:  Not necessarily.

STEIGER:  Too low to back down some of it.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  You know, it always seemed like there’s always runs there.  Even the water gets low, you take your time, and of course slower water, more time to maneuver.  You can get the boats through, even bigger rigs like that.  You can get 'em through.  And so it took us a while, we hit our share of props, and pulled the motor a lot, just floated over things, but we got on through it, made it on out.  Turned around, went up again, started another trip.  This time, same thing, from <Lee's Ferry>, go upriver; second day around noon pass <Lee's Ferry> and head on down.  On that trip we made it to above <Lava>, and then we called in helicopters again.

STEIGER:  Because you were late, or just because you didn’t think....

DENOYER:  We were late, we couldn’t get any further.  Couldn’t run <Lava>, for one.  It was too low to really get a motor rig through <Lava>.  So we helicoptered everybody out.  We were above <Lava> on the left.

STEIGER:  There was a big ledge on the right that was like too bad to drop.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Exactly.

STEIGER:  Helipad right there, what the hell.

DENOYER:  Yeah, so we got everybody out there.

STEIGER:  Definitely don’t have to give that money back.  (laughter)

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And so Henry wasn’t on that one.  It was Jake and I that were on that one.  I gotta back up a bit.  Before that trip, that was when we got hung up at <Hance>.  It was Jake and I on the trip, and we got down to <Hance>, and that’s when the water was low, there was a bunch of people piled up above <Hance>, just waiting to get through.  Motor rigs couldn’t get through, rowing trips weren’t going through.  There was an OARS trip there, and they were gettin’ their boats on through.  That’s when Jake and I walked all the way out.  You could walk way the hell out in the middle of <Hance>.  That’s where Jake found this motor.  There was an old Mercury layin’ in the boulder pile down there.  I can remember who it was"maybe it was Jake or someone"grabbed it and set it up on a rock in <Hance>.  As these trips were comin’ by in low water, you’d see that old rusted  (STEIGER:  Mercury 20) yeah, hangin’ up there.  So anyway, we just waited and waited at <Hance>, and we’re about ready to get helicopters in to helicopter everybody out.  And that’s when they released enough water to get us through.  So we got through as far as we could get goin’, and we got to <Lava>, pulled in above <Lava>.  And then the water dropped again, and so we didn’t go any further.  It was time to get these people out, so that’s where they came in.

STEIGER:  So you basically spent a couple of days at <Hance>, they gave you a wave, and you went from <Hance> to <Lava>.  You went as far as you could go on that.

DENOYER:  Right.  And then it was time"the people were down here for, I think it was a seven-day trip at that time.  I don’t remember the length of it, but it was time to get those folks out, so we called in the helicopters again, helicoptered everybody out at <Lava>.  And then they went out, the helicopter was comin’ in, they brought two half-gallons of whiskey and a carton of smokes for Jake.  Henry brought that in for him.

STEIGER:  Oh, he just sent it in, because he figured, "Okay, all right."

DENOYER:  Yeah, "Jake’s had enough of this.  We’d better take care of this guy."  And then we made it on out, I can’t remember.  The next day or so we finally got on out.

STEIGER:  Better not have Jake get grumpy on Mike.  (laughter)

DENOYER:  Exactly.  Get that guy his smokes and his booze, he’ll be just fine.  It was a fun challenge, though.  I mean, you just figured it out, figured out where to go.  Of course I listened to Jake a lot, and he could run a good boat.  He really knew how to get through some of these areas.  I guess what got me more than anything in that lower water, were gravel bars.  More than anything else, it was the gravel bar situation.  You could look up and see....  You’re tryin’ to pick the deepest channel through all this gravel.  Sometimes you picked the right one, sometimes you didn’t.  That was, to me, even a little bit more anxious than the rapids themselves, because you kind of knew where you had to go in these rapids.  But on some of these gravel bars, you couldn’t tell.  I mean, you never saw 'em before, for one.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  It’s interesting that <Lava>-Chuar stopped ya’.  I’d have thought somewhere further down, or somethin’ like that.

DENOYER:  Well, Henry thought we should stop there, because we knew we were gettin’ into the gorge, and we didn’t know if we could get out, once we got in the gorge.  But he knew we could get out at <Lava>-Chuar if the water didn’t come up.

STEIGER:  Could chopper out or do whatever.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And he was concerned about droppin’ into the gorge.

STEIGER:  Oh, so it wasn’t like that rapid stopped you, it’s just like that was a place you could make easy contact and all that.

DENOYER:  Yes.

STEIGER:  Yeah, crazy days.

DENOYER:  Yeah, but that was fun stuff.

STEIGER:  Well, you got any really epic trips that come to mind?  I’ve got somethin’.  I don’t know if you want to talk about it or not.  Here, I’m gonna pause this.  (recording paused)  All right, so we’re rollin’.  So let’s just talk about ’83, and talk about that trip that led to"there’s a mark that’s chiseled in the rocks down there at 220, and it’s the highest water since they built the dam.  What was that, 92,000?

DENOYER:  Yeah, 92,000 second-feet.

STEIGER:  How about just tellin’ me about that trip, just how that trip went, leadin’ up to that mark.

DENOYER:  Those ’83 trips, they were just fast blasters.  You could float all day long and still be way ahead of yourself on schedule, so you had to just figure out things to do.  There wasn’t a whole lot in the way of"some of the rapids were washed smooth.  And when you have, of course, <Crystal> goin’ on big, and <Lava> was always big.

STEIGER:  What did you guys do at <Crystal>?

DENOYER:  We walked everybody, and ran right into the trees, just far right.

STEIGER:  Did you do a turnaround?  Or did you get through straight?

DENOYER:  Turned around.  We’d just point the bow to the right and give it everything you could, and end up goin’ sideways, and then around, spun it, and then pulled into the eddy below and load the folks back up.  I think it was July 1, ’83 is when we were camped"it was Richard, Bear, and myself"we were runnin’ a trip together.  And we camped at Middle 220.  Upper 220 was gone.  I mean, it wasn’t campable.  But Middle 220, there were some big bars there, sand dunes, you could camp on.  So we pulled into Middle 220, called it camp, and said, "Another great trip," the last night.  At that time, we pulled out at <Diamond>, I believe.  Maybe it was at <Diamond> then.  And so, as usual, everybody got things goin’, and was takin’ baths and doin’ whatever, and Bear and Richard and I had a little gin and tonic action goin’ on, and we decided to just walk around a bit, check things out.  So we walked upriver, and went up there by ourselves, just lookin’ around.  Actually, we went up to see what Upper 220 was like, and see if it was even a doable thing at all for a camp in the future.  And of course it ended up that wasn’t.

STEIGER:  It was totally underwater?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Well, you could still get some sand there, but it wasn’t that much left of it.  And so was we were comin’ back, we decided we should mark this high water.  After a couple of gin and tonics, it’s just time to do it.  So we went back down to the boats, got a hammer and chisel, brought it back up, and we had this rock picked out.  We tried to figure out something we’d be able to find.  And so there’s points comin’ out of 220 Canyon, there’s a big rock escarpment there, and then you look across the river, and there’s another one directly across the river, there’s another point.  So if we get between these two points, that rock’s gonna be in between these two points, we can find it right there.  So that’s how we decided on the rock.  Of course the rock was a piece of schist right at the high-water mark of ’83.  And so we got in there, the first thing we did was got the chisel and hammer, bent over this rock, and started chiseling the date in.  It was July 1, 1983.  So we’re bendin’ over, lookin’ at this rock, and takin’ another sip of gin, and start chippin’ away, and all of a sudden we realized the thing is upside down, we’re chiselin’ it in upside down.  "Oh man!"  So we got the chisel and started scrapin’ off the first part of the date.  Then we turned around and faced the rock and started chippin’ into it right.  We got the date.  So everybody’s wonderin’ what that little scrape is there on the side, and that’s where we chipped off the mistake.  And we wouldn’t say, just three of us knew, we never said anything to anybody.  And then one year went by, and there was actually a mark, like a survey mark on that rock.  Someone has actually surveyed that rock.

STEIGER:  Oh, you didn’t put the "plus" in there?

DENOYER:  No.

STEIGER:  They did that?

DENOYER:  Somebody put it in after.

STEIGER:  The Namdoors [phonetic] or whoever those guys were.  I’ll be darned.

DENOYER:  Put in afterwards.  Of course we’d never say anything, because, "Oh, man, we’ll get busted if we get caught for chippin’ that date in there."  And then after a while, we said, "It’s worth the cause.  I think it’s worthwhile showing...."

STEIGER:  To let everybody know that this was where the 92,000 was.

DENOYER:  Yes.  It was a nice reminder.  And now there’s a number of people who stop there and look at it and showin’ it to their folks.  So I guess I’m over the scared portion of it anymore.

STEIGER:  Well, river history!  It’d be nice to think that we wouldn’t see that again, but....  Just because that’d mean the dam’s in trouble again"if they’ve gotta let out 92,000.

DENOYER:  Definitely.

STEIGER:  I don’t think they’re gonna want to be doin’ it deliberately, the way things went that last time.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Were you down there in ’83?

STEIGER:  I was, but I missed the"I saw it come up to 72,000.  I saw all the carnage at <Crystal>.

DENOYER:  Were you runnin’ for Fred then?

STEIGER:  Yeah, I was runnin’ for Fred.  Me and Stoner were down there.  We were right in the middle of Georgie and the Cross boats.  And then we took off that trip, and it went up to 92,000.  And the park was gonna close the river, and Fred came and got us, he got me, and said, "C’mon, we gotta fly back, we’re goin’ to this big meetin’.  You gotta tell 'em that it’s okay, we can still run."  Dick McCallum was on the ramp with the Dierker boys.  It was a Grand Canyon Youth trip, and McCallum was like, "Oh, this is no big deal.  Why, we used to run with Georgie, we ran at 120,000.  This isn’t anything big."  So he was gonna go.  "I don’t care.  This is bullshit, we can go."  But there was this big meetin’ in there at the trailer where they were talkin’ about it.  And Fred"I forget who flew us, but we flew right up the river, lookin’ at the 92,000, lookin’ out the river, going, "Oh yeah, that don’t look too bad."  (laughs)  "Oh yeah, there’s a run there.  Sure thing, we can make it."  And then we landed at Marble Canyon and raced down to go to this meeting.  So that was pretty good, I got out of the de-rig, I got out of the cleanup, I got out of the drive back.  That was a great deal for me.  And I assured 'em that yeah, <Crystal> would be fine, if you just knew how to do a turn-around run.  (laughs)  I don’t think that what I had to say carried any weight, but it was sort of the collective weight of the industry.  They had actually stopped trips for a couple of days there.

DENOYER:  Two days.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Because everybody, they’d had all that trouble at <Crystal>.  But then the water came up to 92,000.  And then unbeknownst to us, that was when the dam"I guess they cranked it up and they went and looked out at the dam, and the spillway was breakin’ up, so then they shut ’er back down pretty quick after that, it seemed like.  So that 92,000, I don’t know how long it lasted, but it was only like a couple three days, wasn’t it?"if that.

DENOYER:  I’m not sure.

STEIGER:  You must have got off the next day.  It didn’t drop on ya’, did it?

DENOYER:  No.  No, it didn’t.  I’m not sure how long it was at that, but they must have records of that, though"what was released and how long it was goin’.

STEIGER:  We could probably go online and just punch in that date and see it.

DENOYER:  Probably the <Lee's Ferry> gauge would even have it.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Yeah, those were exciting times.  I hope they don’t....  I believe that it’s not a question of "if," it’s only "when."  Someday that dam will"my gut feeling is that someday Glen Canyon will catastrophically go.  I hope I don’t live to see it.  I’m certainly not rootin’ for it.

	What should I be askin’ ya’?  What should you be sayin’ for the benefit of your unborn grandchildren?  You know?  Or posterity, or history, or whatever.  I know you’ve had a million epic river trips, and I know there’s a million good river stories, too"runnin’ with Jake or whoever"all these guys.

DENOYER:  Yeah, it’s tough to really lock-into 'em.  The stories kinda don’t come out freely.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Where do you see....  It’s a pretty impressive career you’ve had, and I think it’s worked out good for the whole community.  GCE’s still goin’ strong.  You guys have done a good job of upholdin’ that tradition, I think.  And I think you’ve done a really good job of addin’ to it, and addin’ to the community, with addin’ the dories on there and stuff.

DENOYER:  That dory choice, that’s an interestin’ story too.  We, of course, acquired GC a while back.  It was ’86, actually.  GC was not doing rowing trips at that time.  The contract said you could do rowing trips.  And so we decided to start.  I wanted to do some rowing trips.  "Well, what do you want to row?  Do you want to row snouts?  Do you want to row <Yampa>s?  Or Delmars?  Do you want to do dories?"  And I didn’t know.  I’d done some rowin’ trips of mainly the Middle Fork and the Tuolumne and Stanislaus, and rowed the Grand a few times on private trips, but not that much experience rowin’ the Grand.  And so we decided, "Well, if we’re gonna do rowin’ trips, let’s just check things out, try 'em."  So we went up to <Oregon> and bought an aluminum boat.

STEIGER:  From Jerry Briggs?

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Yup, from Briggs, the Rogue River Boat Shop up there.

STEIGER:  Does he own Alumaweld, too?  Or did he just make a deal with 'em, where he gave 'em his design?

DENOYER:  He gave 'em the design, and Alumaweld made the boats for him.  So anyway, we bought one dory.  It was the Kaibab, the first dory we bought.  Brought it down.  And then wanted to do rubber rafts.  We rented a couple of boats from Big Bruce, from Bruce Helene [phonetic], the big fellah.  And so we had, I want to say two, but maybe three rafts and a dory.  And I’d never run a dory before, didn’t know.  I’d been in one for a couple of minutes, switch off with R.D. or somebody.  "Let me get in that and row it for a second."  So I’d do it for just a little bit.  I can’t remember which one of these dory guys it was let me row his boat for a little bit"but not in a rapid, just in some current.

	So we had a dory, and I think three Delmars.  Connie was rowin’, John Toner [phonetic] was on that trip.  Maybe it was just three and myself.  Maybe it was just the three of us.  Of course we had a motor rig.  I gotta think back on this trip"I can’t remember who was on that trip.  The idea was trying to decide if we really wanted to do dories, or wanted to do rubber rafts.

STEIGER:  You’re gonna do rowin’, but what boats?

DENOYER:  What boats to use, exactly.  And so we get down there, and I’ve always used pinned oars, never had feathered oars before, so I couldn’t figure these things out.  So as I’m leavin’ <Lee's Ferry>....  Toner was on, actually, the motor rig"Toner did the motor rig.  And so I’m rowin’ down there, tryin’ to figure these oars out and stuff.  And I’m rowin’ the Kaibab, the dory, and Toner comes by and started talkin’ to be about featherin’ and twistin’ your wrists and stuff and doin’ that.  "Oh yeah, we can do that."  So I started figurin’ that out and gettin’ it going.  Runnin’ down there, just, again, not quite havin’ the knack for runnin’ that dory, but good fun.  Got through there.

STEIGER:  Typical boatman.  "It’s a boat, goddamn it!  Give it to me here!  I’ll just figure this out."

DENOYER:  Exactly.

STEIGER:  "How hard can it be?  Look at those fools that are doin’ it!"

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And so basically I just did all my motor runs.  That’s just the way I ran the thing.  I ran it the same way I’d run a motor rig"<Hance> or <Hermit> or <Crystal> or whichever, that’s how I’m gonna run it.  And I remember after a while it got to be where I just really had a hard time with this thing.  I did the motor run in <Crystal>, and I got thrown out of my boat, and I’m out there swimmin’ in <Crystal>.

STEIGER:  The motor run being left or right?

DENOYER:  It was right.  Yeah, I was runnin’ right.

STEIGER:  So you were pullin’ right.

DENOYER:  Pullin’ right, and didn’t get pulled far enough right, and went in the big wave.

STEIGER:  The new wave.

DENOYER:  Yeah, the new wave.  Knocked me right out of my boat.

STEIGER:  Well, yeah.

DENOYER:  So I just swam, got back into it, and we’re headin’ for the rock garden.  And I said, "Oh, man!  I’m gonna bang and beat this boat up bigger than...."  But for whatever reason, I just maneuvered right on through the rock garden, didn’t hit a thing.  I don’t know how I did that run, but got through there and made it on through.  I kept runnin’ down there, and I got knocked out of my boat at <Fossil>.  [unclear]  Went around a corner, it was Forester.  There’s a rock right there, as you’re makin’ that turn around, make your entrance and there’s a turn comin’ around.  There’s a big rock right there on shore.

STEIGER:  Oh yeah, that’s <Fossil>, I think.

DENOYER:  And I hit that rock with the stern of my boat.  C.C. Lockwood was sittin’ on the stern hatch, takin’ pictures.  Knocked him and his camera into the creek.  He had a good camera, too.

STEIGER:  Was there anybody else in the boat?

DENOYER:  Yeah, Don Saunders was in the boat with me.

STEIGER:  You were probably stern heavy.  That’s why you hit that rock.

DENOYER:  So anyway, binged on that rock.  C.C. goes in the drink.  And then pulled a run off and got him back in.  And there’s some other place, I can’t remember where it was, I ended up in the creek again.  Maybe it was like on ... I don’t know, some other place.  Anyway, we’re gettin’ down to <Lava>, time to run <Lava>, and that’s where everybody just started gatherin’ up there.  There was a couple privates, a couple commercial, there’s an OARS trip, there’s a Dories trip"no, there wasn’t a Dories trip.  There was an OARS trip, a <Diamond> trip, Wilderness trip, GC trip.

STEIGER:  Worst possible scenario.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And here I’ve gotta run this damned dory through <Lava>, not havin’ a clue.  So I’m sittin’ up there talkin’ with everybody I can about it"just tryin’ to figure out.  And I said, "If I had some way of gettin’ out of runnin’ this boat through here, I would do it."

STEIGER:  "Okay, bad idea, that was a nice try, but let’s just forget the whole thing."

DENOYER:  And so I’m sittin’ there, and Roxanne and her sister were on this trip.  I said, "Look, I don’t think you two should ride in the boat with me.  I don’t feel that confident about this run in <Lava>, if I’m gonna run right.  I don’t think I’m that confident about it, so I don’t think you should go.  You should go in one of the rubber rafts."  They went in a rubber raft.  But Don Saunders went with me, and John Toner went with me.  And John’s talkin’ me through this.  We’re up there scoutin’, we’re scratchin’ our heads and figurin’ what we’re gonna do, and talkin’ about just a slight push on the left lateral, and then straighten out for the "V" wave, and tuck the oars when you go through the "V" wave, and then be able to straighten out for the bottom.  Hopefully you’re far enough left you’re not goin’ in the corner pocket.  Okay.  I’m just sittin’ there, nervous as all get-out, about ready to throw up.

STEIGER:  "Bad idea!  What was I thinkin’?!"

DENOYER:  "These damned dories!"  And so we get in there, and John’s behind me.  Saunders in the front bow of the boat.  Toner’s behind me.  I’m rowin’ on through, and just had this incredible run, just a beautiful run, popped out.  I stand up and cheer so loud!  Man, I’m so happy to be through that thing!

STEIGER:  "Good idea!  I knew we could do it!"  (laughter)

DENOYER:  Exactly.  So we just go on through, and there’s a ton of people up there watchin’ me go through.  "Denoyer doesn’t know what he’s doin’, he’s gonna flip this thing.  Let’s get some good pictures of this one!"  So everybody’s up there, just watchin’ this run.  Made it through, just had a great run.  So all the cheers pop off, and everybody’s havin’ a good time.  People are slammin’ down beers.  And so everybody’s pulled in down below at Tequila Beach, Lower <Lava> Beach there.  It’s lunchtime, so everybody’s settin’ up lunch.  I think there were like four commercial companies and maybe three private trips right there, the whole beach was covered with boats"rubber, and one aluminum dory sittin’ there by itself, side-by-side.  And there’s lunch tables goin’ up for all these different companies and all the different private groups.  And everybody starts sharin’, they go back and forth between lunch tables, everybody’s havin’ a great time sharin’ these lunches, and I’m just happy to be through <Lava>.  "These dories are great, man!"

STEIGER:  "I knew we could do it!"

DENOYER:  Yeah, exactly.  And in the meantime, all these folks are here, C.C. gets this idea about gettin’ a great shot of everybody up on all these boats, and all these people.  "It’d make a great shot!"  So C.C. and Connie have a little conversation first, a little discussion, and C.C. climbs up on one of these Lava boulders way back behind camp, up high quite a ways, so he can get a great shot of everybody.  And Connie’s down there talkin’ to everybody.  "We’ve got this great National Geographic photographer, C.C. Lockwood, very professional photographer up there, and he’d like to get a picture of everybody, so we can all get everybody together, just lined up on the beach:  the privates, the commercials, and everybody, with all the boats behind there.  And on the count of three, we moon the guy."  This is what Connie’s sayin’.  She’s settin’ this big thing up, wants everybody to moon him.  And sure enough, there’s gotta be 75-80 people"I don’t know, we’ve got the picture, we can count 'em, how many bodies there were, but everybody’s lined up.  On the count of three, everybody moons, C.C. takes the picture.  It was just a great shot.  He’s got it in that....  Have you seen that picture in his book?

STEIGER:  I think I have, yeah.

DENOYER:  Just a great shot of everybody moonin’.  So that’s where that shot came from.

	Anyway, got through with the trip, and even though I knew I had a hell of a lot to learn about these dories, I thought, "These boats are still so cool.  We’re gonna run dories."  So we end up not doin’ the raft thing, started runnin’ dories.  Went back up, bought some more Alumawelds, which I thought would be great, because we’re gonna bang 'em up and we didn’t have to pull over and repair 'em.

STEIGER:  Fix 'em on the water.

DENOYER:  Didn’t have to do all that stuff.  Ended up, after a while, you figure the better you get, the more you’re not bangin’ 'em up and then the wooden and foam boats"knock on wood"are more aesthetically pleasing.  They’re just a cooler and nicer, quieter, and just more aesthetically pleasing.  So that’s why we switched.  Got one wooden boat, and then switched over to the Air-Ex boats, and that’s what we’re runnin’ now mainly, Air-Ex type boats.  At that time, of course, the first fellah we had help us with the dories deal was Darrell Stewart [phonetic]. And Darrell came in, and he pretty much built our whole dory program.  He came up with the ideas, the type of boats.  He started buildin’ the boats for us, came up with the type of oar locks we should have, types of oars.  On and on it went, until we had the whole thing"you know, we’re still fine-tuning it, but still bit by bit, just working up to the deal we had.  Darrell introduced us to Andy.  He met Andy, and he knew Andy, so we had Andy comin’ in.  I was runnin’ the dories at that time, Darrell and Andy both just showin’ me all kinds of things"how to get a bit better, progress as you go, and learn.  And then we had Chuck and Amy come in and start runnin’ the dories with us, and bit by bit just built crew.  Have yourself now runnin’ boats, Dock’s runnin’ boats.  I see it all changing, and eventually people are fading away.  We had Jan, Darrell’s wife, also runnin’ boats for us.  Maryann at that time, Andy’s wife, was runnin’ boats with us.  And bit by bit, people go their own ways.  Darrell and Jan, of course, passed away, no longer with us"of course not runnin’ the boats.  And some of the folks just don’t run as many trips as they used to.  And so we had to get some more folks involved, getting going on these dories.  Now we have, like bring Irv in and bring Art in.  Benjie’s gonna run a boat this September, so bring new, younger folks in there.  And Alan’s runnin’ boats now.  And so havin’ folks come in, and just getting some more people, getting used to the dory thing, and getting a little experience with those boats.  And I think they’re just great trips, they’re wonderful trips.  And as you know, it’s the first trips we have that book up every year now, are the dory trips.

STEIGER:  Are they still?  They’re still hangin’ in there?

DENOYER:  They’re the first ones.  Yeah.  They’re doin’ great.

STEIGER:  It’s discerning"you ask people, on the ones that I’ve done, "How’d you end up on this one?"  And most of the people that ended up on those are people that have really researched what’s out there, and they go, "This is a neat way to go, and it’s a good deal."

DENOYER:  Yeah, the price is right, and at the same time they’re also wonderful boats.  I don’t have to tell you this, but they’re just wonderful, wonderful boats to get through.

STEIGER:  You know what I love about this"and you might not want to put this on tape"but I love that you don’t do exchanges.  That you just said, "Nah, we’re gonna go the whole way."  I think that’s so important.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Well, you look at yourself, say, if I were a guide"which I am, down there"but if I’m guidin’ down there, the last thing I want to do is stop the trip at Phantom, have folks go out, a new group come in, start a new group from there on down"whether it be rowin’ trips or motor trips, I think it breaks up the dynamics of the trip.  That’s my personal opinion, but I also understand the reason people do the split trip.

STEIGER:  They’re more marketable and all that.  But if I was gonna do it, I don’t mind doin’ it if it’s everybody out and everybody in.  What’s really tough is when....

DENOYER:  Split it up, yeah.

STEIGER:  Yeah, just because....  I mean, it’s more work, but sociologically it’s really hard.

DENOYER:  Oh yeah, definitely.

STEIGER:  Psychologically or whatever.

DENOYER:  So our dory program’s come a long ways, and I think in a very positive thing.  I mean, I think they’ve developed into some very nice trips.  We’re still tweakin’ it, still have a lot to learn.

STEIGER:  How’s the motor deal goin’?

DENOYER:  Motor support, you mean?

STEIGER:  No, the motor program.

DENOYER:  Great.  We’re sellin’ all those trips.  It’s all goin’ great.  We have a great new, old and young crew comin’ in.  We have folks like Bob Dye’s [phonetic] still down there runnin’ trips and doin’ the motor thing.  Bob’s also doin’ dory trips too.

STEIGER:  I understand he’s really good at it, too.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Yeah, Bob’s good.  He’s a good, good fellah.

STEIGER:  Really good.  Connie was sayin’ the trips that she’s done with Bob, that he rows a really good boat.

DENOYER:  Yeah, he does.  But the motor trips are doin’ just fine.  Of course we run more motor trips than anything else.

STEIGER:  It’s pretty funny.  We went and did this trip"and I’m talkin’ O.C. and here’s O.C., he just swamped for Emory.  And then Ann Marie’s takin’ her mom down.  And then here’s Emily.  I mean, here’s these guys, and we go down, and we run into the other dory trip, and there’s Duffy and Elisa, and they’re all, "Yay!  Whoopie!" they’re doin’ it.  And here’s Cash Clepfer [phonetic] and all these guys that are the children of these guys that are our generation.  Well, and pretty quick Katie will be doin’ it.

DENOYER:  Katie, yeah.

STEIGER:  It’s like, "God, that happened fast!"

DENOYER:  I know, it’s so amazing.  I think it’s a wonderful thing.  I love the idea.  I was on Ann Marie on her first trip through with her own boat.  And just watchin’ those kids.  We all knew 'em since they were babies"now here they are runnin’ the show now, runnin’ the boats.  Art and Fred, those guys doin’ it.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I’m so proud of those....  They’re all such great people, I’m so proud of 'em all, I really am.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  I just finished a trip with"I don’t know if I told you this or not"Katie just swamped for me on my last eight-day trip I did.

STEIGER:  How’d that go?

DENOYER:  It was just wonderful.  She was my helper on the trip, and she did it all. She busted her butt down there, and it was just wonderful.  And I get so much feedback from everybody on the trip, how great....  They love to see that daughter-father relationship, and how we work together on it.

STEIGER:  That’s good that she got into it.

DENOYER:  She’s all over it, too.  I was a proud father.  It’s just an amazing thing to see.  It’s good stuff.  I can imagine....  I’ve never seen O.C. get so emotional as the last night on Ann Marie’s trip.  You know how it is, you give a little talk, we presented her with a book with everybody signing it and stuff.  Then O.C. was gonna come up and say something about Ann Marie, and he got up there and started talkin’.  He tried to talk, and he just choked up.  I’ve never seen him get that emotional.

STEIGER:  I’ve never seen him get choked up about anything.

DENOYER:  Right.

STEIGER:  Or if he did, it wasn’t like it was gonna show.

DENOYER:  He got up there and put his arm around Ann Marie and he started chokin’ up.  "Oh, God, I got a little emotional."  So he walked away and sat down.  Then twenty minutes later he comes back up and says how proud he is of her.

STEIGER:  Okay, bad idea.  (laughter)  Never mind any words.

DENOYER:  Yeah, that’s wonderful stuff.  And you look at all the folks, just look down the industry.  Gloeckler’s son, T.J., is down there.  He’s runnin’ boats.  So you have....

STEIGER:  I’ve never even met him.  I didn’t realize that.  So he’s runnin’ for them guys now?

DENOYER:  Yeah, he’s runnin’ for ARR.  You pick the companies, and they’re all down here just....  Look at Elliotts.

STEIGER:  Yeah, those kids.  Alexis and Anthea, and then what’s the boy’s name?  They’re all so level-headed!  How did they do it?!

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And you’ve got Trent Keller in there managin’ Western now.

STEIGER:  I didn’t realize that.

DENOYER:  Lynne’s son.

STEIGER:  And he’s a good egg, and always has been.  Really good guy to see.  Tiffany George.

DENOYER:  I’ll bet goin’ down the companies, I think you’ll find the same thing just goin’ on.

STEIGER:  And then there’s these old guys just hangin’ on by their fingernails.

DENOYER:  I’m hangin’ with you, though!

STEIGER:  I used to go, "Oh no, you’re not gonna see me be a thirty-year-old boatman.  No way!"  And now it’s like, "I’m just gonna do it as long as I can.  I’m just gonna keep doin’ it ’til they tell me I can’t.

DENOYER:  Myself included, Lew.  I’m gonna keep goin’ ’til we can’t.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  You know what’s interesting....  I mean, now we’re just blatherin’, but I was talkin’ to Stewart Reeder last night, and he was sayin’ his first trip was 1965, and he went, and it was Jack Currey’s first trip.  It was the first Western River Expeditions trip that Jack Currey ever ran.

DENOYER:  Was Paul on that one?  Probably not.

STEIGER:  I don’t think so, no.

DENOYER:  Paul met him at a massage parlor in Salt Lake Athletic Club or somethin’.

STEIGER:  Yeah, this was Jack Currey, and I forget, Earl Staley maybe.  But the thing was, Stewart went because his dad said, "We gotta do this, ’cause they’re gonna dam the <Grand Canyon>.  We gotta do it now."  Stewart was twelve years old.  "We gotta do this because they’re gonna dam the <Grand Canyon>.  We gotta do this so we can see it before they do that."  I’m so glad they didn’t do that.  It was so cool just to think about.  I mean, I never heard anybody say that, that it was actually that early where they thought about maybe it was gonna....  Anyway, I’m glad they didn’t do that.  Glad we’ve gotten to do it this long.

	Do you think we’re at the end of the trail in terms of the evolution of the equipment?

DENOYER:  No, not at all.  That’s why you have to talk to Ron.  We have to get that together, talk with Ron Smith.  There’s gonna be more things developing, bit by bit.  Another boat design’s gonna come up.

STEIGER:  Is he workin’ on one?

DENOYER:  He’s worked on 'em forever.  He’s still got ideas.

STEIGER:  He’s got 'em still sittin’ there.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Let’s face it, this thing came up in the sixties, and we’re still using the same deal.  There’s definitely room for....  One thing I think [unclear] is we need the guide in the"I’m referring to the motor rig"you need the guide in the middle of the boat, instead of at the back of the boat.

STEIGER:  Just so he can talk and be with the people.

DENOYER:  And do interpretive stuff, yeah.  There’s a way they can design a boat to figure out all that.

STEIGER:  It’s gonna be complicated.  It would be nice if you could just push a button and lift the motor straight up, all the way out of the water.  Push the button, put it back down in.

DENOYER:  Oh, they’ll come up with it, I think.

STEIGER:  It’s gonna be complicated, though.

DENOYER:  You get the youth in here with this new energy, and it’s still gonna evolve.  I think it’s still gonna evolve.  The thing is, you need that flexibility, though.  That’s why this has worked so good for so long, being able to flex between the two frames.  And that’s what’s kind of the savior on a lot of these boats.

I might want to see maybe smaller groups coming in, trip size getting smaller, which might mean you could do a smaller boat, like a Zodiac type situation, or somethin’.  I don’t know what they’re gonna end up doin’.  Like right now you have maximum group size is twenty on the spring and shoulder seasons.

STEIGER:  Really?  That’s the new plan?

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  That didn’t used to be that way, did it?

DENOYER:  No.  Now you can have twenty guests, so now we’re gonna have ten people per boat.  You can have twenty-four actually"two crew members on a boat"but there’s only gonna be ten guests on a boat, which is a nice feeling on a boat.  It’s a great trip to run.  Cuts into the finances, for sure.  And less accessibility for the public.

STEIGER:  What jumps out at me is you look at these areas where camps are few and far between, and it doesn’t make sense to me to spread these people out more.  There’s only a few big camps.  If they want to keep the steady flow of people through, but they’re breakin’ 'em into smaller groups, it just seems like it would increase the competition for camps.  I hate to say it, but I think we’re gonna have to have cots.  Seems like it’s gonna be the only way.  I know it’s a bad thing to say, but if the sand keeps goin’.  Either that, or they’re gonna have to go to a steady flow.  I was talkin’ to Steve Carothers, and he said if they went to a constant 8,000, that’d keep the beaches around a lot longer.  And every now and then, have a beach-building flow and then forget about it.  Just base load Glen Canyon, forget about peaking power.  Otherwise....  Do you think the beaches are littler?  Or do you think that’s a bunch of baloney?

DENOYER:  No, I think the beaches are lower, yeah.

STEIGER:  I think so, too.  And I think when it’s up there at 20,000, it’s tough to find camps now.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  Yeah, the cot thing, boy, sure don’t want to go there.  Went to the chairs this year.  That was a big one for us.

STEIGER:  How do you like it?

DENOYER:  It’s good.  (laughter)  I fought it for years, but....

STEIGER:  We all did.  But you get in 'em and you sit in 'em, it’s like, "Yeah, okay."

DENOYER:  "These are all right."

STEIGER:  Yeah.  They really are.  That was a huge one.  I like what it does socially.  Because without 'em, everybody kind of has to go off and find a good seat somewhere, and it’s really nice to just put 'em in a circle and everybody sits around and eats dinner together.

DENOYER:  Yeah, it’s good.

STEIGER:  Have a cup of coffee in the morning together.

DENOYER:  Definitely notice the difference there.

STEIGER:  And easier for us old people.  (laughs)  It’s a little easier on the lower back.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  I think things are still gonna evolve from an equipment standpoint.  It wouldn’t surprise me to see us getting away from gasoline, goin’ to the fuel cells and such"electric motors.

STEIGER:  Could be.

DENOYER:  Yeah, I see that comin’ down the road"which I think’s a positive thing.  Nothin’ wrong with that at all.

STEIGER:  No.

DENOYER:  Yeah, it’s gonna be interesting to see how the whole industry evolves.  You just don’t know.  So many things, who knows what’s on the horizon.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Well, it’s sure been a fun ride.

DENOYER:  It definitely has.  Still is, man.  Still is.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Okay, well here we go, next trip, knock on wood.

DENOYER:  Yeah, I’m lookin’ forward to that one.  You and I, Irv, and Doc, correct?

STEIGER:  Yeah.

DENOYER:  Good deal.

STEIGER:  All right.  Well, I’m gonna shut this thing off.

(recording turned off and on)

DENOYER:  Sometimes it evolves from being a guide to being an owner of a company.

STEIGER:  That’d be a good thing to talk about.

DENOYER:  Yeah, but I’m not sure it’s appropriate.

STEIGER:  Well, let’s just talk about it.  We’ll throw it out, if it isn’t.

DENOYER:  I don’t know if it’s good or not.

STEIGER:  I think that’s really good, because that’s a fairly unique experience.

DENOYER:  Well, but there’s a number of guides that have gone through this, though.  A lot of guides want to do the boating thing, and eventually they realize it’s tough on guides, building a future in the river industry, if you don’t own the company.  What are you gonna do?  You’re there as long as your body holds up, and then you have to go find another thing.  And that’s why the whole Whale Foundation thing, and why people get depressed over this whole scene.

STEIGER:  And by then it’s a little late in the game to find somethin’ else.

DENOYER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  That’s the hard part.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  So I don’t know, I’m not on a track or anything here with what to say or anything.

STEIGER:  Well, we can just blather on, and if we don’t like it, we can just cut it off.

DENOYER:  It’s like when you get into this, and you just kind of see.  What I saw personally was just"I saw the dead end.  I said, "I want to work for Henry until I can’t work for him anymore, until my body gives out.  Then I’m gonna be out there tryin’ to figure out what to do."

STEIGER:  And you saw that early on.

DENOYER:  Yeah, I saw it a while back.  But everybody’s doin’ the same thing.  I mean, all these guides now are in here, but a lot of 'em have figured out different lifestyles, and they have other things going on, other than the boating thing.  But they’re still doin’ that.  But there are still those that are locked into boating, period.  I don’t have an answer for what to tell 'em.  It’s not like everybody can have their own company and have the security of having their own company.  But you gotta go into other aspects, and make it work from the beginning.  A lot of these guides, I think, need to know that when they get into it, that you gotta look down the road.  It’s like we didn’t look down.  Initially, we didn’t look down it, we just wanted to run river trips.

STEIGER:  Well, you did, but a lot of us didn’t.  So what would you say?

DENOYER:  I’m just saying that people should plan.  I mean, the guides, there’s a lot of counseling going on now with the river guides and such.  I think it’s just a wonderful thing, but everybody has to be aware for most of the folks, there’s an end down there.

STEIGER:  We had Sandy Reif [phonetic] on this trip, whose been involved with the Whale Foundation, and I couldn’t believe it.  I got to talkin’ to her about that one day, and she said they have stopped nine people from committin’ suicide.

DENOYER:  I’ve heard similar stories.

STEIGER:  I had no idea that they’d even....  I mean, I’d heard....

DENOYER:  I didn’t realize it was that big of a deal myself, until I talked to a few people"McCallum bein’ one of 'em.  He said, "Yeah, we’ve actually intervened on some things and made it work."

STEIGER:  That’s pretty good.  That’s really good.  I figured they’d helped a couple guys dry out, but that’s pretty good.  It’s interesting that you bring it up, just because....  I mean, if they’ve saved nine people....  I’m tryin’ to think if I know of anybody.  It’s hard to say, because how many people didn’t make it, that cycled through this experience.  I’m sure there’s a few.  I mean, we know of a couple of 'em.  You think of all these colorful characters, and then they’re just gone and nobody knows quite where they are, and you sit around and you go, "Whatever happened to old So-and-So?"  It can be a lonely, scary thing.

DENOYER:  Yeah.  And I think as long as people are more aware of it now, that there is an end down there to this river runnin’ thing.  I mean, you go on and do private trips, or trips once in a while, but as far as boating for bucks type of deal, making a living or employment out of boating, there becomes an end to it, and everybody just has to be aware of that, and maybe something"which I think they’re doin’.

STEIGER:  The earlier you are aware of it, the earlier you start plannin’ for it.

DENOYER:  Can plan, exactly.  Yeah.  I think the Grand Canyon River Guides, as a community"which they’re probably doin’, I don’t know"but makin’ everybody aware of it initially, say that’s something that everybody should know, it doesn’t go on forever.  There’s a few who can’t make it go on forever.

STEIGER:  Grand Canyon River Guides is just a herd of cats.  (laughs)  You know, I mean, geez Louise, it’s pretty amazing that it’s hung in this long.

DENOYER:  I think it’s a wonderful thing, that whole deal.

STEIGER:  Kenton Grua, "Hey, we need to get together and start an association of river guides."  "Oh, Jesus Christ, Kenton, are you out of your mind?"  "No, no, we can do it!  It’ll work!"

DENOYER:  And it is working.  I think it’s working great.  The best thing to come out of that is that BQR.  I think that’s just the most amazing thing.

STEIGER:  That was the product of so many.  Brad Dimock.

DENOYER:  A lot of effort, big effort on Brad’s part.

STEIGER:  Effort and talent"vision.  And now Mary and Catherine.  Those guys kind of took it over for him, because he just ran out of gas on it.  He didn’t really run out of gas, but I think he wanted to do other things, and he realized that he had other things he wanted to do with his life.  But those guys really have stepped in and done a great job too.

DENOYER:  Yeah, that’s good.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Well, all right then, I’m shuttin’ this thing down.



