CHARLIE CLARK INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-21



[BEGIN SIDE A]



This is George Babbitt of <Flagstaff> speaking. We are today interviewing Charlie Clark, one of the real old-timers of Northern <Arizona> and <Coconino County>. Mr. Clark lived in <Flagstaff> for many, many years, and is at present residing in <Phoenix Arizona>. I understand that Mr. Clark is, if not the oldest living A-l Cattle Company cowboy, he is undoubtedly one of the very few who are still living.





Babbitt: Charlie, what year did you come to <Flagstaff>? 



Clark: I landed at <Flagstaff> June 15, 1883. 



Babbitt: How old were you at that time, Charlie? 



Clark: I was fourteen--fifteen that fall. 



Babbitt: That makes you eighty.... 



Clark: I'll be eighty-one this year. 



Babbitt: Did you come out with your folks? 



Clark: I came with my father. 



Babbitt: And you came to <Flagstaff> from what place? 



Clark: From <Concord New Hampshire>. 



Babbitt: How did you happen to come to <Arizona>? 



Clark: Well, my uncle was one of the first white men that ever settled in Northern <Arizona>. 



Babbitt: And what was his name, please? 



Clark: John Clark. 



Babbitt: When did he happen to come to <Flagstaff>? There was no town. 



Clark: [Would you like some of my uncle's history?] 



Babbitt: I'd like some of it, yes. 



Clark: Well, I'll tell you how he happened to come to <Arizona>. He was a sailor boy. He started out on a ship, went around the Horn, landed in <San Francisco>. The gold excitement was on there, and he skipped his ship, run away from his ship. He fooled around with the mines a little while, and couldn't do any good. In the meantime, some Australian sheepmen had shipped sheep in there on those islands off the coast, and he got a job working with them. Went over and took charge of one of those islands for the Fowler [phonetic] brothers. 



Babbitt: (unclear) Catalina Island, down in there somewhere? 



Clark: I couldn't tell you what particular island it was. So anyway, he worked several years there for them and got a little money ahead and finally made a deal with them to take some of their sheep over onto new land on (unclear). Well, he settled at <Marysville>. 



Babbitt: <Marysville California>? 



Clark: Yeah. And he used to (unclear) sheep up there (unclear). That was way before the Civil War, way back. Well, (unclear). Well, they pushed him--he finally had sheep of his own by that time--clear over to <Bakersfield> is where he made his last stand. And the people (unclear) across the country had told him what a great country this was over in Northern <Arizona>--nobody there a'tall, lots of grass, lots of water. So Bill Ashurst and Frank Hart.... 



Babbitt: Was Bill Ashurst Senator Ashurst's father? 



Clark: Yes. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Clark: He was my uncle's partner. Frank Hart, they all banded together and came over into <Arizona>. Hart settled up on Hart Prairie. (unclear) My uncle and Bill Ashurst went south of <Flagstaff>. The first year we camped with (unclear) while they looked the country over. 



Babbitt: Were they the only white men in that country then? 



Clark: At that time. (unclear) 



Babbitt: About what year would you say it was? 



Clark: (unclear) in '76,1 know that. 



Babbitt: Before '76. 



Clark: (unclear) But I do know that they wanted to go over into <New Mexico> and get a wagon train, fifty or a hundred wagons, and they'd load their wool at <Flagstaff>--where <Flagstaff> is, or somewhere there--(unclear) and haul their wool clear to <Kansas City>. 



Babbitt: By wagon? 



Clark: By wagon. It took just a year to make a round trip, to haul their wool to <Kansas City>, and haul supplies back. They just made one trip a year. 



Babbitt: Were those wagons hauled by oxen? 



Clark: That took all their wool (unclear), all their money. They didn't have money enough to pay their sheepherders. 



Babbitt: Were those wagons pulled by oxen or horses or mules? 



Clark: Oh, hell, I think they were pulled by horses. I'm pretty sure, (unclear) deep water here. 



Babbitt: In other words, they spent about all they had coming by getting the supplies back in for all year. 



Clark: Took their entire clip to pay the expenses. I know he said he didn't have any use for the wool anyway--just about a break-even proposition. So they laid the railroad in there, and they had a lot of tie choppers. And, well, the railroad had come into Albuquerk [i.e., <Albuquerque>]. This is later. The engineers surveying the railroad, they clipped a pine tree there, up on the old Clark (unclear), put a flagpole up to celebrate the Fourth of July there. 



Babbitt: Do you remember just where that was? 



Clark: Yes, I know how it was. Yes, I know how it was. 



Babbitt: Did it have the old John Clark home out there somewhere? 



Clark: No, no. It was more of a little log cabin (unclear). 



Babbitt: That's all right, just go ahead, John. 



Clark: Well, they used to talk about going up to the flag pole after that. That's the only designation we had for it. They had a commissary up there, the railway company, for the tie choppers and fellahs. So when they got some supplies in, didn't have to go anywhere for 'em then. They could go right up there and get 'em-pay the price and get 'em. By that time, they were gettin' civilized. 



Babbitt: Do you remember about where the (unclear). 



Clark: In 1838 (unclear), Old P. J. Brannen come over there and built a store. He built that old stone place there where Babbitts have got a store now. They bought it afterwards, on Railroad Avenue. 



Babbitt: Railroad Avenue and San Francisco Street. 



Clark: Well, Old P. J. Brannen built that in '82. His uncle had a store over in <Prescott>, but he went into company with P. J.--it's P. J. and Company--and started him in business over there at <Flagstaff> in '82. See? They didn't have any post office there. And so they had a meeting there. My uncle was at the meeting, and Bill Ashurst was at the meeting. I heard him tell about it several times. Somebody-there was only a few of 'em, just a handful--says, "Well, why not call it Flagpole? Everybody knows it as the flagpole." Old P. J. said, "No, that sounds pretty crude. Let's call it <Flagstaff>. That's more like it." So they called the town <Flagstaff> and they got a post office in the name of <Flagstaff>. That's absolutely true, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Do you know the names of any of the other men who were at the meeting when they named the town? Ashurst and your uncle. 



Clark: (unclear) so darned long ago. 



Babbitt: P. J. Brannen. 



Clark: P. J. Brannen and (unclear) Ashurst and my uncle. I know three of'em. 



Babbitt: Ed Whipple, I guess, was there too. 



Clark: No, Ed wasn't there. Ed was an old-timer, but Ed didn't come. He was there before that time, went through there. I couldn't swear that he wasn't there at that time, because he didn't come back to Flag until about '85 again. He went off somewhere and come back again, about '84 and '85. 



Babbitt: Well, then they got the post office started. 



Clark: Then they got the post office there. Well, that place up there, Bill [Hawks?] built the first cabin to be built there. Bill Hawks took that place there, the place where the high school is. 



Babbitt: Is Hawks Tanks out near the <Grand Canyon> named after him? That same Hawks? 



Clark: Yeah. And Old McMillan, Tom McMillan got it from Bill Hawks-had some sheep corrals there. When my uncle sold out his sheep, he sold his sheep in '82, for a lot. He saw Tom McMillan had some. And Tom (unclear) thousand dollars on the sheep. And he wanted to take that place. He didn't have it. I think McMillan paid fifty (unclear). 



Babbitt: Was that the old John Clark Ranch, as we now know it? 



Clark: That's the place up there where the high school is. 



Babbitt: Yes. 



Clark: So we came here in '83. We come on short money. We didn't have any money, only a few dollars. 



Babbitt: Who was with you, your folks? 



Clark: My father, just my father. 



Babbitt: What was his name? 



Clark: Asa. 



Babbitt: Asa Clark. 



Clark: So my father told my uncle, "You go ahead and take that off of Mac, and I'll give you the thousand dollars for it. I believe I can make a livin' on it." (unclear) nice farming land up there. (unclear) hay and potatoes--everything. So they agreed to it, and my father took the place. That was '84, I think. 



Babbitt: What did you grow up there, Charlie? 



Clark: Potatoes, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Was there any community there at that time? 



Clark: Yes, the town was growing. 



Babbitt: Starting to grow then. 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: How many people, about, would you say were there then in 1885 or '6? Were there 500 people? The big lumber mill was there? 



Clark: Yeah. Must have been 300-500, (unclear) the mill. 



Babbitt: That's what most of the (unclear). 



Clark: That was the biggest settlement up there until the mill, Old Town. I think bigger than the town was, at one time. I was going to say, my father got that place for a thousand dollars. It was on the university section, and we kept gettin' letters from <Washington> and everywhere to [tear down his fence?] (unclear) and vacate, get off of that. (unclear) title to it. Just (unclear) no deeds or (unclear). Well he got scared and he thought he was gonna lose out on the whole thing. In the meantime my uncle married George (unclear)'s sister. She (unclear) place to live. He come back to Flag. And my father said, "The woods is full of (unclear). Thousand dollars (unclear)." (unclear) built that house. 



Babbitt: Was that that big two-story house? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Lovely home there. 



Clark: They built that. It didn't cost much money at the time. He traded hay for lumber. My uncle said, "What would you take for it?" He wanted the place. He said he'd take $3,000 for it. "All right, I'll give you $3,000." That was in '88, I think. 



Babbitt: Your father was still there, though, later on, wasn't he? He didn't leave the company. 



Clark: Oh, no, he always lived there (unclear). "This place isn't worth any more now than when you sold it. You're a darned fool to give him that much money. Give him his thousand dollars back." (unclear) In fact, my father wouldn't do it. So a big row was on. So each one of 'em picked a man, and them two picked another man to arbitrate it. They both agreed they'd take whatever they said. So (unclear) and George was the other one. (unclear) "There's only one way we can do this, we'll just split the difference, give him $2,000." That made my father [mad?]. So he got $2,000 and they never spoke to each other from that day 'til the (unclear). 



Babbitt: They were brothers, weren't they? 



Clark: Twin brothers. Never spoke to each other 'til the day they died. 



Babbitt: I remember hearing something of the old Clark feud. I didn't know just what the basis of that was. 



Clark: (unclear) uncle got the deed to the place afterwards. He sent to <Washington> and got a deed to it. 



Babbitt: Wow. Well, what did your father do after he sold the ranch? Still (unclear) stockmen (unclear)? 



Clark: Oh, no, no, no, no. Him and Charles Babbitt went in the hog business there, (unclear) early nineties. They were in the hog business, over on that whole side of the hill over there, in town there. I guess they had hundreds of hogs there, just raisin' the dickens. 



Babbitt: How did your Uncle Asa do? What was he doing there? 



Clark: That was my father, Asa. 



Babbitt: I mean your Uncle John. 



Clark: He never did anything. He sold out to [Broadman?] brothers (unclear) Flag. 



Babbitt: In those early days, did they ever have any trouble with the Indians? 



Clark: No. No real trouble. Six hundred Indians were in <Flagstaff> at one time. 



Babbitt: Navajos? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Were they on the rampage? 



Clark: Well, Bill Roden [phonetic] was always havin' trouble with the Indians. Not Bill, his father. From the time they settled down there on the river, they always had trouble with Indians, because they tried to fence it up. And there was an old Indian crossing that had been there for years and years (unclear) tear the wire down again. Always had trouble. So they came up there and swore out a warrant for the chief, Old (unclear). 



Babbitt: What was the chief's name? 



Clark: Bowatin. [phonetic] They swore out a warrant for him. John Francis took the warrant, went down there, and (unclear) at his hogan and (unclear), brought him to <Flagstaff> and put him in jail. (unclear) went up the next day, or the second day, 600 Indians went into town. 



Babbitt: Were they going to take Bowatin? 



Clark: They did take him. 



Babbitt: Did they have rifles? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Were they pretty mean? 



Clark: And darned glad to give him away, they let 'em take him. They had Old Riordan, he was interpreter. He used to be agent over there. 



Babbitt: That was D. M. Riordan? 



Clark: And he was the interpreter. And Old D. M. said there's only one thing you can do, turn him loose and get rid of him. 



Babbitt: About what year was that, Charlie? 



Clark: Oh, (unclear). I never was any good.... 



Babbitt: About '85, somewhere along in there? 



Clark: Oh, no, no, no. That was in the early nineties. But I don't know the particular year. 



Babbitt: Well, that's close enough. You said that you were probably the oldest living A-1 cowboy? 



Clark: Oh, I was a kid when Old Bulwinkle hired me. 



Babbitt: Bulwinkle, he was the famous fellow used to ride in on those fast horses to <Flagstaff>? 



Clark: Yes. 



Babbitt: Who started the A-l Cattle Company? 



Clark: The Mormons. 



Babbitt: Which Mormon was it, do you remember? 



Clark: No. 



Babbitt: Wasn't it the head man's son-one of the head men of the Mormon Church? 



Clark: I was trying to think. 



Babbitt: Brigham Young? 



Clark: No, his son. It was one of his sons, I think, that started it. 



Babbitt: Their headquarter ranch was up in Fort Valley? What'd they call that place, Fort.... 



Clark: That was Fort Valley. 



Babbitt: Fort Valley. 



Clark: They had a stockade there. 



Babbitt: Was that to keep the Indians out? 



Clark: I guess so. (unclear) It was at least ten feet high (unclear) stockade of logs set in the ground. 



Babbitt: That started about the eighties, I imagine, sometime along in there? 



Clark: Well, it was there when I came there. 



Babbitt: And you came in '83? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Was that a pretty good-sized outfit? 



Clark: Oh, yes, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Where did their range extend? 



Clark: It extended all over the country there. That was the main headquarters there at Fort Valley. 



Babbitt: Did it go up to the <Grand Canyon>? 



Clark: Their winter quarters, they used to keep a camp over there at Cedar Springs. They had all the country they wanted then. 



Babbitt: There was no Forest Service then? 



Clark: Had all that country north of <Flagstaff> there. That was all theirs. And (unclear) to the Colorado River. 



Babbitt: That was their summer and winter range? 



Clark: That winter I worked for 'em, and that fall. We gathered a thousand head of beef. 



Babbitt: Was it really fat stuff, just grass-fed cattle? 



Clark: Good stuff. 



Babbitt: What sort of cattle did they run? 



Clark: Oh, (unclear) old longhorns. They had these old Texas longhorns, most of the people, in that country. But they had what they called a shorthorn that they would breed in, and it was bred from that, most of it. 



Babbitt: They had some Durham stock, too, I suppose. 



Clark: That's what I mean, shorthorns. 



Babbitt: Shorthorned Durham. 



Clark: That's what they were breedin'. 



Babbitt: About how many cowboys do you suppose they had, Charlie? 



Clark: At that time, about ten or twelve. 



Babbitt: And they had several thousand head of cattle. So you've got a thousand head of beef, they must have run.... 



Clark: Two bulls on that outfight: Wainwright and.... Oh, what's the name of the fellah on the Yankees? Ruppert. 



Babbitt: Oh, Ruppert! Was he one of the owners of that? 



Clark: Ruppert owned the A-l Cattle Company. They bought it. 



Babbitt: They bought it from the Mormons? 



Clark: They bought it, Ruppert and Wainwright. 



Babbitt: Well, then afterwards, Babbitts bought the.... 



Clark: Babbitts got the name. They shipped all the cattle, shipped 'em out. 



Babbitt: That's now part of the CO range, isn't it? 



Clark: It's CO range now. 



Babbitt: Did you have any trouble with rustlers? 



Clark: Rustlers all got rich, (laughter) (unclear) was a big cow man. He started (unclear). The Hashknives wouldn't let him ride on the wagon. He stole his outfit from the Hashknives. And Frank Murphy, he put the (unclear) and Cattle Company on the shelf. Curly Wallace, he pretty near put Babbitts on the shelf. He put (unclear) business, you know. Babbitts got a warrant out for him, and he went in (unclear) got $700 for it and give it to 'em, and Curly took it and left the country (unclear). Now everything's fine. I had a little attack here a while back, and I have trouble with my speech every once in a while. 



Babbitt: You're talking wonderfully. If it isn't bothering you, Charlie, I'd like to ask you a few more questions. 



Clark: Go ahead. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Were there any shootings you can remember, or any arguments they had over the range in those days? You didn't have the Forest Service to settle arguments. They just fought it out between themselves? 



Clark: Yeah. There wasn't so much shootin' as there was talkin'. But shootin', you know, (unclear) get killed. They were kinda careful about shootin'. 



Babbitt: Well, they did have a lot of arguments about where their ranges began and where they ended, and whose cattle were whose, and so on and so forth? 



Clark: Between the sheep and the cattle, mostly. 



Babbitt: When the Forest Service came along, I suppose it settled a lot of those arguments then, didn't it? 



Clark: I was living in <Apache County> when that Forest Service was put in. 



Babbitt: My mother used to tell about the cowboys, how'd they get drunk and leave town shootin' up in the air nights. I guess they were the A-l cowboys, probably, weren't they? Were you part of that group at all? 



Clark: No, I didn't come here 'til '93. 



Babbitt: He came in '87, I believe it was. 



Clark: Did he? 



Babbitt: Uh-huh. 



Clark: I think he went to work for P. J. Brannen when he first came. 



Babbitt: That's what I understand. And then I think he had a little restaurant. 



Clark: (unclear) Yeah, him and Billy Babbitt. 



Babbitt: Oh, did they? 



Clark: Yeah, him and Billy Babbitt had a restaurant there where.... I think it was right where that Black Cat is. I think it was right there. 



Babbitt: How'd they do? Did they serve pretty good grub? 



Clark: Yes. (unclear) He worked for 'em, I think. I thought Babbitt was the cook. 



Babbitt: My father, Uncle Billy Babbitt, ran that together. That was news to me, I never heard that before. Then I think he went in with Uncle Dave and they went in the grocery business later on then. 



Clark: Well, Dave Babbitt started the store. Dave never did have anything to do with the.... Dave and Charlie had come here together. (unclear) Well, then Billy came afterwards. I don't know when he come. 



Babbitt: Well, what did they do when they first came here? My dad and Uncle Billy started a restaurant, Uncle Dave had a hardware store. 



Clark: He had that little hardware store right there where the store is now. (unclear) by the name of Miller had a tent there. Had a tent.... Had a restaurant, had a restaurant there. And I think Dave (unclear). They built a little shack there, a little bigger than this room. And they had a few knives and forks and tin plates. 



Babbitt: Well, there weren't very many buildings in <Flagstaff>. 



Clark: No, no, no, they were all tents. 



Babbitt: What would they do in the wintertime?! Pretty cold in a tent, wasn't it? 



Clark: They'd take and build up the windows, about that high and then tent top. 



Babbitt: People lived in houses, though? 



Clark: Jack Smith had a hotel there. 



Babbitt: Was that the Grand Canyon Hotel? 



Clark: No, no, no. The Grand Canyon Hotel was right across from Babbitts' Store on the corner there--right across from [Bean's?]. That's where the Grand Canyon Hotel was on that side. That's where.... 



Babbitt: Durham? 



Clark: No, no, no, Oscar LaBarre [phonetic]. He had that. 



Babbitt: When you said they had tents.... 



Clark: Babbitts financed it, Oscar was running it. 



Babbitt: You said they had tents. Did people live in tents too, or did they have board homes, wooden homes, to live in? 



Clark: Lumber was cheap there. (unclear) lumber shacks. 



Babbitt: Little lumber shacks. 



Clark: (unclear) tent, just (unclear). 



Babbitt: Were most of the men bachelors or single? Were there many women? Some of em were married probably. 



Clark: No, there wasn't very many. Women were very scarce, I'll tell ya'--very scarce. 



Babbitt: What did you do for entertainment, Charlie? 



Clark: (unclear) the saloons. 



Babbitt: Sandy Donahue had a famous saloon there, didn't he? 



Clark: Yeah. Jim Vail. Jim Vail and Sandy were the old-timers then, and Johnny Berry. 



Babbitt: Sandy was quite a character wasn't he? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: He was one of the leading men in the town in the early days. 



Clark: Sandy died back in <Rochester>. 



Babbitt: Sandy Donahue did. 



Clark: Yeah. Livin' in the Pioneers' Home, you know. 



Babbitt: Yeah, that's what I understand. Well, you know, you mentioned that this first flag pole that they speak of was located near the log cabin. Where was the log cabin at that time? 



Clark: Right up on the end of where that pond is now. 



Babbitt: On the old Clark Ranch? 



Clark: Yeah. I don't know just exactly where the darned fence goes through there, (unclear). 



Babbitt: You talked to the people who were actually there when that was in existence, didn't you? 



Clark: Why sure. 



Babbitt: Who were some of those people? Do you remember the names of any of 'em? 



Clark: There's only two that I could swear to: my uncle. My uncle [turned a fee out to me?]. After we moved up there, we moved into that log cabin. That's the only place to live there. (unclear) cabin's been torn down years and years ago. That's where we lived. 



Babbitt: George Hochderffer and some of these men claim that (unclear) railroad track, but they don't know what they're talking about, is that it? 



Clark: George Hochderffer knows all about it. He talked to P. J. Brannen. P. J. Brannen came there in '82, and they know all about it. They know more than the people do that was there when it actually happened. 



Babbitt: Your uncle actually (unclear). 



Clark: He actually seen it. I used to come in there to the commissary for supplies before P. J. Brannen ever come to the country. 



Babbitt: Who cut the tree down? 



Clark: Billy Love cut it down. (unclear) burned it up in the fireplace. 



Babbitt: Just for firewood you cut it down? 



Clark: Sure, it was pitch, it had died. 



Babbitt: Now, who cut the tree in the first place and made a flag pole out of it? Were those (unclear) engineers? 



Clark: They were railroad surveyors. 



Babbitt: I heard it was a party of immigrants going from <Boston>. Some fellow in <Flagstaff> said his father was on a party that did that. 



Clark: Well, they got a flag pole located up there at Old Town Springs, and another one down on the railroad track below Flag. And they could, any of 'em, have been trees of someone else, but they was later than this other one. They come in later. But the old original tree, the one I'm talking about--those fellahs were all later. But when somebody remembers 'em, and talks about seein' 'em, I guess they were standing long after this other one was cut down maybe. 



Babbitt: I see. In other words this immigrant party may have also cut the branches off a tree and made a flag pole. (unclear, tape slipping) Is that correct? 



Clark: Yeah, that's what happened, (unclear). (tape slips) 



Babbitt: You're from <New Hampshire>? 



Clark: I was born in <Concord New Hampshire>. 



[END TAPE 57-21, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Babbitt: Well, Charlie, for entertainment, what did you do up there? Play a little poker and drink a little whiskey? What kind of poker would you play, what kind of cards? 



Clark: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Draw stud poker. 



Clark: (unclear) stud game. And they had what they called the free roll. 



Babbitt: What's that? 



Clark: Everybody to get--had one of them great big tables, you know--and everybody put his hand down there, put his hand down. And there there'd be two out of those who put their hand down, get a two-dollar stack of chips free to start the game. 



Babbitt: Would they do that every night? 



Clark: Every night. 



Babbitt: Once in the nighttime, huh? 



Clark: Well, more than once every night, because there'd be another saloon, and every saloon had one. They come out the saloon door and (unclear) "Free roll, free roll!" and everybody rushed to get a free stack. 



Babbitt: The idea was to get 'em into the saloon, I guess, so they'd buy another game, huh? 



Clark: (unclear) 



Babbitt: How much would a drink cost you in those days? 



Clark: Well, 12 1/2 cents is all. 



Babbitt: Oh, you're supposed to buy two, is that it? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Two for a quarter. What would a quart of whisky cost you? 



Clark: Oh, it was cheap. You could get the very best for about two dollars. 



Babbitt: Didn't they have another game they called faro? 



Clark: That was (unclear) gambling game. 



Babbitt: Was that a form of poker? 



Clark: Oh, no, no, no, they built that out of a box. 



Babbitt: That was what I thought. 



Clark: They'd deal two cards. One of those went down alongside the box, was the loser, and the one that stayed up there on the box was the winner, (unclear) and they had [coppers?]. If you wanted to play a card that was the loser, you put a copper on it. If you wanted to play the winner, you would (unclear) straight up. That's the way (unclear). 



Babbitt: How much would you bet on a hand? 



Clark: You could bet all you wanted to, on some of 'em. 



Babbitt: Would some of 'em bet pretty heavy? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: What would you call a big bet then? 



Clark: Well, I (unclear) lots of times. I started telling you Ruppert, you know.... (unclear) Yankees (unclear) thirty-five-dollar (unclear). 



Babbitt: I didn't know that. Did you know that? Ruppert of <New York>. (several talking at same time, none discernable) 



Babbitt: Uncle Jacob Ruppert, I believe they called him. 



Clark: I used to call him John, I think. 



Babbitt: Well, in addition to playing cards and doing a little drinkin', did they have any women to entertain 'em? 



Clark: (unclear) out with him once, from <New York City>. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Is that the fellow Wayne Mountain's named after? 



Clark: I guess so. His father was the head of some big outfit back there. Every time he'd come to town, (unclear). All of 'em used to take a drink. And every time he'd come in, he didn't have time to sit down and play, but he'd give 'em a tap on the bank. Sometimes he'd lose, and sometimes he'd win. And that meant all the money they had, and if he'd win it, why, he'd set up champagne to the town, buy all of us champagne in town. And he'd take all the silver and throw it away. Throw it out on the street and watch 'em scramble for it. 



Babbitt: That was this man Wayne? 



Clark: Wayne, yeah, young Wayne. 



Babbitt: Was he some wealthy boy from the East? 



Clark: He must have been a multi-millionaire, the way he throwed money away. His father was the head of some big bank in <New York>. 



Babbitt: Do you think they named Wayne Mountain after him? 



Clark: I know they did. Wayne was quite a character. 



Babbitt: And they were interested in that A-l Cattle Company, is that it? 



Clark: Another kid we had there, I guess he was of age, because he got his money. His father owns this Borax outfit. 



Babbitt: That 40-mule team outfit in Death Valley? 



Clark: Yeah. Billy (unclear). And he had $40,000--his mother give him $40,000--and he landed there in <Flagstaff>. In 48 hours he done away with it, lost it all. He stayed there for, oh, he was there all the rest of that summer. He got money, all right, he got money somewhere, somebody sent it to him. But everybody knew him as the $40,000 Kid. That's the only name he had around all that summer was the $40,000 Kid. (laughter) 



Babbitt: Well, he earned some sort of a name, didn't he? What did you say they called Walter Durham? 



Clark: He was Hashknife Walter. 



Babbitt: That was because he worked for the Hashknife outfit, wasn't it? 



Clark: Right in the same camp was (unclear) McNeal. 



Babbitt: William Robert McNeal [phonetic], the holdup man. Will and him worked in that same camp, out there at the Hashknife, out to the [Duck's Nest?]. They had that camp out to the Duck's Nest before they (unclear). 



Babbitt: Charlie, (unclear) and had all that time, did they have any other entertainment with any women around, dance hall girls, like they have in the movies? 



Clark: Oh, yes. We had a dance hall right there in Flag. 



Babbitt: Were any of 'em cute? 



Clark: Oh, yes. 



Babbitt: Do you remember the names of any of those girls? 



Clark: They called it the Wooden Hall. (unclear) later in <Flagstaff>? (unclear) wouldn't do for publication. 



Babbitt: That certainly is interesting. Now, you say you used to come to <Phoenix> once in a while, didn't you, Charlie? 



Clark: Oh, yes. I was in the sheep business so I (unclear). But before that, I worked at Cameron and Francis, different outfits. 



Babbitt: How long did it take you to come down to <Phoenix>? 



Clark: As late as (unclear). In the early 1900s, we used to put our horses up at Old Man Garritt's feed lot there at Five Points, and walk through a pasture to <Phoenix> then. 



Babbitt: Did you tell me about some man wantin' to sell that piece of property down where the [Lures?] Hotel is now, for $700? That was in eighty-something. 



Clark: Old Al Beasley won the whole block there at Five Points playin' poker one night. And he sold it for $1,200. You know Al Beasley? 



Babbitt: Know him very well. 



Clark: That's the absolute truth. Al ain't tellin' that, I'm tellin' it. He won the whole block there. That was in the late nineties, I think. No, that was in the 1900s. 



Babbitt: The early 1900s. 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: You were here first in, what, 1887? 



Clark: I think it was '85--'85 or '6. 



Babbitt: How long would it take you to come down from <Flagstaff>? 



Clark: Five days. 



Babbitt: By horseback? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: How would you come, were there any roads? 



Clark: Well, we came down right south to <Flagstaff> to Rattlesnake Tanks. You know where that is? And then we took that Beaver Road-where there's a [Sears?] now. 



Babbitt: Beaverhead? 



Clark: Yeah. And went down through the fort where the soldiers are there, to <Camp Verde>. Down through <Camp Verde>, and out that old government road there, the Copper Canyon Road. Old Hance had a ranch up at the top of the hill there. 



Babbitt: George Hance. 



Clark: Old George Hance, an old white house. And then we cut diagonally right from there, right across and hit the old Black Canyon Stage Road. 



Babbitt: Let's see you came right in by <New River>, and (unclear) three and that way then. 



Clark: (unclear) about where.... Yeah, come right down there. 



Babbitt: How many people in <Phoenix>? There weren't very many people here then, probably--what, 5,000, would you say? 



Clark: Well, I don't know. Weren't very many. 



Babbitt: Then you'd go on back up after. Would you come down here for supplies? 



Clark: Oh, no. 



Babbitt: Just come down for a trip, huh? 



Clark: Come down for a job. I wanted to work. 



Babbitt: Where was [two sets a man?]. Was it where the Lure Hotel is, the man wanted to sell that whole block there for $700? 



Clark: No, that's where the Lure's Building is. 



Babbitt: That was (unclear). 



Clark: That was N. W. Craw [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: Oh surely. I've heard of that. Well, you mentioned the names of some of these boys: the $40,000 Kid and Hashknife Walter. Do you remember any other interesting characters up around Flag? Unidentified woman: I wonder if he remembers Wally Traubert? [phonetic] 



Babbitt: Do you remember hearing about this Roderick McNeal? Do you know any stories about him? 



Clark: Oh, yeah. Didn't he tell you all about himself? 



Babbitt: Well, he told us a few things about himself. He was on the rampage a lot of the time, apparently. 



Clark: Yeah, he pulled off some stunts right here in <Phoenix>. They had two big saloons there, and had gambling games in there. I'd like to see McNeal (unclear). 



Babbitt: What did he do here in the saloons? 



Clark: He went in and held 'em up and took their money, what he wanted of it. (unclear) Becken.... 



Babbitt: I don't know, who was Breckenridge? The officer there? 



Clark: No, that isn't his name. I was trying to think of it. He was city marshall here at the time. Well, anyway, after he'd held 'em up, he (unclear) a city marshal in the eye as he was coming in, as he was goin' out, and started him up the street, talkin' to him. All the excitement back then, he tore loose from him and run back (unclear) started to walk away, and this fellah held him up. Well, the town was in an uproar here, <Phoenix>. The very next night he come back and did the same thing to the other saloon, and got away with it. 



Babbitt: He had a lot of nerve, didn't he? 



Clark: He sure did. 



Babbitt: They said he was a good shot, and he would shoot, too. 



Clark: Little Oscar's the one that learned him how to shoot. 



Babbitt: Who's Little Oscar? 



Clark: Didn't he mention Little Oscar? 



Babbitt: No. Unidentified woman: (unclear) 



Clark: He used to hold up the Black Canyon Stage. 



Babbitt: He told me about that. He said that he had done that. That's McNeal. 



Clark: Did he tell you about holding up those deputy marshals? 



Babbitt: No, he didn't tell me about that. 



Clark: Well, (unclear) that they were shipping payrolls down on a certain stage. Instead of that, they loaded it up with the U.S. marshals, see. So he used to find out those things. People used to tell him, or he'd find out some way, what they were doing. Anyway, he didn't hold up the stage, (unclear) off their guard. He didn't hold it up like they expected. So they were goin' into Carter's to eat, a dinner station, Carter's, and Mac held 'em up, took their guns and [notches?] away from 'em. 



Babbitt: Those were United States marshals? 



Clark: And then the United States marshals were sent out to bring him in. 



Babbitt: They must have felt pretty cheap. 



Clark: And then he loaded 'em on and sent 'em on to <Phoenix>. And then he went back and got the stage that was comin' behind 'em, (unclear). 



Babbitt: How would he find out those things? 



Clark: I don't know how he found 'em out, but he did. 



Babbitt: He was a clever fellow, wasn't he? 



Clark: Did he tell you about holdin' up the train there, all alone, at <Canyon Diablo>? 



Babbitt: No. 



Clark: And rollin' the safe off into the bottom of the canyon? 



Babbitt: Now, who's Little Oscar, though? You said Little Oscar taught him how to shoot. 



Clark: Well, Little Oscar was a bad actor. McNeal thought a lot of him because McNeal was just a kid then himself, because Oscar was a good shot. He's one of these [trick?] shots with a six-shooter (unclear). So he took up with Little Oscar. Let me tell you how Mac turned out to be an outlaw. 



Babbitt: Is that how he became an outlaw, because he was associating with Little Oscar? 



Clark: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Yeah, I'd like to hear a little about it, yes. 



Clark: Well, did you ever hear of Doc Sosi? [phonetic] 



Babbitt: No. 



Clark: Doc Sosi (unclear). There was three of 'em. One (unclear) crazy (unclear) time here, (unclear) Hashknife outfit for $35 a month, and (unclear) and everything else, and he said, "Let's get us a bunch of horses here and take 'em up into <Colorado>, and we'll sell 'em to the cowmen up there. Top ones are in demand, you know." And we'll grab a bunch up there, and (unclear) Hashknives, (unclear)." So we went up (unclear) Doc Sosi, and Little Oscar, and Mac, (unclear). So we got a bunch of horses, went up there. 



Babbitt: Did you buy the horses or steal 'em? 



Clark: No, no, I stole 'em, and got rid of 'em. And then round up another bunch up there and started back. But they didn't get a good enough stock. They got (unclear) before they had a chance to go very far. And so the sheriff got out after 'em and some big outfit there, whose cowboys got after 'em, and they killed Little Oscar, they caught up with him. I turned the horses loose and made a run of it. But they killed Little Oscar and they wounded Doc Sosi. You never knew [Andy McCline?] used to be in <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: I've heard of him, I didn't know him. 



Clark: And he was up in that country. They hung Doc Sosi right on Andy's gate post. He told me about that himself. 



Babbitt: Where was Andy's ranch? 



Clark: In <Flagstaff>? 



Babbitt: You said they hung Doc Sosi on Andy's gate post. 



Clark: <Colorado>. (unclear) <Colorado>. Mac had a pretty good horse and he got away. And they didn't get him. We didn't know where to go, in the country (unclear). That Hashknife range down there, (unclear) so he high-tailed it back (unclear) country. He got ahold of a little old log cabin along <Clear Creek>, that somebody built, and he holed up there. That's where he called his home, there. Well, he was there, (unclear) he had to (unclear). Well, there was about $50,000 reward out for him, a string that long. And (unclear) <Winslow> offered $1,000. Everybody, state of <Colorado>, <Arizona>, everybody offered a reward--a fresh string of 'em, $6,000. And the Pinkerton Detective Agency got ahold of that someway, and they thought, "Well, a lot of money going to waste there. Maybe they can do some business there." So they hired a cowboy out (unclear) <Boston Massachusetts>. He was the president of the Hashknife outfit. He come out here with a saddle and rope and papers to go to work for the Hashknives. And they used to have their headquarters then right there at <Holbrook>, just the other side of Holbrook. That's (unclear). 



Babbitt: That's what I understand. 



Clark: Well, this fellah went to work for the Hashknives. He was a real cowboy, no imitation about him, he was a real cowboy. But it was a different sector, too. So he gets Old Jacoby [phonetic], the fellow that picked (unclear) cowboys from shootin' up <Winslow>, (unclear) comin' in there. And he got John Francis from <Flagstaff>. I'm going to tell you a lot of secrets now, and I want you to keep 'em to yourself, not tell anybody about 'em. When I get through here, (unclear). So he arranged for Jacoby to leave <Winslow> and John to leave <Flagstaff>, and he was leavin' <Holbrook>, and they was gonna meet out at the old battleground there. That's where they were gonna meet. Everything went just like as nice as could be. Each one of 'em left with his pack horse and all met out there. He'd located McNeal, where he was livin', he was gonna go and get him. Maybe you've got all this stuff from the paper up there, I don't know. 



Babbitt: I don't. 



Clark: I'm trying to tell you now. 



Babbitt: It's very interesting. I'd like to hear it anyway. 



Clark: McNeal, I think, was a college graduate, if I ain't mistaken. 



Babbitt: I think he was. 



Clark: Was a college graduate, and he was pretty good with a pencil. He could write. So he wrote this up (unclear) reporter to print it in the old Flagstaff Champion there in <Flagstaff>. I saved it for years and years and years, but I lost it. 



Babbitt: I can give you a copy of it. I have a copy of that poetry, about Boy Johnny Francis? 



Clark: Well, Johnny Francis, I told [Shoestuss?] down there (unclear) and he sent it up to Flag, and it was republished in the paper. I memorized it at that time. You've got it, you say? Well, you don't want me to try to repeat it over again? 



Babbitt: Well, you might. It might not be the same thing I have. 



Clark: Well, it tells (unclear, unidentified woman speaking at same time). I've forgotten a lot. 



Babbitt: Do you remember it now, Charlie? 



Clark: Yes, I'll never forget it. 



Babbitt: It isn't too long, is it? 



Clark: No. You'll be here all night, if you stay here and listen to me. (recites poem) "Here where <Clear Creek> deeply flows (unclear) masses and the Mogollon snows, here I lived in (unclear). Oh, the country that I for years called home. Hunted continually like some wild beast, until I'd reached my ranch I knew no peace." Is that like (unclear)? 



Babbitt: That's something like it. Go ahead there. 



Clark: (continues reciting) "Until I reached my ranch, I knew no peace. One day when while walking on the canyon side, three men on the opposite side I spied. They were officers, all brave men, who dared to brave the lion in his den. The soldier trail they come winding down, I little dreamed the danger there, until a report which startled all, quickly followed by a whistling ball. Nothing could excel the leader's grace as he threw his rifle to his face. And as my carbine rang out 'crack!' he quickly sent an answer back. In fighting these officers (unclear) well skilled, yet strange to say, none were killed. But as the battle held its course, a bullet struck John Francis' horse. And among the fine (unclear) a bullet pierced Jacoby's hat." The story goes with this, when I get through. There's more to it. 



Babbitt: As I understand it, the sheriffs were pretty hostile, they were pretty much (unclear) about that. They thought he was making fun of them, didn't they? 



Clark: (recites, unclear) "I hope some day a free man to stand, (unclear) confidence by their hand." You know, John was pretty brash. After they got down in the canyon there, John says, "Just watch him." And he started rushing his--can I swear?--horse up the trail, and he shot the horse out from under him, and left John standing there on the trail. And he shot over John's head, McNeal, and told him, "Get in the brush!" John said, "Go to hell, (unclear). If you'd wanted to kill me, you'd have killed me a while ago," and walked on down the trail (unclear). (unclear) didn't kill him. 



Babbitt: I heard Mac tell me, he said he (unclear). 



Clark: He tried to scare him by shootin' over his head, but he couldn't scare [him]. John had guts. John Francis. You know him, don't you? Unidentified woman: Yeah. 



Clark: And Jacoby, he tracked up there on the side of the canyon, and some way Mac could get next to him, seen him crawl up there. And he got behind a (unclear) and he peeked out to try to locate him, and shot his hat off his head. And then he crept. Him and John both went down there, and they told him, "He's right up there. If you want to go up and get him, we're goin' back to town." 



Babbitt: A Pinkerton man, huh? 



Clark: Yeah. He said, "I might as well go too." (laughter) 



Babbitt: Where was he when the other two, when Jacoby and John Francis were (unclear). Who was he? Do you remember what his name was? 



Clark: No, no, no. 



Babbitt: But he wasn't in the fight apparently, the Pinkerton man. Unidentified woman: He was there with 'em. 



Clark: Well, you know another tough guy we had, Carl Owens [phonetic]? 



Babbitt: Yeah, I've heard of him. 



Clark: He was out after him, too, on the other [side?]. You see, they elected him, he was a hard nut himself, and they elected him over there as sheriff in <Apache County>. And everybody went crazy. It was all Apache, there wasn't no Navajo. 



Babbitt: All <Apache County>? 



Clark: All Apache. They say he killed him right here. Everybody (unclear). But they elected him anyway, because they wanted him, see. Well, he exterminated that gang and all that, that Blevings [phonetic] gang. 



Babbitt: I heard about that, yes. 



Clark: He exterminated them, but he was after McNeal, too. And Mac was thought to be at a certain camp out there, on dry lake (unclear) there. So he went out there to get him. Of course them [cattle?] (unclear). And he told the [foreman?], told the boys in the camp, said, "When he shows up, I want you to point him out to me. I mean it, too!" (unclear) So everybody was pretty mum. That night, some fellah rode in there after dark, and [came into the light?] and the sheriff (unclear). So he [slept with the sheriff?] and got up and left the next morning early. Well, Owens was pretty sore about it, because somebody told him that Mac was gonna be there, and he hadn't showed up. So he (unclear) foreman (unclear). The foreman was scared to death. Some kid cowboy there wasn't afraid of anything, said, "(unclear) you slept with him last night." (laughs) He (unclear). He had slept with McNeal that night (unclear), (unclear) on Owens, and [Hughstus?] Got that too? 



Babbitt: I've heard something about it. 



Clark: He said, "I'm the kind of the [lasticks?]." He went into the Hughstus store there and bought some stuff, and Adolf was waitin' on him, and he said, "Just charge this (unclear)," and walked out. So he wrote him a little piece of poetry on it. (unclear) the Aztecs [on perfection?] of robbing the store. I have a stake left me by Wells Fargo, and before long, I'll have more. As my kind friends at Hughstus--and then grabbed a double-barrelled shotgun. 



Babbitt: That was Shoester? [phonetic] 



Clark: Yeah, (unclear) both barrels, as he was ridin' off. (unclear) kind friends at Hughstus, for whom I carry so much lead. In the future to kill (unclear), then I'll have to aim at his head. He says (unclear) Owens says he would like to kill me. To me that sounds like [chaff?]. (unclear) six-shooter (unclear) and kills a jackrabbit and (unclear). Should he and I happen to meet, there'll be an <Arkansas> (unclear). (unclear) from <Arkansas>. Say, I'll keep you here all night, (unclear) get talkin'. I haven't told you about the time Johnny.... 



Babbitt: I've got about two, three minutes left. 



Clark: (unclear) tell you a secret. 



Babbitt: All right, tell me a secret. 



Clark: I'm gonna tell you some secrets now, but for godsake, don't [tell] too many people, because some of 'em are livin' yet. Charlie Francis went down to the river, (unclear) River there. Charlie [Crulless?] was down there at the stone cabin. McNeal rides up. Charlie throws his rifle down on him and told him he'd kill him if he didn't throw up his hands. Mac (unclear) just looked (unclear) and he's just standin' inside (unclear). Said, "Wait'll I get my horse unsaddled." (unclear) unsaddled his horse. But he set up, John and Charlie Crulless, guarded him all night. Put him on his horse the next morning and started to <Flagstaff> with him. Well, he got away on the way to <Flagstaff>. (unclear) 



Babbitt: How'd he do it, anyway? 



Clark: Charlie Crulless was workin' for $35 a month at that time. He went to <California> and (unclear). Charlie Francis started a grocery store. That's to be kept secret. I wasn't told to keep it secret. And I don't know a thing, I don't know a thing. All I know is what happened. I ain't sayin' anything, just what happened. That's what happened. 



Babbitt: It certainly is interesting, Charlie. 



Clark: Don't say (unclear). 



Babbitt: No, no, we won't tell anybody. 



Clark: John's got a couple of kids right here in the country. 



Babbitt: Sure. Well, we'll keep that confidential. Well, Charlie, this certainly has been interesting, this meeting with you. Are there any other old-timers living now who you associated with in the early days? 



Clark: Not very many--they're all dead. 



Babbitt: Is there anyone around <Flagstaff>? George Hochderffer, question him later. Charlie Babbitt? 



Clark: George told me I was the first man he ever met in <Flagstaff>, first man he spoke to when he landed in <Flagstaff>. It's kind of dumb of me, I can't remember. I don't know, '86, wasn't it? 



Babbitt: Mighta been. Let's see, Charlie Babbitt came in, in '89, I think it was. Or was it '87? 



Clark: No, no, he was there before that. 



Babbitt: Was he? 



Clark: Yeah, he come....




