William "Buzz" Belknap III- Part 3

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli

Camera by Sam Jansen

March 28, 2009



BELKNAP:  (referring to photo)  An early trip to Pearce Ferry.  I think it was a year and a half.

QUARTAROLI:  Are we ready?  We rollin’?

JANSEN:  We’re ready.

QUARTAROLI:  So let’s see, ’63 Sportyak trip, low water.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, that was....

QUARTAROLI:  Quite a bit different.  So far, you’ve had this whole variety of trips, when you look at 'em:  jet boats, the only up-run, low-water Sportyaks, drivin’ at ten or twelve years old.

BELKNAP:  Every one was very different.

QUARTAROLI:  Every one was pretty unique in some way in those days.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  I guess just thinking back, you’d mentioned that ’54 was kind of the cutoff for the 200th person to go down.  It wasn’t a full trip for me, of course, but just to be with that trip, that period of time when I don’t think that many people had gone down.  That’s pretty amazing.  But that Sportyak trip, the rapids were just-I mean, boulder fields with water just trickling down, or running down around the boulders, a lot of those.

QUARTAROLI:  What year did you go up in <Cataract Canyon> in the Sportyaks?

BELKNAP:  Probably maybe either ’64, ’65, somewhere in there.  Dock was gonna look for the "D. Julien" [Denis Julien] inscription up there-wanted to find it before it got covered up by <Lake Powell>.  He pretty well pinpointed it through all of his research and everything.  So we had Sportyaks down through Cataract.  I think it was spring break, because I was in college at the time.  But we had wet suits.  I think we might have even had a dry suit with a wet suit.  It was just extremely cold.

QUARTAROLI:  Dock and you and your dad?

BELKNAP:  My dad and Jorgen Visbak.  We got down and Dock was able to pinpoint that "D. Julien" inscription.  But it was funny, I don’t know if you ever remember My Weekly Reader.

QUARTAROLI:  Uh-huh.

BELKNAP:  That was written up in there.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you get that?

BELKNAP:  I did.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, you weren’t reading it then, because you were in college.

BELKNAP:  Well not at that point in college, yeah.  But I remember just looking at it and then trying to take the little quiz at the end.  I got one or two questions wrong.  It was funny to be on the trip and....  Yeah, whatever.

QUARTAROLI:  So it was pretty low flow then, you were goin’ down in March or April.

BELKNAP:  Uh-huh, it was, very.

QUARTAROLI:  So thus the Sportyaks.

BELKNAP:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  You went in from near <Moab>?

BELKNAP:  Yes.  I think Tex took us down on his big boats.

QUARTAROLI:  Down to the junction?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, right.

QUARTAROLI:  There was no Hite Marina then, so you just went down to the ferry crossing?

BELKNAP:  I guess we did.  I don’t remember the details on that one too much.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you do a lot of lining then?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, it was, definitely.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you run anything?  There’s some runable stuff there for sure.

BELKNAP:  Oh yeah.  Sure we did run some.  That was just a week of extremely cold weather.

QUARTAROLI:  All your college mates are in <Florida> and you’re....

BELKNAP:  Yeah, really.

QUARTAROLI:  <Cataract Canyon>.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  So then I guess another interesting trip was in, I believe, 1965 when I’d taken a year off from college, and between my sophomore and junior year, and went down to the Antarctic as a field assistant.  It was through Phil Smith and Bill Austin who I’d met on the jet trip.  They asked me if I’d like to come do that.  So I did.  After I got back in February, I guess, from the Antarctic, I had some time.  Also, I learned to fly.  Earl Leseberg.  I had to go up, pick up a car one day, up at, I can’t remember, <Peach Springs> or someplace, so on the way up he asked me if I’d like to try flying the plane a little.  The next day he had me out to the airport, taking lessons.  So that was a fun experience, to learn to fly.  He had so many different....  I learned in a Piper Aeronca, a tail-dragger.  It has a stick.  You start the plane by pulling the prop-propping it.  So I went ahead and I did get my commercial license, so I did do some that summer and the following summer.  Actually, no, it was the following summer, I did do some commercial flights for Earl, just sightseeing things up the <Grand Canyon>.  That was fun, because there were no regulations on flying to altitude.  So we would take passengers and come up the lower end of the canyon and fly right over the forest area and then just drop down and descend 4,000 feet into the canyon, fly on down to Lake Mead.  So times have changed.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh yeah.

BELKNAP:  But that year, 1965, I got back from the Antarctic, I learned to fly.  Then also in April, I guess, we decided to do a Sportyak trip, from <Whitmore> on down into Lake Mead.  It was Dock Marston, and I invited John Evans, who I’d met in the Antarctic, asked him if he’d like to try a river trip.  So he said sure.  So Mack Miller was gonna go along.  He was on the ’63 trip with my dad.  So we got the Sportyaks and got out to <Whitmore> and looked down.  We were expecting, I don’t know, maybe 8,000-10,000, but I think it was running 40,000 [cfs].  Mack Miller, at that point, bailed.  But we took the Sportyaks, Dock, my dad, and John, and went on down.  Dock didn’t carry one down, but I think between John and myself and my dad, we carried and got all the boats down there, carried 'em down to the river, down the trail.  That water was just way too high for Sportyaks, because of the turbulence.  We were just constantly having problems.  John was always getting sucked into a whirlpool and flipped, so we called 'em "Evans suckies."  Dock did really well in not turning over, until we got down in the lower end, down about the 230s.  Dock did finally have one flip.  I was really concerned about it, because I knew what we were going to be getting into down in the 230s.  So I suggested that we tie all four boats together and make one unit.  Dock always believed in having backups, more than one boat and everything.  He didn’t really think that was the best idea, and I remember it was around noontime when we decided to do this.  I’d been on a lot of trips with Dock, but I never saw him get his log out and start writing in a diary, his log, in the middle of the day, as though it might be his last entry.  (laughter)  But it was a good decision, and the boats just weren’t affected as much, as one unit tied together-two in the front, two in the back, and then those were tied together.

QUARTAROLI:  I’ve seen at least one picture.  You used driftwood logs to stiffen 'em up, between each other?

BELKNAP:  Uh-huh.  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  And I think Diane Boyer has told me that there are movies, your dad took movies of some of that.  I haven’t had a chance to look at that yet, but I’m kind of interested in that.  But those high flows, I just recently found out that there were channel-clearing flows from the dam.  They wanted <Glen Canyon> flushed out for trout habitat.  They wanted to flush the silt out for gravel bars and things.  Luna Leopold was on at the USGS and came out with this piece called "The Rapids and the Pools," about gradient drops in rapids.  It was at that same time.  And these things all kind of fit together.  And you guys were expecting low water, and then they started flushing up above, and then got down there and had....  And I think it actually went-you know, I’m not sure about your timing, but I think it actually went into the 50,000 range.  But it was only for a week or so.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  And then after we got down in the upper part of the lake, there were sand waves, just seemed to go on for twenty, thirty miles-just these very steep....

QUARTAROLI:  Did you stay lashed together for those?

BELKNAP:  We did.  And the lake was really low.  There was current even down into <Iceberg Canyon>, I think.  Jimmy Jordan came up and picked us up from that trip.

QUARTAROLI:  Where’d you go, Temple Bar, or did you go further down in those days.

BELKNAP:  We probably went out at Temple Bar, yeah.  I can’t really remember.

QUARTAROLI:  So then John Evans, of course, stuck around a little bit.  I guess that the first river trip was okay enough.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  So John, the next summer [June, 1966], [Walter Myer] "Toppy" Edwards, who worked for the National Geographic, had an assignment to do an article on <Lake Powell>.  He asked me if I would organize the boating.  So I guess the Turbocraft Company got a couple-my dad was working with me too on this-but got a couple Turbocraft jet boats.  But I called John Evans up and asked him if he’d like to come out and be part of that little month-long expedition on <Lake Powell>.  It was when the lake was still coming up.  It was, I think, getting up fairly high at that point.  So he said sure.  So he drove one of the boats around the lake, and I was driving the other one.  And then my mom and dad were there on the trip, and Toppy Edwards, and my sister.  She’d never met John before, and that was where they met, on <Lake Powell>.  It was another year or two, and they were married, I guess.

QUARTAROLI:  I used to think it was the other way around, when I heard about John and the ’65 Sportyak trip, "Well, this is the way to get the brother-in-law broken into the family," or something.  But then Loie had told me, "No, I didn’t even know John at that time.  It came the other way."  And you guys had been in <Antarctica>, and you said you were a field assistant there?

BELKNAP:  Right.

QUARTAROLI:  What kind of stuff were you doing, and what was John doing down there?

BELKNAP:  John had been down a few years, had already done a few years in the Antarctic before I got down there.  I was at Byrd Station, which was inland.  Just helped out with a lot of different scientific programs, where they needed help.  We laid out a long wire antenna, which was, I think like three or four miles long, on the snow surface.  Just doing the VLF [very low frequency], listening for the low-frequency signals that are generated through thunderstorms in the Northern Hemisphere.  I also showed the VIPs around the station when they’d come in.  Byrd Station, the new station was built down in the-they dug these tunnels and then covered 'em over, so we were living in some tunnels with buildings inside those tunnels.  It was unique.  We did get a lot of visitors up there to see it.  And helped out with communications of people who were coming and going from the station.  They had to always know when people were coming and going.  Just a lot of different little activities like that.  It was minus 70 degrees when I first got down there.

QUARTAROLI:  You spent a year there?

BELKNAP:  No, about three months, the summertime.

QUARTAROLI:  So summertime starts at minus 70?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, right, exactly.

QUARTAROLI:  And John was doing what?  Is he a climber too?

BELKNAP:  Oh yeah, he’s done a lot.  He was at <McMurdo Station>, which is 800 miles away on the coastline there, on the main supply base.  He’s been on Everest, I think two or three times.  Never quite got to the top.  I think he was involved in some rescues there on Everest too.

QUARTAROLI:  So he evidently quit that work, after he met Loie up on <Lake Powell> in ’65.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, he actually went to work for Outward Bound for quite a few years, I believe.  Then he went to work for a bank in <Denver> as an executive banker.  That didn’t last.  Well, yeah, maybe a few years.  Then he got back into the Antarctic support activities, Raytheon, that he’s currently working at.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you do any more on <Lake Powell>, after that article came out for National Geographic?

BELKNAP:  I did, I think, the following year.  Yeah, uh-huh.  So we were up there on the lake for a few months, yeah.  That was really beautiful, just because the water was coming up, and there was no white rings around the lake and that type of thing.  Not very many people up there at all.  It was really neat to see.

QUARTAROLI:  It’s a great contrast with the blue water and the reddish rock.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Then where did the Sportyaks and your dad....  Who-all was involved with the Fastwater Expeditions, with runnin’ Sportyaks up on the Green?

BELKNAP:  My dad just loved the Sportyaks, and he, I think started doing the <Desolation> trips.  Got the boats together and organized the commercial trips.  I’d gone in the Navy and had moved away and was in <Hawaii>.  So I was not really too much involved with that part of it.  But I did come back and do a couple <Desolation> trips.  But he really loved those Sportyak trips.

QUARTAROLI:  Maybe you could explain a little of the philosophy behind your dad doing those.

BELKNAP:  He wanted people to really experience and get involved in running their own boat.  It was life-changing for a lot of people.  They just loved those trips.  <Desolation Canyon> was kind of ideal, the way it started off slowly and built up.  It was a good training area for the first few days, and then you got into the larger rapids.  So he ran <Desolation Canyon> and ran the <San Juan> and the <Dolores>.  I never did do either the <San Juan> or the <Dolores>.  You’ve done those, of course.

QUARTAROLI:  I haven’t done the <Dolores>.

BELKNAP:  Oh really?  I guess the water flow in there is....

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, it’s iffy.  Not a very long season when there is one.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Would he have a support raft on the Deso?

BELKNAP:  He did, uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  Carrying the kitchen gear and something?

BELKNAP:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Then everybody carried their own gear in a Sportyak and carried some of the camp gear too?  Or any of the food [unclear]?

BELKNAP:  Just their personal stuff.  I think he did run some trips without the support boat-maybe smaller trips with more experienced people.  I guess one of the Sportyak trips that I did run, I did run the support boat up there in <Desolation>.  Then Loie, my sister, got very involved with the Sportyak trips.  Leading those trips, too.  She can fill you in on the details there on that.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you finish a college degree?  You said you took a year off.

BELKNAP:  I did.

QUARTAROLI:  What was that in?

BELKNAP:  I had a major in business finance.  My sophomore year I kind of had a sophomore slump, took that year off and that kind of rejuvenated me and made me see things in a different light.  I came back and got like a 3.4 or 3.6 average for those last two years, so I was very focused.

QUARTAROLI:  And in the Navy what did you do?

BELKNAP:  I was a Naval aviator and a navigator and flew on the P3 Orions.  And actually I was what they called a tactical coordinator on those.  And so in that period we were mainly looking for submarines, and they had all this electronic gear that would....  These sound buoys that would drop, we could drop in a pattern in the water, and so the buoys would drop down a microphone and transmit up to the airplane, and we could listen for different engine noises and that type of thing, and had other types of what they called MAD, Magnetic Anomaly Detection.  I don’t know if you’ve seen a P3 with the long stinger tail, but that had that type of gear in it.  But the Vietnam War was winding down, and so they were actually at that point looking for encouraging early outs.  So I was only in for about three and a half years.  So then when I got out, I just decided to stay in <Hawaii>.

QUARTAROLI:  About that time was the river guides.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, well, actually, I was in the Navy, down in <San Diego>, and, it was, I guess 1968, I would go up to <Boulder City>.  It wasn’t that far, you know, on the weekends sometimes when I was stationed down in <San Diego>.  So one weekend I was up in <Boulder City> and just had the "Plan and Profile" maps [Plan and Profile, Colorado River from <Lees Ferry>, <Arizona>, to <Black Canyon>, <Arizona>-<Nevada>, from the 1923 USGS Birdseye Survey].  I don’t know how it happened, but I just thought, as they were talking to my dad and thinking it’d be fun to put together a folding map of the <Grand Canyon>.  So I just started xeroxing these sections and cutting 'em up and pasting 'em together.  One thing led to another.  I’d also run into a friend down in <San Diego>, Doc Orris [Dr. Bill Orris, later with the Scripps Institute], and he said he had a friend in <Riverside> who was a printer, and he could take me up one weekend and introduce me to Eben Dale [O.C. Dale’s father].  So he did.  I showed Eben just the prototype dummy of the river guide, and Eben was just so enthusiastic.  That’s the kind of person he was.  He just said, "Sure.  Let’s see what-I can help you put it together and that type of thing."  Because I didn’t have really any graphic arts experience at that point.  So I sent Eben the "Plan and Profiles" and he reduced 'em down because they were just too large to fit in the format that we were looking at.  So then we got these Velox [photographic paper] prints, and I just xeroxed those again, and then just kept pasting up revisions of dummies.  Then my dad....  By that time I had been moved up to Mountain View in the Navy, in the training period process.  So my dad came over for a weekend and stayed there at my apartment, I think, for two or three weeks, actually working on helping put the guide together in Mountain View.  So that was a joint effort there.  And Dock Marston, of course, lived over in <Berkeley>, just across the Bay.  Went over and visited him quite a bit.  He was so helpful with photographs and all his research material.  So, finally got the guide.  My dad spent a lot of time helping in the production work, because I was-being in the Navy, I didn’t have a lot of extra time.  Got it all put together and took it back down to <Riverside> to Eben Dale.  They did some finishing touches on it, and he had found this Texoprint paper [still made by Neenah Paper Inc.], that waterproof paper, and went ahead and printed.  I can’t remember what our first print run was.  I remember Eben being so excited about the paper and testing it and rubbing it in the mud, and sticking it in an oven, and just having a good time with it-just to see if he could destroy it.  It seemed to work really well.  And then that first book was, the binding he went to a tentmaker for the binding, and just had 'em sew it right across, through the center of the book.  Of course that was ’69, spring.  I think he actually had it printed by probably May or June of ’69, just in time for the Powell centennial.

QUARTAROLI:  I met Eben when we had your dad’s thing [exhibit opening at Cline Library in 1997], and talking.  I don’t know whether he told me this story then, or I heard it somewhere else, and I don’t know all the details, but someone was making a delivery, and they had a bunch of 'em in the back of a pickup in a rainstorm, and inadvertently tested the waterproofness of the paper by just having 'em all exposed to the rain.

BELKNAP:  Exactly, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Do I remember that correctly?

BELKNAP:  I’m not sure, because I wasn’t involved in that part or whatever.

QUARTAROLI:  It may have been him then.  He had some boxes of 'em in the back of a truck or somethin’, deliverin’ 'em to <Salt Lake>.

BELKNAP:  It always was a good excuse for him to take trips from southern <California>, up to <Boulder City>, up to <Salt Lake>.

QUARTAROLI:  Did he get on the river then?  Did he get enthused?  I know his son did.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  And all the other Dales:  O.C.nnor and the cousins.  The Dales are still proliferating.

BELKNAP:  Exactly.  That’s amazing.  Eben did, I guess after O.C. went to work for <Grand Canyon> Expeditions-his son.  He had his mom and dad, Eben and Dorothy, go down quite a few trips in the <Grand Canyon>.  I could just remember Eben yelling, "River trip!"  He was such a fun person, so enthusiastic, and such a support to what we were doing.  So I guess my father passed away in late ’86.  The book was pretty much the same as we produced in the early ’70s on the <Dinosaur>, <Desolation>, and <Canyonlands> guides.  Eben printed all of those too.  But then when my father passed away in ’86, at that point he’d never seen....  I mean, we didn’t do any more graphics to those basic books at that point.  Then my mother, after my father passed away, she thought it would be a good idea to upgrade the Grand Canyon guide and encouraged me to work on that.  And then she actually passed away in September of ’88.  She’d arranged for me to go see George Billingsley, to talk about the geology, and put in some; and Meribeth Riffey [for natural history]; which we did, to get some additional sections into the book.  And then Loie, after my mom passed away, that’s when she got really involved in the publishing, and took over the distribution, and became president of the company and everything.  I guess it was ’89 when she came over to <Hawaii>, because I had my graphics arts production work over there, and spent quite a bit of time just working to put a lot of these new sections together.  At that point we redid the maps.  We took out the old "Plan and Profile" maps and got the <U.S.> 1:24,000 quad maps.  And I got the negative separations from the USGS for getting just the contours.  And spent months opaqueing away the outer contours on those and stripping them together and making Veloxes and shooting those down.  So we had the latest maps at that point in there.  So that new edition with the new maps and the new sections was published in ’89.  That was the beginning of the computer age.  So some of the sections were computerized, other parts were still paste-up-you know, the map sections and that.  So it was a combination of paste-up and computer work at that point. Then I guess it was probably four years ago, I guess....  At that point we’d been printing the books in <Denver>, at [the] Eastwood Printing company.  I had been working on printing some other books for some clients in <China>.  We thought it would just be a good idea because the cost was just skyrocketing in <Denver> for the printing.  We wanted to move to the four-color process at that point, because they were two-color.  So we decided to completely digitize the books, make 'em completely electronic.  And we did the <Desolation> and <Dinosaur>-those were the first two that we totally converted to four-color.  And I wanted to get some shaded relief in, and at that point the learning curve was so high on that, that we stuck with just the older contour maps on those.  And then I finally got working with the shaded relief on some of the different computer programs and really kind of developed that.  Then we were able to generate shaded relief in the contours, and put all that together electronically into its current form.  It took a good year and a half to really develop that.  I was working with-it’s funny, a lot of that software can cost $2,500 for a program or something, but I found a simple Mac[intosh] application and started working with that, and working with PhotoShop and putting all these different layers together in PhotoShop from taking stuff out of the digital elevation model program and combining it.  And then I was able to build these-have really complete control in PhotoShop, of the intensity of the layers and the way I wanted it to go together.  But the new guides are just all printed over in <China>, and so much more efficient, the operation.  I would get one book together and take the files with me and get to the plant.  It was about 100 miles from <Hong Kong>, and I’d get there on a Monday morning and by Wednesday they would have one book printed.  Just amazing.

QUARTAROLI:  You hadn’t even gotten over jet lag at that point!

BELKNAP:  I know!  Exactly.  Really.  (brief interruption)  So Loie has done such a wonderful job of coordinating so much of the new material and contacting people and really getting that together.

QUARTAROLI:  (aside about recording quality)  What other kind of graphic work?  You were doing graphic design when you kind of started changing the guides around and incorporating more stuff.  What other things were you doing?

BELKNAP:  Well basically....  I started, after doing the Grand Canyon River Guide, in the seventies I did quite a bit of map work in <Hawaii>, did some street directories.  We did a lot of election maps for the lieutenant governor’s office, did some stuff for the Army Corps of Engineers.  And then about 1979 or ’80, I bought a process camera to start shooting my own Veloxes and negatives for the map work that I was doing.  People heard that I had that camera, and people started asking me-the advertising agencies and graphic designers-if I could shoot things for 'em.  So that turned into a business, graphic camera service business:  basically film Veloxes, stats, that type of thing.  And then in about ’88 or ’89 when the computers came along, I bought some electronic image setters, the linotype.  Are you familiar?

QUARTAROLI:  I know some of the terms.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  Right.

QUARTAROLI:  I know what linotype is.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  So they just produced the film electronically from computer files, do color separation work and that.  A number of advertising agencies and clients in <Hawaii> and actually on the mainland that we were doing film separations for.

QUARTAROLI:  What’s a Velox?  You’ve mentioned that a couple of times.

BELKNAP:  A Velox is a photographic print from a negative, basically.  I could shoot a negative and then contact it with a photographic paper and make it.  It’s kind of a heavy mat finish.  They were used for doing paste-ups, that type of thing.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, you’d said the first river guide you were xeroxing and putting together, and Eben did the Velox of that.

BELKNAP:  Right.  So he’d reduce the "Plan and Profiles," shot 'em as negatives, and then contact 'em to a photographic paper, which in the graphic arts industry is called a Velox.  And then those were cut up and pasted on paste-up boards and then rubylith [masking film] overlays were laid down-overlays where you cut the rubylith to separate out the color for the river pattern, that type of thing.  Rapidograph pens:  those were used a lot.  Are you familiar with those?  The old ink pens.  So it was pretty amazing to see the before-computer era.  Some of the maps I did were pretty technical, with lots of overlays, then cutting these rubyliths and drawing with the Rapidographs.  It could take a day or two of separating it into the film separations and doing all the screenings and getting the colors.  And now the computer just automatically does that (snaps fingers) in a heartbeat.  So you really appreciate it, when you’ve been through the older, conventional ways of producing things.  I’m just blown away by what the computer graphics can do.

QUARTAROLI:  Do you still have any of those prototypes laying around?  Do you have any of the mock-ups?  It’d be interesting to see.

BELKNAP:  I do.  I probably have a few, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  That’d be great, for me anyway, to take a look at that.  I’m interested in these printed guides.  What size?  Were you always going for an ammo can size?  Because "Plan and Profiles" were larger, you had to reduce 'em to what you have now, which fits the ammo can.  So what was the size when you had those originals?

BELKNAP:  We always were working with that 5½ x 8½ size, from day one.  Just folded over a letter size sheet of paper in half, and that gives you a 5½ x 8½.

QUARTAROLI:  So you weren’t goin’ for the ammo can, you were goin’ because of the paper you started off workin’ with.

BELKNAP:  Right.  And we originally laid the book out upside down, so the river was flowing as you’re seeing it.  And then we felt it was too unconventional to have a book open from the bottom up, so we switched it around.

QUARTAROLI:  That’s very interesting.

BELKNAP:  It was my dad who really felt that was important, to switch it around.

QUARTAROLI:  So you read as you run?

BELKNAP:  Well, no....

QUARTAROLI:  Or to go to, say, with a conventional....

BELKNAP:  With a conventional way of opening a book.  He felt that was important.  He thought it was too far out to have it the other way.  So it’s just interesting that now the last update of the Grand Canyon Guide we put in the camping sites, and made the new USGS [GCMRC] mileage points more visible.  We have both mileage systems in there, but to be able to now transmit electronically all the files to the printer in <China>, and that happens in a matter of maybe an hour and a half, the whole book.  That’s just so amazing.  And then just to be able to make .pdf files that the printer can use, where there’s no chance of type changing and missing fonts, that type of thing.

JANSEN:  When you made the first map, where did you get the names for....

BELKNAP:  You mean the place names?

JANSEN:  Yeah, all the place names of the rapids and just....

BELKNAP:  Pretty much just using the "Plan and Profile."  I think that’s pretty much where all of it came from.  We were using the quad sheets, and I think the 1:62,500 sheets too-the much more current ones-for really the final names.

QUARTAROLI:  What plans for....  I know you just finished the <Grand Canyon>, and updating that stuff.  And you’re doing similar things to the other three guides, bringing those up to date too.

BELKNAP:  Right, those have all had the shaded relief.  We’ve spent a major amount of time in the last three years, working on 'em, so I think we’ve got 'em up to speed.  There’ll always be fine tuning.  But we’re working on the website.  There’s been a website around for a long time, but it’s never been anything I wanted to talk about-it’s not very good.  So we’re spending a lot of time with this new website, just putting in a lot of resources and supplemental things to the guides-just to support and enhance the guides basically.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, I’ve found the set invaluable in my research, because it covers so much of the whole system, except for the reservoirs [unclear].  You left off those, because it’s not a river running stretch.  Yeah, just an invaluable resource, to be able to lay 'em all out together.  So much information on 'em.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, [unclear].  You probably have a better record of our books than we do!  We really appreciate your interest in those.

QUARTAROLI:  I think maybe I’m just more compulsive than you guys are.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  I’ve got some boxes in storage of a lot of the older guides.  But I’m going to definitely get 'em out sometime soon, and see the sequence and what’s there.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, it’s forty years now.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  Exactly.  Pretty amazing.

QUARTAROLI:  Were you involved-I know your dad was a little bit-in the Western River Guides Association?

BELKNAP:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  Because they kind of started probably in the early sixties, when river running was taking off.  Did you have much to do with....

BELKNAP:  I really didn’t, no.  I know my dad was very involved with it.



