ED FOUTZ INTERVIEW  

NAU.OH.75.4

United Indian Traders Association



[BEGIN SIDE 1]     


This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University.It's March 9, 1998.  We're in the Rug Room at the Shiprock Trading Company with Edwin Foutz.  Also present in the room is Lew Steiger running the sound equipment.  And we're going to ask Mr. Foutz a few questions about his background as a Navajo trader.      



Cole:  First of all, Ed, I'd like to ask when and where you were born.      

Foutz:  I was born May 7, 1937, in <Farmington New Mexico>.  I guess that's why I love this area.      

Cole:  Were your parents from <Farmington> also, or what was their background?      

Foutz:  My father was from <Kirtland>--raised and born--and he was raised here in <Kirtland>.  The Foutz family basically came over from <Tuba City>, where they'd been sent down by Brigham Young in the 1800's to colonize <Tuba City>.  My great-grandfather and his family moved up here, and of course they've been in the valley--when I talk about the valley, in the <Kirtland>-<Farmington> areas, the San Juan Valley--ever since.   My mother and father met at BYU, Brigham YoungUniversity, at <Provo Utah>--she being from <Provo Utah>, he being from here.  And he courted her and brought her back to the Reservation.  Let's see, he was back here at the age of thirty, and that was in 1939.  He died during the spinal meningitis epidemic on theReservation, and he died [when] he was thirty year sold.  He was a partial owner of Tee Nos Pos TradingPost at that time.  [He] helped bury one of his friend's, Red House's, daughters one night.  And about ten days later he contracted and came down with the disease, and he died about eight days later in <Farmington>.      

Cole:  What was his name?      

Foutz:  His name was Edwin Luff, L-U-F-F, Foutz.And actually, I'm a Junior.  I never use the Junior because we've really never been together, where I've had to use the Junior.      

Cole:  What was your mother's name?      

Foutz:  Laprill Sumner [phonetic spelling].  She was from <Provo Utah>.  After his death, she was down here for some time with the Foutz--maybe a year or so with the kids, and then she returned to <Provo Utah>.  And Think after that time, my sister and I came down about every summer of our life we spent down here with our grandparents.  Then we returned to <Provo Utah>, and stayed with our grandparents in <Provo Utah>, going to school.   At the age of fourteen, I went to work with my uncle, Russell Foutz.  At that time, he had Tee NosPos, and I don't think he had this store at that time.I went to work for him, helping truck, and just doing any miscellaneous jobs I could.  I loved it, because I was learning a lot of things.      

Cole:  So is that how you became involved with trading?      

Foutz:  That was the start of it.  Around the Indian people, that was it.  I loved it, and I liked learning, and I enjoyed being with him--he was a great teacher ,and I learned a lot from him.   My mother remarried, and I hadn't had a male figure in my life, immediately there, and I guess Russell kind of fulfilled some of that, too--he and Helen.  They opened their house to me, and they were very, very gracious.  He taught me a lot.  He taught me this business.   As I was raised, I went back to school, and I guess as I looked at the business, there were so many Foutzes in the trading business at that particular time--Ithink at that time there was maybe twenty some oddstores under the Foutz name.  They weren't closelyrelated or connected, but there were Foutzes runningthem--my cousins, my third and fourth cousins, anduncles.  And I decided not to go in [the trading]business, so for a long time I was doing other things.I’d owned a Quality ice cream store, and was workingfor a company.   One year, I think it was about in 1964, [I] visitedRussell and Helen in <Farmington> with my wife.  As wewere driving back to <Provo>, she said, "Ed, I don't knowthat I'm gonna be real happy about it, but every timeyou're around the Indian people, you just come alive.You just have a whole different quality.  I reallythink maybe you ought to pursue it."  Well, odd enough,it was a short time after that, that Russell called meand asked me if I'd be interested in working in andbuying-into Shiprock Trading Company.  At that time, hedidn't have anybody to run it.  And not that I couldrun it right off, but I could learn.  And he wanted toknow if I'd be interested, which I was.  And so a veryshort time after that, we moved down.      

Cole:  And that was....      

Foutz:  That was in 1964.  And I'd worked beforethat time.  I'd worked until I was about eighteen,nineteen years old, with Russell.  I transferred to Arizona State College, and at that time ran a shop for Russell on 5th Avenue during the winter months when Iwas in school.  Then we would close that during thesummer months and I'd come up here and work at thetrading post.  And so I got to see, you might say, the retail end of the arts and crafts business in <Scottsdale>, and the wholesale business as well as thetrading end of it, where we were trading for livestockand things on the Reservation.      

Cole:  Describe <Teec Nos Pos> in 1945, when you were working there.      

Foutz:  I'm not sure, and you need to talk toRussell about that, the year it got moved up to theroad.  For a long time, <Teec Nos Pos> was around on thedirt road, or the old road, in the valley, by theboarding school, and up that little valley.  And ofcourse that is where it derived its name, which is "Circle of Trees,"  'cause it was surrounded by thesebeautiful cottonwood trees on the wash there.  And itwas an older store.  We'll furnish some pictures of it.It was what I would call the older-type store.  It wasrun on a huge diesel--ran the electricity out there.That's why I can always remember that, is because ofthe wonderful quiet noise it made night and day.  And you'd finally kind of--what I'd say, the noise wouldfade out, because you'd never notice it until it wentoff.  And then it became so silent, that something was drastically wrong.  But they run it off of a big diesel, so they didn't have electricity out there.  Andit was a bull pen.  And they had an old-type gas pumpout front that you would hand-pump it back and forth.And it had a reading up in the glass meter to where you'd pump out seven gallons, if that's what they wanted, and then you'd put that in the car.  And it wasjust what I would call your typical 1940 trading postwith everything behind the bull pen.  It was a highbull pen with a stove in the middle, the groceries onone side, the dry goods on the other, along with yourtack and horse and horseshoes and things like that.They had very little refrigeration, and youringredients that you sold at that time were prettyabbreviated.  When I say that, you would sell one typeof bread, and maybe sweet rolls.  And your fresh meat.And you wouldn't have a lot of refrigeration for it, soyou'd butcher in the morning, and you'd cut thatcarcass up during the day and sell it piece by piece,but it pretty well all went out during the day.   It was interesting in that we always had what wecalled a guest hogan out in front of the store.  Thatwas typical of a lot of the trading posts where thefamilies would come so far, like the ones that liveddown by the Four Corners around the <San Juan River>.  Bythe time they'd come up to the store, they couldn't getback home that same day, so they would stay over anduse the hogan out front overnight.  And it was there,furnished by the store, free--it was just a service.But the people would come up, and a lot of the peoplewould get there earlier in the day, and then they'dsocialize all day long--talk and visit--and they'd comein at lunch time and pick up little stuff likecrackers, or maybe corned beef or corned mutton, orvienna sausage or sardines, or something like that,just some little light [snacks] to have for lunch.  Andthen they would sit around talking in the shade of thestore.  The store most always would close at noon.Then they'd open about an hour, hour-and-a-half later.And then the heavy trading or the heavy business wenton from about two to three in the afternoon untilclosing, because everybody wanted to get their thingsand head out for home.  And so that was kind of asocial time for the Indian people as they cametogether.  It was a time they could come together andfind out what others were doing in different areas--because geographically, they were still pretty isolatedat that time--a few cars, but very few.      

Cole:  So what kind of transportation did most ofthem have?      

Foutz:  Horse.  It was a combination--a few cars andtrucks--a few trucks I should say.  Mostly horse andwagon at that time.  Now this is at <Teec Nos Pos>.  Andthat was still pretty well that way at that time.      

Cole:  About that time period, how would you viewthe social and economic conditions of the Navajopeople?      

Foutz:  A lot of the social would come together atthe time of dances and things like that, because theIndian or the Navajo, being nomadic, lived in theirdifferent areas, and they didn't do a lot of cross-socializing or meeting one another--only at events likea squaw dance or a fire dance or a sing or somethinglike this.  This was a great time to come together.And I think during that period, that's why Shiprock Fair was so big, because this was a gathering of Indians from all over this area of the Reservation.And young people would get to meet other young peoplethat weren't particularly from their area.  It was agreat time for that.  I think the boarding schools werestill very strong at this time.  A lot of water wasbeing carried at that time, and probably a lot of useof what we called river water, as drinking water andthings.  The trader or the trading post was looked onas a source of water.  They'd come in with theirbarrels and fill up the water and carry it back home atthat time.  So that was another service that wasrendered by the trading post at that time, as a center, because they had, usually, water, and access to it.Economically, it was what I would call the last of thetrading era.  I think during the 1940's [was] the realtrading period, but there was some cash flow out on theReservation, both from payrolls and from SocialSecurity and welfare, payroll and other sources.  Therewere some railroad checks.  There was getting to be asmall cash flow to where everything wasn't trading.There was some cash and some trade.  And I think it wasduring that era that the transfer from all trade onarts and crafts started to change to where a lot oftimes you would buy things at half trade, half cash.And you would give either a trade slip, if the peopledidn't deal with you, or you'd give a trade token or atrade slip, and then they could trade that out over aperiod of time, and then you'd pay the other half cashfor things.   So the trading era, back in the forties and fifties,was starting to change--the change being that the cashflow, and the people wanted cash, because they weregoing to maybe outside markets and different demandsfor that cash than they've ever had before.   

Cole:  What kinds of things did your uncle let youdo at the trading post during that period of time?      

Foutz:  Oh, at <Teec Nos Pos> I didn't stay there somuch, so a lot of times I was used for truckingcommodities or merchandise out that we would buy herein town, of suppliers that didn't go out that way withit.  And a lot of times we’d bring back livestock orpelts or something that we had traded for from theparticular store.  And a lot of times I'd drivelivestock back in and bring it in to the ranch, which was at <Kirtland>.  I would stock while I was at thestore, and boy, I was pretty young back then.  I was, what, eight, nine years old, and so I was just learning.  I was trying to drive.  They'd have to takethe keys out of all the cars, or I'd be trying todrive, like I think any youth that age, and things thatare pretty normal.   I can remember throwing rugs to Gil Maxwell and Penny, his partner, when I was about eight or nineyears old at <Teec Nos Pos>.  So there were times when Iwas there, and I'd help fold rugs or unfold rugs.  AndI can remember these very distinctly, because duringthat time there weren't a lot of dealers that wouldcome through looking for rugs--especially wholesale,where they would take more than just one rug.  And soit was always a highlight when a dealer came by.  Itwas an important time.  And I can remember folding rugsas they would throw 'em to these dealers.  It was EdCrane and Penny and there was a Mr. Keely that used togo up and he would run up through <Jackson Hole> and thatcountry in the summertime and sell a lot of rugs.There was Ed Green from <Boulder>.  He would take quite afew rugs up into the <Colorado> area.  And yet fromthose, there weren't a lot of customers.   Once a year I can remember the highlight of thewhole summer was going to the <Gallup> Ceremonials.  Iwould help Russell and Helen over there set up a booth,and then just be in the booth.  And I kind of thoughtmaybe I was helping.  As I look back, probably becauseof my age, I was a lot of times in the way, but theywere very, very good about it, and I think I learned alot.  I loved the arts and crafts, and Russell did, andI think through that I learned a great deal from him.But at that time we'd always look for accounts at the <Gallup> Ceremonial.  And one of the biggest accounts wealways had there was Fred Harvey.  And so when Fred Harvey used to come by, it was a very important thing,and they would buy their rugs.  Sometimes it helpedmake that whole summer season, and we depended heavilyon that cash, because we have to convert those rugs sowe could buy more arts and crafts the coming fall andwinter.      

Cole:  Do you remember any of the buyers from FredHarvey?      

Foutz:  Oh, Mr. Evans was one of the early ones. When I was [ten to fourteen], it was Mr. Evans, a thin,bald-headish man, and I would guess, I'd sayScandinavian of some kind.  But he was foreign.  He worked in <Albuquerque>.  I remember the first stack of rugs I took over.  Russell sent me over, I was fourteenyears old.  They were in the back of the station wagon,and I took 'em in there, and I can remember him havingan old broom handle that had been cut off and the nailwas pointing out.  And every rug you'd throw to him--Idon't care the quality or the price of it--he would jabthat in it and pull it apart to see if it had a cottonwarp.  And Fred Harvey at that time would not buyanything with a cotton warp in it.  So immediately, ifit had a cotton warp, he'd say, "Oh! when will theseweavers learn?!" and we'd fold it back up, and ofcourse carry it right back out.   After that I believe it was Trammel Bowman.  They'dmoved their buying office at that time to the South Rimof the Grand Canyon.  Trammel Bowman then was the headbuyer for the Indian arts and crafts.   I think after Mr. Bowman, it was probably....  Oh,gosh.  For a fact, he's been there until just lately,and I can't remember his name, I'm sorry.  That namewill have to come around to me.      

Cole:  So you then worked at <Teec Nos Pos> for _____years?      

Foutz:  No, I wasn't really working for <Teec Nos Pos>as much as I worked with Russell.  And I really stayedwith Russell and Helen in <Farmington>.  And Russell,back in that era, did not spend much time at thestores.  He'd go out for a day and then come back in.The roads were still dirt, and I can remember intrucking out to <Teec Nos Pos>, that several of thosewashes would be washing at that time.  And of coursethey were hauling a lot of uranium out of MonumentValley, and so we had convoys of uranium trucks.  But alot of the times when the washes would be running, theywould run so high that even the uranium trucks, the bigdiesels, couldn't even go through 'em.  And we wouldsit there on one side of the wash, if we were goingout, and we had commodities on the truck, so I'd open abox of sweet rolls and pull out some sweet rolls, andthey'd have a coffee pot, and we'd make some coffee, orwe'd have some pop, and we'd sit there until the waterwould go down.  And then they would hook onto my truck,because it was a deuce-and-a-half, it was still smallenough that the water would go through the runningboards and out through the engine, and they'd pull meacross with a winch.  They could get through, and thenthey would pull me through.  But at that time, it wouldstill take a long time to get out to some of thoseroads.  They could be in pretty bad shape real fastbecause of the weather.      

Cole:  Did you learn to speak Navajo?      

Foutz:  I speak fairly good Navajo, as long as I'm in the store.  You get me to church, or somewhere out of the store area....  But I would say I speak Navajo well when it comes to the store, yes.      

Cole:  When did you learn?      

Foutz:  I think that was something I picked up rightalong.  My grandfather, Al Foutz, [who] I stayed within <Kirtland> there when I was very young, taught me howto count.  He'd be on the front porch, resting on thecouch, and I'd be with him, and for some reason hetaught me to count.  And I think with a lot of youngminds, you pick up things much easier.  And I, for some reason, never forgot how to count in Navajo, from him,and some of the things.  He always dealt with theIndian people.  He'd run trading posts himself, and hehad a part of Progressive Merc, but even after thattime, he would always keep a lot of livestock on thefarm, specifically with the Indian people in mind. While they were still using horses to pull wagons, he'dalways pick up at the auctions in <Cortez> and <Durango>,animals that he thought would be good for them--eitherriding or work horses.  And the Indian people wouldcome by all the time to buy horses, or to buy cows, orto buy sheep from him.  And so he was always dealingwith the Indian people there.  So even when I wasyounger than that, I was around them.      

Cole:  Did your uncle or yourself drive animals totown?  Or was it mainly just....      

Foutz:  Russell.  I was back at the area when we'ddrive the livestock to town, and mainly that would beyour lamb drives.  Russell certainly was involved inthat still, and I still can remember hearing thestories about how they would start to eat hay orsomething with some burrs in, and they would get scabson their jaws so bad they couldn't eat, and they'dstart to lose weight.  But it was always a time to lookforward to, because of course your lamb and your woolseason were so important to the trader.  Even back inthat era, that was the way that we really kind ofcleaned off, that people were able to pay theiraccounts completely off, was if they sold their wool ortheir lambs.  Then that was a time that the traderspretty well got their accounts receivable or theiraccounts down to where they could pay their bills, andpay the bank off, maybe, on some of the note that theyowed them.  Very important.      

Cole:  How would you describe the Navajo-Anglo trading relationship at that time period?      

Foutz:  At that time period?  Oh, I think probablythe trader was a great intermediary between the outsideworld and the Navajo.  The Navajo, up to that time, hadbeen very isolated.  He relied a great deal on thelocal trader for a lot of his communication, and to--what would I say?--to find things that he had got, onhow he could qualify for welfare or Social Security.  Alot of times it was just how well the trader, and howup the trader was on things.  And so the Indians reliedon him heavily for that type of thing economically.  Ithink the trader became, a lot of times, relatively agood friend, somebody they could really trust and relyon.  And when I say a friend, it wasn't just abusiness, seller-buyer type situation, but it wassomebody that they could come to when they reallyneeded it, whether they could pay back or whatever, butthey knew they could rely on that person to help.  AndI think that went both ways.  I think there were greatrelationships back in those eras.  And of course theyrelied on each other so much.  But the trader, I think,went beyond that.  I think a lot of times he was....Between that, he was the banker.  I think he was thepostman.  When letters would come in from, let's say,people in World War II--some of the young ones went offto World War II--that he was the one that would readthe letter a lot of times, or be able to read a letterto 'em, because a lot of times they didn't havesomebody that could really read that much at that time--or the kids would be away to school.  So a lot ofreliance there.      

Cole:  Did you ever fill that role when you were atthat age?      

Foutz:  No.  No, Russell always had either Jay orLloyd Foutz there, or somebody older that was looked onas the local trader.  I was not the trader.  And Ithink to really get to that level where the people hadtrust in you, you would have to spend some pretty solidtime there, as Jay and Lloyd did, and Russell himselfhad been there long enough that the Indians had enoughtrust that they would deal with them.  And I didn't speak good enough [Navajo], and because of my age, backin that era, they did not [speak enough English]. Later on in my life, here at Shiprock Trading, I didthat many times.   At the time of a death, called on--not just to help,but to maybe speak.  Just any way that you could, youwould try to fill in, because they were adopting ourway of life, and sometimes it wasn't too comfortablefor them.  And while they wanted to do some things,they didn't quite know how to do it.  And they maybedid know how to do it, but they didn't have confidencethat they really did, and so they would use you to makesure of that confidence to back them up, you might say,in a lot of ways.   Financially, you were a go-between a lot of timeswith the finances at this period, because at that timethe banks weren't out here.  There was a bank now at <Shiprock>, and there are branches out on the Reservationnow as we speak, but back in that era, there was not.They were either in <Farmington> or <Gallup> or some bordertown.  And consequently you had to do a good share ofthe financial counseling for 'em.  And that was reallybasically lending money.  And that was in the form ofpawn, or on livestock, or possibly on their accountthat they'd pay off with livestock or wool and mohair.   It was interesting.  You look back at the tradingeras and the first time that we really got a cash flowout here on this reservation of any substance wasduring the Roosevelt days when the New Deal came out.They started building reservoirs out here, and doing alot of water work in drilling small water wells andreclamation work.  And that was some of the firstsubstantial checks that were out in this country.  Andup to that time, it was almost purely trade.  And so asyou come away from that era, you just constantly get alittle greater cash flow out here, and then with theadvent of uranium and oil and gas, and just the jobsthat came along with things like that, you started toget substantial cash flows.      

Cole:  As a child working for your uncle, did youhave time to play, and did you have playmates?      

Foutz:  Yes!  I had a group of cousins.  My UncleBob and Aunt Helen had kids, as Russell did too, and Iplayed with all that group, yes.  Really, most of 'em,because of my age, they were my cousins up there, butkids here in <Shiprock> I got to know real well.  And aswe moved here, yes.  My kids were raised and went toschool here.  Yeah, some of the good friends I have areIndian people, are from out here.  And they were greattimes, but really from the time I was, I would say,twelve or thirteen, I really didn't take a lot of timeto play.  I think I was more interested in working andstaying busy.  And once I started with Russell, it waspretty well work most days.  Now, to me, that wasplaying, I enjoyed that.  I don't look back on it as Imissed anything.  We'd play in the evenings, and Icertainly had those times when we'd enjoy long weekends and that, but still we were pretty busy during the day.      

Cole:  Would you say that--I'm sort of curious--Navajo kids your age, were they also pretty busy, theyhad things to do?      

Foutz:  Well, at that time most of them--I'llqualify that--were not living in big areas, so theywere living on small farms.  So they had things to do.They had livestock to look after, they hadresponsibilities, and they were expected to take careof those responsibilities--whether it was tend to thesheep or the livestock or help with the hay in thegarden, and things like this.  And the girls were tohelp with the weaving and cooking and things like this,and they were brought along.  And so it was veryinteresting, because during that era, they were nomadicand spread away from each other, and you can't help butnotice as you come into <Shiprock>, as the people havebuilt these housing projects, through both the tribeand the government, and then just the people, becausejobs around here will look for places, and they builtplaces here.  But slowly as these people have cometogether, the young people don't have things to doanymore, they don't have the responsibility, and theyhave extra time on their hands.  And so for the veryfirst time, as these kids came together, we started tohave problems with groups, you might say, at night.  Askids got together, they started looking for things todo, and some of those things were maybe looking fortrouble--or they ended up in trouble.  No differentthan we were, but it was interesting, because you coulddefinitely see the shift happening.  And it's evenstill happening, on more of an accelerated basis.  Andhere in <Shiprock>....  Did you come in from <Gallup>?(

Cole:  Yes.)  You maybe saw the area that all thoselittle houses out there were built for the FairchildSemiconductor Plant.  I almost say that that was likeputting together, once the jobs left, that, to me, as Iwatched families come in there, and the kids havenothing to do, that you might say that in a small way,that was like building a ghetto, in that the samethings happen.  The kids didn't have anything to dowhen they got there, and all of a sudden they werelooking for things to do, and boy, we really had somehard things going on in town, as we still do today.Not just because of that, but it was just aninteresting thing to see happen, as you look back now--that you don't get to see capsuled, finite things likethat happen in many communities like you did out here.So things have really changed, it's changed a greatdeal, as the cash flow....  The roads, of course, camealong--the area of transportation changed.  And withthat, the demands of the people changed.  And then Ithink the really big change came about with the adventof communication:  Your radio and your Navajo Hoursthat were aimed and beamed almost straight at theNavajo people in the way of advertising and things.And it used to be at the old trading post that fashionlagged maybe two or three or four years behind thefashion, let's say, in the country.  If pointed tennisshoes were in, somewhere maybe three or four yearslater, they would be in demand on the Reservation.With the advent of radio, and especially with TV, theyoung people, as well as all of  'em, were brought intothe world today.  So if chocolate Cocoa Pops werepopular as a cereal, that's what you'd better stock inyour store, because that's what the kids would becoming in and telling their parents they wanted to buy.And so things changed pretty radically.  You couldn'tcarry just the good old standard things that we used toin the early days in trading posts.  Their demands,like everybody else's, started to change and widen, andwe started carrying a greater selection of meat.Instead of just mutton and lamb, we carried chicken andluncheon meats and things like this.  And in the earlydays you'd never see that, because of refrigeration ofthings, as well as for just....      

Cole:  Did you have a nickname?      

Foutz:  I think most people are given a Navajo name. The Navajo people are a very descriptive people, and they give you names.  And it's a very interestingthing.  Do you know why there's so many Begays?      

Cole:  I have no idea.      

Foutz:  Begay means "So and So's son."  So if your father was given a name, and you were the first son,you'd be your father's name [followed by] Begay.  My father's name was ‘Ashkii Tsoh, which was "Big Man"[Big Boy], and I was ‘Ashkii Tsoh Biye’ to a lot of people from <Teec Nos Pos>, but a lot of  'em didn't knowmy father.  So I was so associated with Russell, and he was called Dághá»chíí’, which in Navajo means "Red Moustache."  So I was called a lot of times Dághá»chíí’Yázhí, or Dághá»chíí’ Biye’ "his son."  And really, inNavajo, he's my ‘abízhí yázhí, or my uncle on my father's side.      

Cole:  When you came back in the sixties andactually owned a post, did that name stick?      

Foutz:  Yes!  Oh, the Indian people knew my father,and of course Russell was here with a partner with me.And even more than everything else, rather than beingcalled ’Ashkii Tsoh Biye’ at that time, I was calledDághá»chíí’ Yázhí, which was "Little [Red Moustache]."I didn't carry a Red Moustache, but I was with Russell,and that kind of, to a lot of people, associated ustogether here at the store.  And so I was really calledDághá»chíí’ Yázhí a lot of times.      

Cole:  How did the supply system work?  Like, say,in the forties when you worked for Russell, how didthey get diesel, gasoline, and groceries out to thetrading post?      

Foutz:  There were a few large suppliers that wouldcome by, but most of the time you'd buy your stock orlet's say you'd stop by Farmington Merc.  That was thebig supplier in town, and they carried a lot of thetrading posts from wool season to lamb season, or youran an account there, and very seldom did most traderspay up their account.  They would pay it up once ayear.  And I think they would carry a lot of dry goods,Pendleton shawls.  They would carry tires, they wouldcarry almost anything the trader would need, and you'dback in there, or you'd send an order in, and theywould fill that order, and you'd go back at the end ofthe day and they'd have it sitting out on the warehousefloor.  And you'd back up your pickup or your biggertruck to it, and you'd load on that order and take itout to the store at that time.  As things progressedalong, and as Kimball started to come out, they wouldactually deliver to some of the stores out on theReservation if the roads were good enough.      

Cole:  Who is Kimball?      

Foutz:  Kimball was a supplier that I believe--andI'm not quite sure--I think they bought out possibly Farmington Merc, it become Charles Ilfeld, and then Ithink Kimball's was a large wholesaler in this region,and they bought out Charles Ilfeld, and I think [it]became Kimball's.  For a long time Kimball's serviced alot of the trading posts and small businesses up inthis area.  Then slowly, as the Associated IGA orAssociated Grocer came in, we joined for the first timein <Denver>.  And so we were supplied from the Associated Grocer Company from <Denver>.  And at that time, for thefirst time, we became fairly competitive.   But backing up, as you move around, your mind takesoff on one phase, but during that phase of time,Kimball was serving then for the very first time.  Wewould start to get flour from Tanner's Flour Mill in <Cortez>.  He would deliver out to the stores, and he'dbring out maybe a full truck at a time.  And for astore like <Teec Nos Pos>, that would maybe hold us forthree weeks to a month.  They would supply us with onetruckload of flour, or a partial lot, and they would drop some at <Beclahbeto> and some at <Teec Nos Pos>.  And these were still dirt roads at that time, and so a lotof suppliers didn't come out.   Then you were pretty well--you had a few reps, whatwe called representatives, coming through, selling drygoods, like Henry Yeltsin, and Herbie Mann from <Phoenix> had National Dry Goods.  And there was the Babbitt Brothers had their wholesale place in <Flagstaff>.  And then there were several little ones, the Rio Grande Lotion Company started coming out with salesmen andthat.  They found out enough business was out here,that they'd work this area.  And they would slowlystart to deliver out here.  But before that time, boy,you were pretty well dependent upon a supplier if youlived up in this area out of <Farmington>.  And we'd pickthings up from Charles Ilfeld or Kimball's.  And thenlater on they'd start to deliver, as the companies gotbigger--like Kimball's would start to deliver to thestore.  And then after Kimball's, IGA came in.  And forthe very first time I feel like we got relativelycompetitive, because of that association.  We couldbelong to a large group of people, buying in suchvolume, that our things were delivered at a fairlycompetitive price--and much fresher.      

Cole:  And that was....      

Foutz:  And that was when I was here at <Shiprock>,and I'd say that's probably in the, oh, probably 1970'sand maybe early 1980's, that IGA came in.      

Cole:  And who would you have been competingagainst?      

Foutz:  Here in <Shiprock>?  (

Cole:  Uh-huh.)  Therewas Bruce Bernard Company up just here on the hill.And then there was Bond and Bond Company, that had beenhere a long time, down on the river.  And then Manningsopened a store that Charles Dickens had.  They boughtthem out.  And then there was Manning Trading Post.Back in the very early time, there was two or threestores here, but when we started, there was BruceBernard, Shiprock Trading Company, and Bond and Bond,and then there was a little convenience store over hererun by the....  Oh, the family from <Cortez>.  Again, thename slips me.   So it was competitive, we did have competition herefor almost any phase.  Whether it was the Bernard’s andus--we were competitive for livestock.  The othercompanies, we were competitive for arts and crafts aswell as any business.  So for the first time we hadsome pretty strong good competition, which was good forthe Indian people, as well as good for our business.It made us stretch a little more.   I think when I ran this store, as I got a littleolder, I had one great advantage, and that's we boughtso many arts and crafts.  Russell had a great love ofarts and crafts, and he knew 'em well.  He, at thattime, I think, had decided that if he was going to bereal good at arts and crafts, that you had to establishoutlets.  And consequently, he was out working hard toestablish those outlets--Fred Harvey.  Russell workedwith Fred Harvey, and he worked with accounts a greatdeal, building up the type of thing they wanted, and hewould listen to 'em and go back to the weavers and workwith them to try to find marketable things that wouldbe more marketable the next season, and come up withnew ideas.  In doing that, he was instrumental inbringing Germantown wool back to the Reservation.  Now,a lot of people were critical of that at the time,because they said, "Well, aren't handspun rugs better?"Well, they were, if the weaver could handle it.  But alot of times a weaver would spin all of her wool, doher hand dying with her homemade coloring, and come in,and the end product was very unsalable.  Now, a lot ofweavers could handle--let's say half the weavers couldhandle it well, but the others had a hard time betweendying and coloring and keeping a rug straight and thepattern going, to where when they got through with sixmonths' work, they'd bring it in, and you'd rather notbuy it, because you didn't know where you'd go to sellit.  And it was really a hard thing.  By bringing thecommercial wool back in, we could take a weaver likethat, and she could double her output, control hercoloring, and I think to a lot of those weavers, wetripled and [quadrupled] the money they were getting ina year's time.  So I think when you look at one side ofit, you might argue the point, if you're a purist andsaid, "Well, gee, handspun wool's the best," butlooking at the overall marketability of the rugs, notjust that, but the quality that came out on your four-ply yarns were just almost as good as your handspun.But we certainly put more money in the hand of themaker.      

Cole:  So Germantown....      

Foutz:  Is a commercial yarn rug, or a four-plyyarn.  The original, where the Germantown word comesfrom is the very, very early four-ply yarn that wasused back in the early, early 1900's in the Germantownrugs, came from <Germantown Pennsylvania>.  And so it was always referred to as Germantown.  We bought a lotof our wool from <New Richmond Ohio>, from Crescent and Klassen [phonetic spelling] Woolen Mills, back in theearly days here.  Russell worked very hard aboutestablishing great wool connections.  And when I saywool connections, [I'm talking] about the processing ofgood wool for the weavers.  And he was always lookingfor new markets.  And he worked with them to where herefined it.  He wasn't just taking the colors, but hewanted certain colors that would be marketable.  Heworked with 'em long enough, and he was able to buyenough of it, that they would listen to him, and dyethe colors that he needed, to where he came up withcolors that were very, very good for, let's say,<Shiprock> yei'iis--beautiful greys, beautiful beiges--and consequently the market just absolutely opened up,and we were able to sell a lot more of 'em, becausethey were more attractive to the average buyer, and wewere able again to put more money in the weaver's hand.And that's very important when you're here, looking atthe source.  You don't think of just the market outthere, you've got to think of the supplier, too, or themaker.  And I think Russell was very conscious of that,and we were, and I was taught that.  We've worked atthat very, very hard, and as we made outlets for it,then we could buy more arts and crafts, but also youhad to stay on the road selling.  And so a lot of timeswe were out selling, and I think when I was relativelyyoung, at that time I was buying in with Russell, orbuying part of <Shiprock>.  We went for the very firsttime to what we call a "market" up in <Denver>.  It wasthe Merchandise Mart in <Denver>, and it was a gift show.And we took a booth and we sat up and we sold tocustomers for the first time.  Well, not only at thegift show do you sell, but you were able to gocompletely around that market, and maybe there werefour or five hundred suppliers at that time, and so youwere seeing new lines that we could buy from:  scarves,new commodities that the Indians were looking for inthe colors that they liked, that weren't just comingthrough here.  So we didn't become just reliant on thesuppliers coming through, but we widened the marketthat we had, and we went out and bought things, and sowe became very competitive, price-wise, and I think ourselection was much greater for the first time.  And Ithink that helped build the store to the level that wewere able to build it.      

Cole:  What other types of arts and crafts were youdealing, [in addition to] rugs at that time?  Anything?      

Foutz:  Rugs and a few baskets, a little Navajopottery.  And back in the 1950's the very first sandpaintings that I ever could remember coming in, werebrought in.  The very earliest ones were from FreddieStephenson [phonetic spelling] in <Chinle>, and he was called Grey Squirrel.  Relations of his, Patsy and Frances Miller from <Sheep Springs>, started bringing afew in.  And then James Joe, that was also related tothat family, started doing some work here in <Shiprock>.And I can remember Russell buying a small box of sandpaintings, different sizes, from James Joe, and we took'em to <Scottsdale> for the very first time, and peopleliked the idea, but they didn't quite know how to reactto it.  And slowly, as people built up a littleconfidence that they were an art form, they started tomove.  And just slowly--and it was slow at first--westarted to establish a market for sand paintings.  But a lot of the people back in that time would not do sandpaintings, because it was duplicating a religious deityon something that couldn't be destroyed.  That was really against the Navajo religion, to an extent.  Now,a lot of the sand painters got around that by alteringcolors or altering some of the personages enough thatit wasn't a duplication of anything that they felt likewould be holy to the Indian people.  And yet it was avery sensitive issue for a long time.  A sand painterwould come in, and he never wanted to show his sandpaintings out front--he'd always kind of bring them ina back room to show them.  And there was just enoughsensitivity to some of the people on both sides thatthey just kind of honored that.  And so that wasinteresting.  The first sand paintings that came in, wenever framed.  We sold thousands of sand paintingsunframed before we ever thought or got the idea offraming them ourselves.  And now almost 95 percent ofthe sand paintings that we handle--and you saw thequantity of them--are all framed now.  So our framingbill is immense every month.  Sand painting is a bigbusiness now.  Back in that era, it was pretty wellrugs, where the big stay, we had some pawn jewelry, wehad some new jewelry, but most of it was rugs and smallthings like that.  That's one thing the Foutz familywas known for, was always Navajo rugs, back in thatearly era.      

Cole:  So what was the size of the Shiprock Trading Company when you moved in here?  Was it still a bullpen operation?      

Foutz:  It wasn't a bull pen, no.  It was a verysmall store up front, and it was self-service.  The Jack family had owned it for some time, and they reallyneeded to sell it financially.  They had gottenthemselves in a financial bind, and so Russell boughtit, and it took us a while to bring it back.  But ourbig feature at that time was--no, it was self-service,and of course we sold a lot of corned mutton and cornedbeef.  Your lards and your shortening were a big thing.Coffee was a big thing.  And we didn't have a lot ofrefrigeration right at first--we had two or three smallcases, and then one small case of meat.  Joe Harris,who went to work for Russell at a very, very earlytime--I'd say in the forties or early fifties, I guess--was with us for twenty-some odd years, and was alwaysthe butcher.  The Indian people took a great liking toJoe.  Joe was [of] some Indian [tribe from] back East--I think it was Choctaw or one of 'em--but he and hiswife--his wife worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairshere, and Joe worked here at the store.  But we hadfresh meat, and that was one thing the Indians wouldalways come in for, was they liked their meat fresh,and they knew how they liked it.  They were very, veryfussy with their preparation, and how they wanted it,and how fat they wanted it.  They were much fussier, Ithink, overall, than the Anglo woman or person,shopping.  They knew their meats.  And of course theywere sheepherders, and so they ought to.  And they werevery, very good at it.   Not a lot of vegetables.  Most of your vegetables,because of the lack of refrigeration, were dry.  It waspotatoes and onions and some bananas and oranges--things like this--but nothing exotic like we havetoday.  In our own supermarkets we've gone throughimmense changes.  As we think of the market today, Ithink back then it's been immense.  Out here it waseven more startling.  So they were pretty limited inthe things that we carried there, but they were self-service, and the people could pick up things.   A big majority of the store at that time, I'd say,probably at least half when Russell first bought thestore, was credit, and half was cash.  And that trendjust constantly, that percentage just slowly changeduntil it became almost 10 percent trade or charge, and90 percent to 95 percent cash.  The store was very involume, compared to what it was four or five years ago--it was very small--small volume.     We slowly added to the store.  I think it wentthrough three or four major changes.  It's interestingto me, and I'd just like to take note, because I thinka lot of people wonder about why they didn't see morestores built and added onto during that era of time.The Navajo Tribe, by the lease that they gave, back inthe early era were giving twenty-five-year leases.After that time, they'd give shorter leases, maybe ten,fifteen years, during the era that I came in.  Theywould own--immediately after like we did the expansionhere and spent a lot of money--they own thoseimprovements.  And for some reason, had they wanted tobreak [the] lease, or they would find some clause thatI was not doing right, that they could put me out of mylease, they would not have to pay me for theimprovements, they owned those.  They own the buildingand improvements to the lease.  Consequently, a lot ofthe traders, or a lot of the people out here, didn'twant to spend a lot of money, because they didn't knowhow long they'd be out here.   There was always, oh, what would I say?  Talk in the background, sometime the Navajo Tribe would want totake the trading posts over, and see that these wererun by the Indian people.  And I think it made a lot ofyour Anglo or white traders a little nervous--especially in enlarging their stores or spending a lotof money out there to improve.  And I thinkconsequently, during that era, you didn't see a lot ofimprovement in the stores, because of this.      

Cole:  What year did Russell first buy this store,do you know?      

Foutz:  Boy, you're gonna have to talk to Russell.I think I would just back up.  I'd probably say back inthe fifties.  I'd say early fifties, probably 1954,1952, something in there--so it was early fifties, thathe's had this store since then.  It's my understandingthat this store was started by Mr. Elgart [phoneticspelling] that was in <Tuba City>.  He was down there,<Tuba City> was, I think, originally settled by a group of Mormon people that were sent down by Brigham Young.At that time, it wasn't on the Navajo Reservation, and they had beautiful farms going there.  And because ofthe locale, and because the Indian people wererelatively close, Mr. Elgart built a trading post downthere, and I think you've got a wonderful picture of itin your archives.  Well, when they extended the NavajoReservation, the people had to sell their farms out.And so the Bureau of Indian Affairs at that time boughtthe people out, and my great-grandfather with a segmentcame up here.  Mr. Elgart came up with them.  That wasmy understanding, that he started this store in about,I believe, 1894.  And then I'm not sure, but I knowJess Foutz at one time worked here and had part of thisstore.  And then it went to the Evans family, and Ithink from the Evans family to the Jack family, andthen from the Jack family, Russell bought that, andever since then, it's been in the Foutz group.      

Cole:  When you came in, in 1964, I'm sort ofcurious, what was the situation with transportation andthe Navajo people in 1964?      

Foutz:  Okay.  Here we're on what we'd call theperiphery or the edge of the Reservation.  So there aremore cars per capita here than you would find on what Iwould call further out on the Reservation or theinterior of the Reservation.  But here in 1945 I wouldsay more cars, and if not--certainly not every familyhad a car--they had a relation or somebody that theycould get access to a car if they had to go to <Farmington>.  But I think even back in that era, peopledid not travel or go to town like we do today.  I think maybe the average family would go to <Farmington> maybe once every two or three months, maybe monthly.  And there were some that worked maybe just slightly off the Reservation--they went more, but not a lot.  While theywere traveling quite a bit, the average one didn't goaround.  And of course even back in that era, theIndian people would actually pay somebody to take themto town that had a car.  So this was a way that somepeople made money.  They didn't run a taxi cab, per se.We could call it that, but they had a transit service,you might say, and they rented that to the otherpeople.  That happens even today.      

Cole:  Was it still fairly common then to see peopleon horseback, wagons?      

Foutz:  Not as prevalent here in <Shiprock>.  It wasgetting to be a little uncommon to see wagons.  You'dsee wagons and that, and I think I've got one picture,and I'll never forget it, of an old wagon and team ofWilly John's.  He used to work at the store.  But onewinter he pulled up back here, and the whole harnesshad been made out of old water hose.  He couldn'tafford a harness or a harness setup, but because the[hose] was flexible and everything else, he'd made thewhole harness out of this rubber hose.  And it was thedarnedest-looking setup you've ever seen, wrappedaround his horses and that.  But the wagon was goingjust fine and that.  But as you went not too far out on the Reservation, just say to <Teec Nos Pos>--let alone <Chinle> and that--you saw a high proportion of wagons inthat area.  Here in <Shiprock>, just because of the edgeof the Reservation, and because industry came in like Kerr-McGee, and we had the helium plant here, and wehad a small settlement at that time.  No, we had moretransportation here.  The horses would be here, but thewagons were going fast.      

Cole:  Was that uranium?      

Foutz:  Kerr-McGee was uranium.  It was a renderingor a processing plant here.  They brought the uraniumin from several places on the Reservation, notablyMonument Valley.  In fact, you can see the big tailingspile out here that's been covered.  It was huge.  Butthey had a big payroll.  Plus they built quite a groupof beautiful homes down here for the Reservation, fortheir management and for people like that.      

Cole:  Is that where the Dine College houses arenow?      

Foutz:  No.  That would be the Navajo Community College over there.  That was right down here back ofthe old chapter house.  I think most of the houses havebeen leveled and taken away.  And the helium plant wasout here across in the flat back of the shoppingcenter.  And they had about sixty to a hundred homesout there, done in a subdivision with beautiful treesand everything else.  That was a big thing, theprocessing of helium here, that would come from that Rattlesnake find right up here by <Shiprock>.  Theyworked a lot of people.  Kerr-McGee, that, and HeliumCorp., yeah.  Big payrolls.  <Shiprock> was quite acommunity at one time.      

Cole:  So by the middle 1960's, when you becameinvolved with the trading post here, would you say itwas mainly a cash economy then?      

Foutz:  In the 1960's?  Yes.  But what it had been,it was converting into a cash.  I think, oh, when yousay "cash," okay, it was cash with a lot of emphasis onwelfare and Social Security.  When I say "welfare," thedistribution of state welfare commodities was a bigthing at that time.  Your welfare and Social Securitypaydays were very big.  Your livestock, we were stilltrading here at the store some sizeable livestockaccounts--notably wool and mohair--the Garnezes, the Kendalls, the Knights, the Lights--were all related,but they were big livestock families.  And we stilltraded on the account with those things.  We would runprobably one-and-a-half McKaskeys of just charge atthat time.  Some of those would be welfare checks, someof 'em would be payroll checks, like the Navajo Tribe.And some of 'em would be livestock.  But by far cash isthe most thing, yeah.      

Cole:  What is a "McKaskey"?      

Foutz:  The McKaskey is an old metal box you'll seeout there that closes.  It was the McKaskey Company,and they made charge account receipt holders, and theywould make 'em fireproof, so when you closed it atnight, it was so heavy-metally, that if you had a fire,up to that time it would withstand some of the heat andnot ruin your accounts.  And also, it had a lock on itso you could close those accounts at night and lock it,so if you were broken into, they couldn't steal all theaccounts and you wouldn't know who owed you money.  Andso it was the McKaskey Company--I'm sorry--that didthat.  And if you went to any trading post in the olddays, you'd always see their charge accounts.  It'svery interesting.  As you go out in Jay and Loyd's at <Beclahbeto>, say, you'll see racks of these booksstacked up with the family's names on.  And that's whyI wanted you to stop by there, because that store islike going back twenty years here, because they chargestill today, to so many of the families.  Your averagestore does not charge today.  For a fact, there arevery few trading posts, per se, left, that buylivestock.  When we say "trading post," you know thetrading era kind of evolved from all trade, the cashtrade, and then slowly the convenience store kind ofcome in.  And your local came in, your big stores atKayenta and <Tuba City> and <Chinle>--City Market and Basha's came out here.  And so slowly the conveniencestore took over where the trading post once was.  Andyet there's still livestock out here.  And so there'sstill the need for some services that buy,competitively, livestock and wool, mohair, and thingslike that.  While the market's decreasing, there'sstill some here.   The sheep have decreased for two purposes, I think.First of all, they've lost their sheepherders.  Yearsago, during the forties when I came out, and during thethirties, I think most families would kind of hold backone of the children or one of the kids and basicallysay that he was not going away to school, but he wasgoing to stay home and become the herder, or the onethat looked after the flocks or the sheep.  So theybasically had the sheepherders built in.  Well, the waythat the Indians take care of their sheep, you've gotto have a sheepherder, they've got to go out every dayand go out to a different part of their [grazing]permit to keep the feed coming along.    

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2]      



Cole:  This is Brad Cole from Northern ArizonaUniversity.  It's March 9, 1998.  We're at the Shiprock Trading Company in the Rug Room with Ed Foutz.  Also present in the room is Lew Steiger, who is running the camera and sound equipment.   Ed, could you continue?  We were talking about therole of the sheepherder in the Navajo family.      

Foutz:  Well, as you know, as the livestock haschanged out on the Reservation, the role of livestock,it's interesting to me, because back in the early days,you know, really, basically, the Navajo really grew up.As they were nomadic, they took with them their sheepherds.  They relied on their wool, they relied onseveral things that came away from the sheep, the lambsfor increase and of course the meat of the sheep,mutton, to eat.  But as the new era came in, so tospeak, and as we said that all their kids needed to goaway to school, for some time that wasn't enforced tothe point that a lot of the younger kids--or not a lot,but somebody in most families were retained out of thatto stay home, to become the herder, and basically werenever sent to school.  A little later on, some of theolder parents had to supplement the sheepherding, andthen now, they really have a hard time finding herdersto stay with their flocks, and so they either have oneof two alternatives:  and that is to either take one ofthe older ones out, or put flocks together, or keep theflock in the corral sometimes, feeding them hay.  Atthe price of hay today, you find that even though theylove their herds so much, it's a very expensive thing.And consequently, you've seen more of your Indianpeople go to cattle, or to cows, and that on theirgrazing permits they don't have to herd the cows everyday, or look after 'em.  They check on 'em maybe onceevery two or three days or once a week, and keep trackof 'em.  Then that doesn't take near the time that itdoes to look after a herd of sheep.  And so you've seena great decrease recently in the herds of sheep outhere, and the size of herds of the sheep and goats,brought on primarily by that.  And then also, justrecently, very recently, they lost their governmentsubsidy or incentive on wool and mohair.  That was thatthe government subsidized wool at a certain price.  Andthat certainly meant a lot of differential to theIndian that sold their wool for 32¢ and if theincentive was at 65¢, they got the difference between65¢ and 32¢ from the government.  And so that made itvery economically feasible, or much more feasible toraise sheep for that purpose.  And that subsidy now isgone, and consequently it's hard, economically, to keepa herd going with the price of hay today, that theyhave to supplement their feed on the Reservation; and alack of really, basically, herders, it's hard to reallyhave a herd.  So your numbers of sheep and goats haveradically or drastically decreased over the last fewyears, and have been decreasing for some period oftime, with the cattle increasing a little bit, butreally even down, too.  Your people are turning fromthat kind of economy, and livestock-orientedbackground, more to a job and training and that type ofbackground.  It's interesting.      

Cole:  Take 1965, 1966.  Describe for us the role ofthe trader at Shiprock Trading Company with the wooland mohair--maybe the wool season, how that all cameabout, how much you'd buy and sell.      

Foutz:  I think this was one of the greatresponsibilities, if you will, of the trader, oranybody doing business.  If you're going to be asuccessful business person out here, you need to rendera service to the people that you're trying to dobusiness with.  And I think that service to them is tofind a market or to be a competitive market in handlingwhat they need to market--in this case that we'retalking about, wool and mohair.  In the early days, wepretty well used to buy wool and mohair here at thestore and market it through two or three people thatwould traditionally market Reservation wool and mohair.Now, I define Reservation wool and mohair, becausethere is a differential because most of your mohair in the <United States> is sheared twice a year.  Mohair,goat wool, on the Reservation is sheared once a year.And as we were speaking earlier, the only other placethat I know of in the world today that is anothermarket where they shear their goats once a year is in Africa.  And so we have long mohair here, and so whenlong mohair is needed, this is a market they've gottacome to find it.  And [Navajo] wool is different thanthe rest of the wool in that there's greater dust outhere in the way of wind blowing and dust storms in thespring.  And so if we have a lot of dust, before weshear, that wool picks up a lot of that dust, andretains a lot of it, to where there's greater shrinkageon this wool than the average pasture sheep.  And yourmarkets know that.  So they're unique markets, andthey're uniquely a little different than anywhere elsein the <United States>.  And over the years, your peoplewho have bought this know this, and build that into theprice they pay for the wool, which is a little lessbecause it shrinks more.   Interesting too, there are some--what would I say?--over the years that I've dealt here on the Reservation,there's been some interesting things that you learnyoung, and that's there is accepted gamesmanship thatgoes on in the buying and selling of some of the thingsout here.  And I call it gamesmanship, because I feelthat's what it is.  In the way of buying livestock, youwould find that a lot of times you'd never buylivestock until late in the afternoon, on most days.We'd see very little livestock come into the store forsale till about three o'clock in the afternoon.  Ithink a lot of time the livestock, specifically thelambs, were left off of water for some period of time,and then they were put on water, or even induced forthirst by using a little salt, to where just beforethey'd come in to bring 'em to market, they would put'em on water.  And of course a young lamb can hold fromsix to eight pounds of water a lot of times.  Well,you've got to understand and know that if you're buyinga lot of lambs, or you've got a lot of extra water thatyou've bought, and when you go to market it, that youdon't have that water there to market, and you've losta lot of weight.   With the wool, of course the Indian people were goodabout--what would I say?--adding some weight to wool inways.  But it was gamesmanship.  That was just kind ofan accepted thing, but you had to kind of understandand realize it went on, or things could really bedifficult when you went to sell it, because you'd takea great loss on it.  And you learned these things indealing year after year with them, and it was aninteresting thing to me.  I got bested many times inlearning the business of dealing with livestock here onthe Reservation.  And then there are other times when Iguess I won, I don't know.  But it's been aninteresting challenge here.   When I first worked at this store with Russell, wewould buy about probably 123 or 120 bags of wool, andprobably, oh, 12 to 13 bags of mohair.  We haverecently taken that up to sometimes we bought betterthan probably 1,500 to 2,000 bags of wool, and up to ashigh as probably 800 or 900 bags of mohair.      

Cole:  When was that?      

Foutz:  That was probably back, oh, I'd say back....Boy, time gets away from you!  Probably back about ten,twelve years ago.  And so that would be in the mid-eighties, the late eighties.  We were buyingsubstantial quantities of wool and mohair.  And I thinkwe did this more than anything else instead of relyingon the people that had traditionally bought the woolhere that were working for a wool warehouse, to whereyou had two or three middle people.  We got enough sizeand enough volume going through here that we went rightto the wool warehouses themselves.  We were sellingwool and mohair directly to England, mohair to <Johannesburg> and to <Texas> on the wool market, andconsequently we were able to pay more to the people andkeep it more competitive and yet move the merchandise,the mohair and wool.      

Cole:  Were you buying that wool and mohair strictlyfrom Navajos, or also from other traders?      

Foutz:  The wool that I spoke of there we boughtprimarily from the Indian people themselves.  It wasinteresting, one year the Navajo learned fast that ifthey bought a large wool bag from the trader, they hadto spend $2-$3 for that wool bag.  So they would bringgunny sacks of wool in that we had to consequently putin the big bags and pack.  And after one of our woolseasons, we counted over 10,000 gunny sacks we got outthere that we'd emptied, to show you the volume thatyou do in it.  We had 10,000 gunny sacks back there.And this was--we drove this to where a lot of the wooland mohair was coming in from this whole region.They'd come, because I feel like we were competitive,and then a lot of the other traders had quit buyingwool and mohair.  And some of the other trading postshad actually started to be just a convenience store, orhad transformed into a convenience store with Thriftwaytaking them over.      Cole: Were you still seeing a lot of lambs duringthat period?      

Foutz:  We were buying larger quantities of lambs.We'd taken the lamb buying here from probably, I wouldsay roughly we used to buy 500-600.  The largest yearwe ever had was we bought just under 8,000 head oflambs here, and that's a lot of lambs.  And we used tobuy that on a very small scale.  A lot of those lambswere bought one by one in a big bucket on a singlescale on their back, you'd place each one in it.  Butthe Indian people would feel more comfortable inweighing like that, because they felt like in a bigscale that you could change the weight and theywouldn't know it.  So they understood the small scalemuch better.  And so we tried to keep it that way.  Andwhile it was a lot of work, it helped us, I think, buymore livestock.      

Cole:  Is the livestock business--the wool, mohair,and lamb business--still that big now?      

Foutz:  No, it is not.  I think we've talked aboutthe decreasing herds, and this showed up in lambs andmohair, and especially this has accelerated the lastten years, that the numbers are substantially downclear across the Reservation.  The Navajo Tribe runs awool program, and buys wool and mohair there.  Wealways found that was good competition, but we alwayscould usually match or beat their price.      

Cole:  Do you remember when that tribal wool programcame into being?      

Foutz:  Oh, I do not.  It's been probably viable orgoing for the last twenty years.  It's been a program,and interesting to me, it's been probably one of thelonger programs that the tribe has had going for it,where they've bought things from the Indian people andthen have found a market for it.  Most of the thingsthey'd start up would slowly over a short period oftime be unsuccessful to a degree, or it wouldn't workout, or the service wasn't needed anymore to where theydiscontinued it.  With the mohair-wool program, they'vekept it up for some period of time, and it's been agood program for 'em.      

Cole:  We were earlier talking about the wholetransition to the cash economy.  What effect have youseen, say, from the mid-sixties on, with the federalprograms that have come about, and things like that?How has that affected the buying and selling and maybeeven the Navajo people themselves, in your perspective?      

Foutz:  Well, I think first of all in that ______,talking about the sixties--of course in the fifties andthe sixties we had a few payrolls, but still thebiggest payrolls at most stores--and they were verysubstantial, and probably one of the busiest times ofthe whole month--would be your welfare, which would bethe first of the month; and then your Social Securitypayday, which would be the third of the month.  Andthose were the two very substantial paydays, aside fromNavajo Tribal paydays and your Bureau of IndianAffairs.  But they weren't as substantial as that.Now, your payrolls are more substantial by far.There's by far more cash flow than there used to be.For a fact, now we cash substantial amounts of checks.I think there have been weekends where we'll cash$50,000-$70,000 worth of checks in a single day, andhave to run back to the bank to replenish for Saturday.But totally changed because of your payroll, and thesize of checks.  Your welfare and your Social Securitychecks themselves have certainly, over the last fifteenyears, because of the increase in them, keeping up withthe standard of living, have gone up substantially insize.      

Cole:  How big did the store here get in terms ofhow many employees did you have?      

Foutz:  We got as high as probably, oh, I'd sayclose to twenty-five to thirty   employees, at one time.  And probably of the twenty-five to thirty, I'd say four would be Anglo, with therest being Navajo.  There were some very, very--whatwould I say?--highly qualified Indian people thatworked here, that could handle anywhere.  I had two orthree girls that actually could manage the store.  Theydidn't know they could.  I don't think they knew theycould, but they really could have….      

Cole:  Did you and Russell ever bring in any kind oflike fringe benefits, profit-sharing plans, or anythinglike that?      

Foutz:  I did, yes.  It was interesting, back in the1980's, we disbursed out of a profit-sharing plan here,and there were some very substantial checks paid here--most of it to the Indian people.  I think there was alittle better than maybe $200,000-$300,000 disbursed to'em in a profit-sharing plan that we disbanded.  It wastotally funded, and we decided there wasn't a need forit anymore, so we funded out of it.      

Cole:  It sounds like even in the sixties andseventies you still had quite a bit of credit business.How would it work when--sort of take us through whensomebody would get their Social Security check orwhatever--how much would be put on the account, and howthat would all operate.      

Foutz:  Okay.  I think if you're gonna run creditand be effective at it, you've gotta have really a goodcredit manager.  And I think that's where I trained twoor three of our Indian people to be excellent at that,because you've got to kind of watch.  And when I say"watch," you've gotta keep very good track of credit.But let's just take a Social Security check.  Let's saythe individual received $400-$450 in Social Security.We'd sit down with that individual when they'd open anaccount with us, and ask them how much they'd liketheir account to run.  And we'd maybe come to terms at$200 or $250 they'd like their account to be.Invariably, over a period of time, a lengthy time, theywould always end up trying to go higher than that,because they would always find that they had charged$250 and they wanted more before the check came, and sothey'd be in trying to ask you, and so eventually you'dlet 'em go up higher.  But let's just say the billwould be around $300, the check would come in, or notcome in, or they'd get the check, they'd bring it in,pay their account, and the difference between what theyowed and what they got they would take in cash.Sometimes that check would come here to the store.  Wedidn't have a post office here, but it would come toour post office box.  Other times the recipientreceived it themselves, would bring it in.  I thinkit's like credit you run anywhere else, you would havesome people that would pay their bill every singletime, others would pay it most of the time and come inand let you know why they hadn't.  Others would notever pay their bill, and you were continually trying tocollect the bills from them.  And I guess over theyears, that is one reason you've had to--and thatreally became a dilemma in the trading post, or in thistype of business--is how to mark up your groceries, orfigure your margins on the product you sold if you weregonna sell some for cash, and be competitive; andothers for charge, where some people weren't gonna paytheir business, and you carried it for a month and hadto pay for that extra cost in the money you had tiedup.  Plus, there were a substantial number that didn'tever pay their bill, and so you had to take that write-off.  And so a lot of the posts would lengthen theirmargin to cover this extra expense.  And it was tough.Some traders, I think tried a double pricing--one forcash and one for credit.  And I don't know many stores[where] that ever worked out successfully, becausepeople were unhappy about charging and not paying thesame price as somebody with cash.  That's hard to keepstraight, and I understand that, because I'd be upset,too, if I'd traded at a place for five years and paidmy bill most of the time, and yet I was getting chargeda higher price.  At the same time, I think anybodythat's been in business knows that they have to chargea little more if they're gonna charge and cover thosekind of expenses.  And so that really posed a problemas the greater cash came into being here.  And now,really, at a store like Shiprock Trading here, wherethere is enough payrolls around and that, I don't thinkyou'd really have to do any [credit] business if youwere competitive, and I think you'd probably be morecompetitive if you didn't charge at all.  I think thereare a lot of the old timers that are so used tocharging, they would like to, but I don't think aperson would need to [extend credit] to be in businesshere.      

Cole:  We haven't touched upon the pawn system, but did you have a pawn system at <Shiprock>?      

Foutz:  We had pawn at <Shiprock>, we did.  And we hada very large pawn safe.  Yes, we did a lot of pawnbusiness here, we did.  And that was back, and it was avery intricate part of the trading business at thattime.  This is interesting.  Of course, as you know,the one thing that brought the end to the pawn businesson the Reservation was the Federal Trade Commissionwhen they came out and did their studies on theReservation.  At that time I was, I think, a [memberof] the board of directors of the [United] IndianTraders Association, and we, as an association, triedto give the Federal Trade Commission as muchcooperation in the way of feeding our input, as wepossibly could, to them.  I don't really think thatthey were open in receiving that as much.  I think thatthey wanted to hear a pretty--what would I say?--narrow feedback on what they got about what was going on onthe Reservation.  I think personally that the need forsome changes were definitely needed.  There's no doubtabout that, there was room for changes in the way thatpawn was taken, and maybe the rates of interest thatwere being charged.  Most traders, I think at the timethey came out here, charged, I believe, 10 percent on pawn.  And we all held it for a year.  And that was probably 10 percent a month.  Boy, I'm trying to goback, I think that was 10 percent a month that wascharged at that time.   When the Federal Trade Commission came out, theyheld their hearings, and because of those hearings--Ithink they had pretty well prepared, it was like herein <Shiprock>.  I think when you do business over aperiod of a year, with, let's say, 5,000-6,000 people,you're gonna have ten, maybe, for some reason oranother, are not satisfied, and maybe justifiably so--you've made a mistake or something's happened liketheir piece was lost or something like this.  Eventhough you've replaced it, they end up being unhappy.And I think those are the majority of people that wereheard at these hearings.  I don't think, honestly, itwas a representation of the general or the large marketthat was dealing in the pawn business at that time.  Ithink rates were maybe excessively high, but I thinkthe thing that happened--and I remember the hearings in <Window Rock>--as I visited with the group of people thatwere heading up the hearings for the Federal TradeCommission, and Peterson Zah, I believe, was workingfor the DNA [Dinébe’iiná Náhiilna’ Bee Agha’diit’aahí]at that time, or the legal end, as a lawyer for DNA--that when they said that they were trying to get therates established at 24 percent a year or 2 percent amonth, they felt like that anybody on the Reservationwould pawn at 24 percent a year, when the banks were atthat time charging to borrow, I believe it was around 8-10 percent.  They said, "Well, it's double that."Well, what they didn't take into account is that thosebanks get a substantial interest or closing charge andhandling charge up front.  If you lend on pawn abracelet at 24 percent a [year], that's 2 percent amonth.  Or let's say on a $50 bracelet, if you were topawn it for $50, that means at 2 percent for the firstmonth, you'd get $1.  That would not cover your initialcosts in pawning.  And consequently, because of thehearings, and because of the law that was passedbecause of it, the traders were allowed to pawn on theReservation at 24 percent a year, or 2 percent a month.Well, it became totally unprofitable, or unfeasible topawn to that particular rate, and consequently, thatbrought the demise or the end of pawn on the NavajoReservation.  I feel bad about that for the people inmany ways, because I think first and foremost it hurtthe people pawning in that they now have to travel.They didn't quit pawning jewelry--pawn just moved offthe Reservation to the surrounding communities.They're now the people, or the people that we wereservicing on the Reservation, in their little, in,let's say, their home when they lived at <Shiprock>--nowthey have to travel to <Farmington>.  That's just anadded expense to them, to handle their pawn, the Navajo Tribe, and consequently that hurt the people themselves.  Secondly, the Navajo Tribe lost controlover the pawn, on the length of time it [could be]held, and they could have really dictated the laws bywhich we pawned on the Reservation, and oversaw that.Secondly, they lost the income to off the Reservation.So I think in several ways possibly it was too severein that it went too far.  I think it would have beenbetter for the people and the tribe if they would haveallowed pawning on the Reservation [in] some way, undera controlled thing, with different controlled interestrates.  I think they'd have answered the needs of thepeople to a higher degree.  But as it is now, there'sno pawn on the Reservation.      

Cole:  Were you allowed to charge interest, or didyou charge interest on your charge accounts?      

Foutz:  Yes, I think some people charged interest ontheir charge accounts.  This is one thing we never did.I think there were some trading posts that did--orthat's my understanding.      

Cole:  But that did not fall under the [FTCregulations]?      

Foutz:  That did not fall--to my recollection, thatdid not fall under that.  They addressed, really, thecredit system.  And you might say the trading businessup to that time did live--it had grown up and itcontinued, and you might say to a degree it wassaturated credit.  I believe that, and so I think ithelped us kind of wean off that a little bit, which Ithink was a betterment--for the businessman as well asthe person dealing with the stores.  I think it wastime, and so I think this brought about some changesthat were good, very definitely, because of the creditan the saturation of it, possibly, on the Reservation.I think that just happened because the peoplethemselves were used to it, the Indian people, anddidn't feel like they could get along without it.  Andthe trader had always been used to it, so it wassomething that I think just grew up, and it was ahabit, so to speak.  I don't think it was meant toreally--what would I say?--catch or keep the customers.I think it was just something that had been there inplace, and both parties had been used to, and it wasretained longer than it possibly should have been.      

Cole:  Other than the travel, is there a bigdifference between how the pawn operation works on theReservation versus now where it's off the Reservation?      

Foutz:  Well, it's governed by state laws off the Reservation.  And when I say that, the laws in <Arizona> would be different than in <New Mexico>.  We have a pawnplace in <Farmington New Mexico> at this time.  We areregulated by the State of <New Mexico>.  At this particular time, we can charge 54 percent a year.  Weare asked to hold by the State for six months--we hold for a year.  We get 10 percent for the first month, and4 percent thereafter.  The 10 percent up front givesyou enough return to cover your costs and your initial expenses to where you'll do it.  Then after that, itcould be 4 percent or 2 percent, it doesn't reallymatter, because it returns enough that the person willpawn.      

Cole:  Would you say most of the pawn you take innow is reclaimed or not?      

Foutz:  We lose about 2 percent a year, which isvery, very low.  We hold for a year, and we deal withmainly Indian people that we've dealt with over a period of time.  I think that that will change a littlebit as the great and heirloom pieces of jewelry arelost.  The people are pawning new pieces, pieces thatthey have just made and can't sell somewhere, so they'll take it in to pawn it somewhere.  They've initially sold it to the place where they pawn it towhen they initially pawn it.  So that turns.  So Ithink that slowly our percentage of turn will becomegreater--just by the people that we're pawning with andthe type of things that we're pawning.  And that's whyI'm saying the great old jewelry that we used to see on the Reservation is slowly just disappearing, and it'sgoing.      

Cole:  In your years in the trading post business,were you ever involved with Navajo ceremonies?      

Foutz:  Involved?  This is a place the trader wasasked--in the early days, a trader became almost apartner with that, depending on the size of it.  I can remember a big yei’ii bichai or a fairly large sing going on at <Teec Nos Pos>, Russell would be asked togive substantial things, like a beef, some sheep, andquite a bit of flour to feed the people that came to that sing.  He may participate with the family in the way of donating a basket or two and buckskin.  So there was a participation that was a service rendered, butyet the trader had a tremendous influx of business because of the people that would come there, because they were very isolated.   Later on, as a store here that I worked at so much,where it wasn't--well, I'd say we still became veryinvolved with it.  We were asked to contribute and tohelp with it.  The Navajo people are great ones toreach out and ask family and friends to participate and help, are given the chance to have them participate and help at the time of a sing and a special need.  Thetrader was no exception.  And we, all the time, if the customer was a regular customer of ours, we'd alwaysparticipate and give to it, depending on what wasneeded at that particular time.   We were always invited out.  I've been invited outto many as a participant, as a friend, or just somebody who'd been personally invited out.  And that was alwayswhat I would consider an honor.  I always looked on itas such, and always tried to do that.  I think it waspart of being in the community, and sharing.  I don'tknow, I think it's like belonging to a service unitwhen you're in a town or something.  I think it's partof being in the community and that.  You bet.   

Cole:  Did you ever have any dealings with....  Youmentioned earlier on about working with some Navajo onfunerals or things like that.  How did that come about?because it seems like there are some taboos and stuffwith the Navajo, dealing with death.      

Foutz:  I think in the early days, and predominantlyyou go back at the time of my father, I think thosetaboos were very, very strong, perhaps--or strongerthan they were.  Slowly, as I come along, the Christianchurch had made great inroads--be it the Catholic orMormon or Baptist or whatever, they're all out here--had made enough inroads that a lot of the people hadslowly started to accept burying.  And of course justbeing environmentally--you couldn't very well burypeople all over the Reservation. [Or] if you didn'tbury 'em, leave--because in the early days, they wouldjust move out of a hogan that somebody had passed awayin.  As time kind of progressed, and then the peoplekind of accepted the burial and the cemetery and thiskind of concept--and of course your Public HealthService certainly encouraged this, just to controlinfectious diseases and things like that, it becomes anecessity.  And consequently, the people back that.And yes, when we were asked--I don't think that thepeople back in the time that I first got down heresaved a lot of money, and they didn't save for crisis,if we want to call [it] this, or a major something thatwas unexpected.  They weren't users of insurance likewe are, or been taught to be.  And they weren't greatones to say, but they believe in, we would say, passingthe hat, or letting friends and that contribute.  Andso they would pass the hat and have friends and familycontribute both financially to cover the expenses, andthen to help with food or anything else that would needbe needed at that time as the family came together.There have been times that I've been asked to speak atseveral [funerals].  In my own church--I am a Mormon,or a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-daySaints--I've been asked to speak at Catholic funeralsor Baptist, or several others, just as a friend, or asan associate.  I've always tried to do so.      

Cole:  Did you ever have any direct dealings orneeds to use a Navajo medicine man?      

Foutz:  Myself?      

Cole:  Uh-huh.      

Foutz:  Hm, I have not.  I have been in many sings.I think through a person's faith in something or somebody, that they can receive and be healed and many great things.  But I've had many friends that certainly were involved.  I had a doctor that was a great friend of mine, Bob--Robert--Pudge [phonetic spelling].  He was up here, and he was in specialized medicine and ethnic medicine now, and teaches it at the University of Washington, and also a university in <New York>.  He teaches both.  It's interesting.  No, I have never myself [used a medicine man].   We've done another thing always in our stores.Russell taught me this, and we've always just tried to do it, and that's we've always carried items that they need at the time of a sing:  specifically from us would be medicine baskets or wedding baskets and buckskinsthat have been hand-tanned, that have the ears and thetail completely, that could be used in a sing.  Andwe've really tried to keep these things pricedextremely low.  And until recently, we've been able todo that, but the price of baskets has just escalatedbecause they've become such a marketable thing thatit's driven the price up.  But for years and years andyears a wedding basket would cost from $25-$45, whileother baskets have just soared.  But we tried to keepthem very low because of that, because the people atthe time of a sing really needed something--and a lotof times couldn't afford a lot, but they had to have asing.      

Cole:  How would the community in your experiencesin the forties, and then again in the sixties, dealwith medical emergencies?  Was there access to doctorsand hospitals?      

Foutz:  There was always the Bureau of Indian Affairs.  Here at <Shiprock> we've been lucky, we'vealways had a fairly substantial hospital here.  And sothe people have always had access to that, free.  Aswards of the government, by treaty, they have alwaysbeen given--we had said that we would take care oftheir health.  And we've always furnished those needs.I found a lot of the people, I think because of thelength of time they had to wait to be seen up here, orby a Bureau of Indian Affairs doctor, or through maybesome of the ways the doctor had handled them, lostfaith in the doctors up here.  And a lot of 'em wouldcome in and pawn or want to borrow money because theywanted to go to town to a doctor up there they had topay money to.  And they were willing to do that, butthey felt like maybe sometimes the service was a littlebetter up there, or more personalized, I don't know.But I know that quite a bit of this went on.  And yet,I think it was well staffed up here, the doctors were.They had a surgery unit up here, and for a long time Dr. McKenzie was one of the first Navajo doctors, surgeons, that I know of, and he was very, very well thought of, and he performed surgery up here, as well as in <Gallup> a lot.  And he was from a family, this Ed McKenzie, that used to deal with us forever here at thestore.  It's interesting, here you have a greatsurgeon, and yet his parents could hardly speakEnglish--not that it mattered any--but in onegeneration, that's what had happened, which is reallyremarkable, which I think is wonderful.      

Cole:  What about veterinary care?      

Foutz:  Veterinary care, we carried some vet supplies here as we got a little more sophisticated and got refrigeration.  Before that time, the people just used what I would call basic substantial, you know, natural understanding of the elements around.  They have natural things that they always used to put on--salves and ointments they used to put on animals, thatthey would make from vegetation and plants.  Beforethat time, as we got other things, and they had accessto a veterinarian and penicillin and sulfide drugs thatwould cause some infections to go away--the people werevery stock-oriented people.  And they learned fast, andthen so we carried veterinary supplies and syringeshere for that purpose, you bet--and encouraged it.  AndI think the Bureau of Indian Affairs, through theirprograms, certainly educated the people in the use ofthings with the livestock there.  But these peopleteach themselves.  They are great livestock people andwant to take good care of their things--plus, they havea great basic understanding of it, they've alwayshandled livestock.  Like you and I would panic maybe atsome little thing--some of those animals get sick--theyhave an understanding to know what it is, and theydon't panic and they don't spend a lot of money, butthey get it taken care of.      

Cole:  Maybe switch gears here a little bit.  Youwere saying that Shiprock Trading Company buys andsells a vast amount of rugs, especially Navajo rugs.      

Foutz:  Yes.      

Cole:  How do you buy rugs?  How do you tell what'sa good rug?  Maybe you could tell us a little bit aboutthat.      

Foutz: Arts and crafts rugs....  Well, okay, you know, you back up and <Shiprock> here regionally was always known for the <Shiprock> yei'iis, and Mr. Evansthat owned this trading post at one time, was reallyattributed to starting the yei'ii rug.  He worked withsome of the weavers here in this town that were doingfigure rugs, or what we'd call a sand painting rug, andhe went to 'em and he said, "I feel like if you'll takethree or four of these figures and put 'em on a rugthat somebody can hang on a wall, that we'd have a verymarketable piece that would market well in the markettoday."  And some of the weavers went and startedweaving these yei'ii rugs, or similar rugs to a yei'ii,and they found it very marketable.  And so over aperiod of time, this became the center of yei'ii rugs,and it's where it originated, and were attributed to,and especially with white backgrounds.  As Russell camealong and started ’em using commercial yarn with theyei'ii rug, they became greater, much higher qualityrugs.  They were finer, more elaborate in design, andjust beautiful, with different color backgrounds--grey,beiges, dark grey--and just became a very, very viablething.  You can see stacked in this room, that stack ofyei'iis over there.  There's two stacks of yei'iisright there in the corner.   But then as Russell took the store over, we workedon it, with the wools that we carried for weaving.  Andover the years Russell built up outlets for rugs towhere we could buy the rugs.  If you buy rugs and can'tsell 'em, you can't buy a lot of rugs.  Andconsequently, we built up markets and worked hard atservicing those markets like Fred Harvey.  We helpededucate them, and helped find the things that theycould market in different markets.  As the economy wentup for red rugs, we tried to supply red rugs for 'em.And we kind of tried to answer the needs of bothmarkets, and we tried to be in between those markets,telling the weavers what was needed, or letting themknow what was marketable, and then taking that to amarket to where we could move it and come back and buymore of that product.  Consequently, we took this storeup, and yes, we would average, I would say, between 150to 250 rugs a month that we'd buy here at this store.And that was a lot of rugs back in those days, and thishas been fairly consistent for all the time that I'vebeen around the store.  We have kind of deviated fromthere.  Russell would buy rugs from other traders, asover time I have done the same thing.  We'd go out andbuy from traders if we had a particular need.  But asweaving used to be a regional thing, we used to buyyei'iis here, and then slowly, because Two Grey Hillsonly was a short distance away, we were starting to buysome Greys.  As people became more mobile, they wouldbring Greys in here, and then <Teec Nos Pos> from <Teec Nos Pos>, to where slowly we would buy several different types of rugs right here at <Shiprock>, that people wouldtravel twenty, thirty miles to come to us, because ofthe price we could pay, because we had a market for 'em consistently.  And we worked, again, very hard at doingthat.  Then slowly, as the rugs got better and theprices higher, we started advertising at greaterdistances.  And now weavers will travel from all overthe Reservation to come up in this part of the countryto sell a rug--not just because of Shiprock TradingCompany, but because up in this area there are five orsix extremely strong buyers.  And if we can't buy therug, somebody else will--or usually can--to where theycan market their rug up here.  And over the years wehave really built a reputation for carrying extremelygood Navajo rugs, and yet quality rugs.  We've becomeknown for it.  I'd say the Foutz family has become known for that, and we've worked extremely hard at <Shiprock> to really perfecting that, to where we reallycarry a lot of quality rugs, [and a lot of qualityrugs] go through here.   Not just being that, but the thing you really haveto kind of, I guess, work on the other end, is lettingthe weavers know that you're consistently here to buytop rugs.  They don't want to travel, let's say, eightymiles to get over here to sell a top rug, and find thatyou're not buying, or you haven't got the money to buy,or you've got too many rugs already and you can't buy.But we've always tried to establish a market and behere open to buy, to when that weaver gets here, sheknows she can market the rug.  And generally speaking,it's been our kind of--what would I say?--if a greatrug walks in this store, we try to buy it.  You don'tsee very many leave the store without getting bought.And I guess a lot of times that means that we just paythe price she asks.  But I've always been a believerthat quality sells, and consequently, we've alwaysreached for that.      



Steiger:  How do you know a great rug?      



Foutz:  How do I know a great rug?  Gosh, I'd just take a look at the weaver, and if she was a great lady,I'd say it was a great rug.  (chuckles)  No, I'm justkidding about that.  Great rug.  This is alwaysinteresting, and we were talking about this before.  Ithink so many times, to me, the people, when they comein here--but I am the same way when I go into a marketI don't know a lot about, we're out of our comfortzone, but we try to make--and I think especially buyinga Navajo rug--too hard.  So many times I will beshowing somebody some rugs, and let's say there'sseveral couples there, and somebody will say, "Well,how do you tell a good rug?"  And I'll say, "Just aminute, and I'll show you."  And I'll keep throwing therugs, and then I'll reach over and throw just what Iwould call an extremely good rug.  And usuallyspeaking, the women, and even some of the men in theaudience there, or in the group, will go, "Oh!"  AndI'll say, "That's how you tell a good rug," because asthey have looked at it, the beauty of that piece justcomes out, and it brings that response or reaction thatwe do when we see a piece that's just "Wow!"  It's abeautiful piece.  Well, that means that the pattern,the coloring, the size, and everything in that rug hascome together to make an attractive rug to the pointthat it's a marketable or sellable piece.  And thatmeans I can pay more, because the account that we'llsell it to will pay more, because they recognize thatas just a good rug.  Now, the weave goes in there, too,consistently, but with most rugs, the weave isn't thatimportant, as long as it's consistently good, and forthe price rug it is, it's tight.  But buying a goodrug, it's that.   And it's always wonderful when a weaver will bringin a rug, and a weaver maybe that you don't know sowell, when she walks in, most of these weavers takegreat pride in the things that they have done.  Andthey'll, a lot of times, dampen it and iron it, priorto bringing it in.  Then they will roll it, and let'ssay if it's a substantially-sized thing, they'll rollit in a bed sheet.  So when they come in, you don't seethe rug, but it's rolled up, and so as you come into aroom like this, and unroll the rug, and you're seeing agorgeous piece, your heart just absolutely jumps, andyou are delighted to have that weaver bring it in.   It's interesting to me, in trading or buying fromsomebody on this type of thing, so many times the buyerwill try to get an upper edge by kind of pointing outmaybe a little flaw or a defect in the piece.  Well,I've always felt like that weaver on a big piece haslived with that piece for six to nine months and sheknows every flaw in it, so I don't really need to pointit out to her--that's kind of negative.  And if I hadspent nine months making something, I really try not tomake it a negative experience for her or for me, but apositive one.  And we'll work on the beauty of the rug,even to build it up.  I think some people think it'sgonna cost 'em more if they say something good aboutthe rug.  I don't know, I think if I had made a rug andspent six to nine months on it and somebody praised it,I'd just feel kinda good about it.  And I have alwaysfelt like people like to come back and deal with peoplethat are positive instead of negative, and so we'vetried to build that atmosphere in the store, and haveit a positive experience for the people that come in,and kind of build 'em up.  They know a flaw, and maybeas you look at a rug and it's a little crooked, you canmaybe just kinda of fold it out and kind of take noteof it softly.  But you oughtn't to do it and say,"Wow."  Some traders will say, "Wow, that's reallycrooked, I can't pay you much for the rug."  Well,that's ouch.  If I'd have spent nine months on that, Idon't know but that would have been received too well.   But we were lucky, we've built the business, we knowthe rugs, and I have just felt like myself as--I mean,it’s kind of filled my life, in that I just received somuch, really from the people.  The people are ones togive.  They are great people and I think just down toearth, and I have just come to enjoy my life amongstthem.  But the rugs are just a special thing, becauseeach one is so uniquely different.  You never knowwhat's gonna come out.  Like I say, when that comes outof that sheet, you never know what to expect, whetherit's gonna be a small saddle blanket, or a beautifulpiece, and so it's just always kind of like opening a box of Cracker Jack--you can always get a surprise.Now, if you know the weaver, well, then you pretty wellknow what to expect.  But this has been always just anextension of something that you've done that I'veloved, but it has even added to it, because I reallytruly love seeing the rugs, from working around here.      



Steiger:  I've got one more question, and then I'llshut up.  You mentioned when we met how fun it was,because you dealt with such a variety of people.  Did you actually have a day when you were out there buyingsheep, and then you come in and you're dealing with Rockefeller or something like that?      

Foutz:  Okay.  That was just a "for instance."  But yeah, let's back up.  You know, out at a post like this--and that's why I called <Shiprock> so fun, because of the arts and crafts, and because of the livestock wecontinually built up.  We had a reputation--and so youwould be out buying livestock, you'd be out buying somehay, you'd be out in the front, handling, let's say, acharge account or two, and then you'd always have kindof the unique person walk in--let's say Rockefeller.Will Rockefeller donated a mill down here, and so hegot coming in.  And he'd heard of us, and so yes, heshowed up at the counter.  But the nice thing is, then,is you meet people like that.  Or let's say RobertRedford was in maybe a year later, and he comes incontinually.  But you meet people like that, but theunique thing is, is you don't just meet 'em, but youmeet 'em in an element that's so uniquely different,and they enjoy it to the degree that you do, to wherelet's say you go back into their country, like I hadthe opportunity to visit Mr. Rockefeller in his office.   I was embarrassed the day that I went in, inannouncing to the secretary who I was, she took themessage into somewhere, and it wasn't maybe two minuteslater that the door come bursting open, andMr. Rockefeller came flying out, and he says, "My gad,what are you doing back in this country?!  You'resupposed to be back on the Reservation."  And I lookedover, and there were about four people waiting to seehim.  Well, he ushered me back in his office, and hewould have taken the rest of the afternoon with me, andto me it was a little embarrassing.   But yet, it gave me the opportunity to meet somepeople on a level that [I'd] never have met themotherwise.  And not just a Rockefeller--that's just a"for instance," and of course we all rise to names.But a lot of other people that you've met at such alevel, that open doors, and you've made associationswith, that you wouldn't trade for anything, that itjust gives you a neat--what would I say?--position,because it was so unique.  You don't go many placestoday, and if you were to say "Indian trader"....  Or Idon't even know if that fits.  You could say, "I'm abusinessman on the Navajo Reservation."  I guess youcould introduce yourself as many things.  But it wouldbe so uniquely different that it sometimes raiseseyebrows or opens doors or gets you kicked out, one orthe other, I don't know.  (chuckles)  But it is, andthe variety here was just that, and I think this waswhat was so fun.   And I worked at <Teec Nos Pos>, and I worked at acouple of other stores.  When I was much younger, I wasworking for Russell here, and that was when I wasprobably seventeen, close to eighteen years old.  My cousin, R.B. Foutz, that now owns Newcomb and Toadlena Trading Posts, was working here, and both of us werekind of getting restless to do something on our own.Well, at that time, Russell bought Tocito Trading Postfrom Mr. McGee, and gave R.B. and I, if we would staywith him, each a quarter of it.  And so at that time wewould be trucking livestock out to <Tocito>, we'd come inhere, and I can remember a night or two that R.B. and Iwould work all day at this store, truck merchandise outto <Tocito>, livestock back in that night, getting backin here about 10:30, 12:00.  We'd just take a blanketoff the blankets that were for sale, roll up in it, andsleep on the counter somewhere, and be here for workthe next morning as we'd open the store at about 7:30.But this is when you're young, energetic, and all fullof that old vigor that gets in us.  So that is an era.But we actually go back to that time, yeah.   Working.  We were talking about working at otherstores.  I don't think there's another store that Iworked at that I loved with the way that I liked this,and it was strictly because of the mix.  You were notjust doing that, but you were buying, let's say, muttonby the truckload.  And when I say "mutton," thatdoesn't mean much to you, but these people are veryfussy on the mutton that they eat.  And as weprogressed along, and we were not buying the muttonfrom them in quantities enough to sell back as meat, wehad to go out to the market.  So we would go out andbuy a truckload of mutton, and that would be 300 head.But then we'd have to grind it and feed it so it wasjust perfect for the way the market wanted it here.Well, now, that sounds strange to you, but that's whatbrought people maybe ninety miles on a Saturday to buymutton here.  Now, the average store would probably cutup, let's say, five to fifteen mutton on a weekend.  Wewere going through ninety mutton, just on Saturdays.And we drove it that way, of just servicing the people,and having that mutton fed, and a cover of fat on therejust thin enough the way they like it, because they arefussy--again, I've told you--with meat.  But they wouldcome ninety miles to the store just to get freshmutton, and we were known for it.  And on weekends we'drun specials, and because of those specials, we reallybrought people a long way.   But the variety of the challenges that we were ableto do, and the promotions we were able to do:  we'd runrug contests a lot of times here.  It was a lot of funto do.  We'd give away good jewelry, or Pendleton shawls, and cash sometimes.  And the weavers got areally--you know, this was back when contests weren'tthat popular.  They hadn't happened out here.  And itreally made a difference.  And then I think as westimulated these outlets for top rugs, we were able tocome back and work with weavers to where the quality ofrugs substantially went up, but we were able to pay theweaver for that quality.  (vacuum sweeper noise begins)In the time that I was here, I would take the sameweaver and quadruple and sometimes ten times the moneythat she was able to get.  And this is one thing that Iknow Charles Herring, when he was alive--I was talkingto him not so long ago, and he said, "Ed, if there'sone thing I can remember about you at <Shiprock>, is thatyou were able to take that business and see that theweavers got a lot more money for their product over theyears that you were there."  And I think perhaps wedid.  We sold so many that we were such a sizeablemarket, that....  (vacuum sweeper noise grows louder;an aside about stopping tape; tape is stopped andrestarted)   That really isn't my heart you were hearing, or thepacemaker--it's my stomach!  (laughter)   But the same with the arts and crafts as you seearound here, we were the first, that I know of, thatreally went into the framing of sand paintings.  Andthen as we went into the framing, we really started toexperiment around, and we went into the chrome andglass, the brass and glass, for <New York> markets.  Wewent into the pine frames, and then slowly we went intothe matting of it.  And now the matting has almostbecome an art of itself, as the young people like BillFoutz and some of the others have got into it incutting mats.  It's almost become a work of art itself.So we've got to take....  But the thing that I'vereally always tried to do is never grow tired, or justget in a rut doing the same thing.  It's always beenstimulating to me that you take a weaver making a Stormpattern, or a Two Grey Hill, and she'd got to such alevel--let's say it was a tapestry weaver--to where shewas getting $5,000 a rug.  Well, encouraging her to domaybe a black background, keeping the same quality, itwas so uniquely different, that you could take thatweaver and you could actually add another $2,000 toher, if she didn't do black all the time, but did itonce in a while.  And it was fun to do, but we did someof this.  And it was just moving--and the same with thesand paintings.  As your competition caught up withyou, it was always fun to try to move on to the nextlevel.  And a lot of times we missed, but a lot oftimes we had fun hitting, too, and it was stimulating.      

[END SIDE 2, BEGIN SIDE 3]   



Cole:  This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University.  This is March 9, 1998.  We're here at the Shiprock Trading Company with Ed Foutz.      

Foutz:  Still!      

Cole:  Still.  And Lew Steiger is still running the camera.  This is Tape [Side] #3 of seven or eight togo, I think!      

Foutz:  We're goin' for the record?  (laughter)Okay.  We were speaking about the rug market and rugmarketabilities.  You know, as you think about the progression of rugs, you think about the sandpaintings, or the sand painting rugs that we carry.And behind you is a stack of sand painting rugs.  But atremendous market for those, the authentic market.  But it's frustrating, because these weavers will weave, andyou'll get the price going up as the economy in the <United States> goes up.  I didn't realize until theshortage of gas that came along in, what, the 1980's?(

Cole:  Right.) When all of a sudden we didn't haveenough gas and we didn't know if we were going to betraveling all summer, and so the market kind of driedup, because Fred Harvey and places like that did notknow how many customers would find themselves to them,not being able to travel, and so they were not buyingvery many rugs.  And consequently, we were nervousabout the rug outlet.  But it turned out well, but wedid find out one thing:  That the rugs are so tied tothe economy, and sometimes when the economy is really good, the rugs have gone up and escalated in price. Then all of a sudden when we've gone through atremendous downswing in our economy and the market hasgone to pieces, we find the Navajo rug market's got todo the same thing, and adjust.  And to come back andhelp the weaver understand, when she was getting $4,000a rug, that the market will not absorb that pricetoday, is not an easy thing to do and help herunderstand the complications of it.  And yet we'vetried to educate them to this.  A lot of times theyknow, but it's hard to come down from $4,000 to $3,000when you'll be getting somewhat the same rug.  But thishas to happen sometimes.   We worked on a very interesting project with RuthTiller and Roseann Lee who are sisters to Sam Tiller,that I've talked to you about, from Two Grey Hills.They wanted to start, and I one day, Rose was coming inhere with these very small tapestries.  And thetapestry was selling from $2,000 to $3,000 for thissize of rug.  And it was counting close to 100-110 weftto an inch.  And Rose was frustrated because I hadthree of her rugs that I hadn't been able to sell, andshe came in with a fourth, and I said, "Rose, I can'tgive you a lot of money for it, because I've alreadygot three, and I can't sell 'em at the price I've beenselling."  So I just told her what I could pay for it,and I said, "Rose, try somewhere else.  If you can sellit for more, fine."  And she came back in late in theafternoon and sold me the rug and had come down about$1,500 in price.  I think we probably gave her around$2,000.  I'd been paying her $3,500 to $4,000 for thatrug.  She said, "What can I do?"  I said, "Well, Rose,no one's done a great big tapestry or a large tapestry.Why don't you do a large tapestry?"  And she said,"Well, what do you mean 'large'?"  And I said, "Four bysix or four by seven."  And so she said, "I'll thinkabout it."  Well, she came in a little while later andshe was laughing and happy--and this was about twoweeks later.  She said, "I've talked to my sister, andwe're gonna start a large tapestry."  Well, this wenton, and she came in about a month later, and she said,"Now, Ed, this rug's gonna be on the loom for sometime.  You're gonna have to lend me money kind of as wego along, because this is gonna take quite a while."And at that time I didn't realize how long it was goingto take.   So when the rug was somewhat along, I guess it hadbeen on the [loom] about nine months, Bill Bob and hiswife came over from Cristof's, the store in <Santa Fe>,and they had heard about the rug and wanted to do somepicture-taking of it, so I took Bill Bob, and we wentout to Roseann Lee's mother's place where the rug wason the loom.  And I have never seen anything like it inmy life, in that it was about seven foot wide.  Andthat means the loom was wider than that, and it was onsubstantial metal pipes about this big around, thebottom and the top of it, and they had about twelve bigtie-downs, chain tie-downs, pulling that pipe down towhere that warp was so tight it was more like a harp--you could almost play it, but it was so fine.  Well,the girls would sit side-by-side weaving on that rug.And so you could not see if they had somewhat aninconsistency that their sister didn't have, aboutevery hour they'd change seats, so they would weave onboth sides, so there would be no disparity or nodifference.  Along in that rug, Roseann Lee found thatthey had made a mistake, and she backed up about threemonths' work, undoing, unraveling, getting down to thatmistake to take it out.  The mistake was so small--andI am fussy--but I said, "Roseann, it's not worth takingout."  It wasn't that big a thing, I couldn't hardlydetect it, but it bothered her, and so she took it out.   The girls worked on that fairly steadily--and thiswas a Two Grey Hill tapestry that counted over ahundred weft to the inch, and they worked, I don'tknow, for about a year-and-a-half on that.  They hadwhat I would call a family disagreement, and the twosisters weren't getting along at all, and so they didnot weave on that rug for about four or five months.One day their mother came into the store and I said,"Ruth, I'm worried about that rug.  It's pulled sotight, that when you release those tie-downs, is itgoing to just accordion and come together like anaccordion?"  And she got that twinkle in her eye, andher eyebrow went up and she says, "Ed, you know mewell.  Anything I had anything to do with is not goingto be anywhere [near] that.  You don't have to worryabout that rug, it's going to be perfect."   Now, I forgot to tell you why I was worrying aboutthat rug.  Up to that time, they had been getting moneyfrom me on it, and I said it had been about a year-and-a-half.  Well, as I checked one day on what they'dpicked up so far, they'd picked up about $4,000-$5,000 in cash on that rug.  Well, that was a lot of money forme on any rug.  I just wasn't used to something thislarge, this length of time.  That rug took them fouryears to complete.  Now, they didn't weave totally allthe time on that, but I remember finally, as we got acall, I got a call and I was in <Phoenix> at our home,and Roseann Lee--and I could hear the excitement in hervoice--said, "We've completed the rug."  And I said,"Well, fine, I'll be down here.  Why don't you bring itdown?"   Well, her and her sister, Barbara Ornelas [phoneticspelling], came down with the rug to <Phoenix>.  Well,they were just ecstatic.  They were bubbly and bouncingand they were so excited about the rug.  And we rolledthe rug out in my room, and I don't know that I've everhad quite anything like that take me, in that it wasabsolutely perfect, and yet it was almost six by nine--perfect Two Grey Hills.  The pattern was so intricateand busy, because she lays her pattern out on graphpaper.  And so it's not just a rug, it is the mostintricate thing you've ever seen.  Here was thisgorgeous masterpiece, and she rolled it out, and shesaid, "What do you think?"  And I really couldn't....I just sat and I just absolutely looked at the rug andtook it in for some time, because I really couldn'tanswer for a while.  And finally I said, "Rose, I havenever seen anything like it."  And she said, "What doyou think we can sell it for?"  I said, "I don't know.Rose, I think probably $20,000-$28,000, something up inthere, is wholesale on that, or we can sell it for.But before I tell you that, I need to get a readingfrom somebody that might know.  I'll go up to DanGarland and take it to a couple of places and kind ofget feedback on what they feel like they could sell itretail for."  Roseann said, "That's great."   And then she looked at me and she basically said aninteresting thing that I so understood.  She said, "Ed,you're family, you're like my brother.  Do you know, Idon't want something to happen.  If you buy that rugfrom me, and you pay me $30,000 or whatever you pay me,and I hear afterward that you've got a lot more moneyout of it, I don't know that I would ever be able toforgive you or feel the same about you."  Well, Ithought for a minute, and I totally understood that.  Isaid, "Rose, I understand that.  I totally do.  Maybewe just better work out something that's a littleunique or different on this rug."  So we decided topartnership the rug.  Her and her sister would [each]own a third; I, because of the money and it was up to$15,000, $16,000 by that time that I had in it, wouldown a third of it; and we'd partnership it with her andher sister being able to overrule me on anything theywanted to, because they had two-thirds of the rug.That fit okay with them, and so that's what we decidedto do.   I took it out to Dan Garland and let him take a lookat it.  He had never seen anything like it, and wedecided maybe the rug would be worth around $30,000-$38,000.  Well, Rose came back and I told her that, andat that time it was in August, and she said, "How aboutletting me take the rug to the <Santa Fe> Market and seewhat we can do with it?"  So her and Barbara Ornelastook a booth over at the <Santa Fe> Market and took itover there to the show.  It's a judged show, and it's abig show.  Well, the next day she called and she waslaughing and she said, "Turn on your TV tonight, we'regonna be on TV."  And I said, "What do you mean you'regonna be on TV?!"  She said, "We won the Best of Class,which is the best rug over here.  Then they put all thebest of the classes together and we took the Best ofShow."  That was really an accomplishment for a Navajorug to beat out the pottery and the jewelry andeverything else, and they were gonna be on TV.  Andthey were in the headlines of the paper and everythingelse.   Well, the next day, they'd picked up the rug fromthe judging where it's on show that night, and the nextmorning they get to pick 'em up and then they go backto their booth to sell things.  Well, they picked upthe rug the next morning about six o'clock, they walkedback to their booth, and at seven o'clock this couplecame by and asked a couple of questions.  And thenMr. Marcus from Neiman-Marcus came by and he and hisfamily furnished the money for the ribbons, and theyusually end up buying the best of class over there,because they furnish the ribbon and they also buy it.And he came by and looked at the rug, and he said,"Well, I'll be by later in the afternoon and make youan offer."   Well, this couple came by and wanted to knowsomething about the rug a short time later, asked a fewquestions about it, and asked Rose what she was askingfor it.  Rose, not knowing quite what to say, said$60,000.  They took a look at each other and kind ofsaid, "What do you think?" and they said, "Okay, we'lltake it."  So they went ahead and bought the rug at$60,000.  I guess Mr. Marcus came by some time later,about two hours later, to see if he could buy the rug,and Roseann Lee was elated when she could say, "Well,I'm sorry, but it's already sold."   The gentleman that bought the rug invited Rose and Barbara to come to <Texas>, to bring the rug down, and tosee where it was going to be in their home, and to pickup their money, and to just spend a couple of days withthem.  Well, Rose called me up and of course she wasecstatic.  And she said, "How do I take the money?"  Isaid, "Well, usually Rose, when you're dealing withsomebody at that level, it's fine to take a personalcheck.  But if you're nervous about that, ask for acashier's check or a money order or something similarto that--it's fine."  So I didn't hear anything morefrom her.   They went to <Texas>, and about, oh, I'd say four dayslater, her and Barbara Ornelas show up at this counterout here, and they were again bubbly and dancing andlaughing.  They said, "We've gotta tell you about it,but we've gotta do it in the back."  So I brought 'emback into this room and I said, "Well?!  Whathappened?"  I can remember Roseann Lee took her purseand dumped it up like this, and $60,000 in 100-dollarbills come spilling out, right down here, all over thefloor.  And I said, "Rose!  Sixty thousand dollars incash?!"  And she said, "Ed, when he asked me how Iwanted the money, I forgot what you told me, and theonly thing I could think about was cash.  He kinda gota funny look on his face, but he said, 'Well, fine,give me a little time.  This afternoon I guess I canhave your cash for you.'"  So I guess he'd had to go tohis bank (laughs) and withdraw $60,000 in 100-dollarbills, but here it was, and they spilled it out here.   But probably one of the funnest things I've beeninvolved with, because they were just so special, andit was such a special thing for them and their wholefamily to work with, and Rose, I guess that was maybefive or six years, and she was killed in a car wreck--Roseann Lee was killed in a car wreck with one of her grandsons not long ago on [Highway] 66.  Barbara Ornelas still is very close to the Heard Museum.  I think her husband's a pharmacist in <Tucson>.  And shehas sold several tapestries since then, but never quitethat rug, which was to me one of the most perfect rugsI've ever seen woven.   But the story that kind of surrounds that is uniqueand fun, and just one of those special things that youget involved with, where it turns out to be such a nicething for everybody involved, which it was.  I wouldpartnership with anybody like that--not because we madeany money--it wasn't.  I kinda came out and got mymoney back out of it, the girls were very, very happy.I think Rose ended up getting a double-wide trailer outat Newcomb on that one.   Amen, that's the end of that!      

Cole:  Do you have other affiliations with weavers,long-term, short-term?

