FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Cliff J. "Bill" Kramer

Interview number NAU.OH.28.26

Cliff J. "Bill" Kramer, who was a horse wrangler and Chief Deputy County Assessor of <Coconino County>. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on December 10, 1975. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, June 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born 1890,<Cincinnati> 

    Moving to <Flagstaff> 

    Pine Hotel 

    Describes early <Flagstaff> 

    Childhood background 

    Marriage and children 

    Early <Flagstaff>, more information 

    Places stayed at 

    Horse outfit 

    Anderson Mesa, Sawmill Springs 

    Different places worked 

    Short biographical sketch 

    Homestead 

    Worked in barn for Arizona Lumber and Timber Co. 

    Army, WWI 

    Drove taxi 

    Worked in a garage 

    County Assessor 

    Retire 

    Homestead near Riordan, described 

    Different horse outfits worked at 

    Daily duties 

    Story of horse drive that lost horses 

    Initiation of new men 

    Fenced land, wild animals in area 

    Weatherford Rd. at <San Francisco Peaks>

Tape 1, Side 2

    Weatherford Road, continued 

    More about taxi company 

    Lumberjacks and lumbering camp 

    Horse outfit 

    Social life when came to town 

    Orpheum Theatre, collapse in winter 

    Outlaw, Pegleg 

    How he came to work as County Assessor 

    World War II in <Flagstaff> 

    Flu epidemic of 1918 

    Was in <France> 

    Fourth of July 

    Rodeo, no corral, used a ring of cars 

    New Year’s Eve, 1918 

    Indians running through camp 

    Skiing to round up cattle 

    Story about WWI in <France>, in trenches

This is an interview with Cliff J. Kramer, who's also known as Bill Kramer. He was a horse wrangler and chief deputy county assessor of <Coconino County>. This interview is being conducted on December 10, 1975, at 314 West Birch, which is his home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mr. Kramer, when and where were you born?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: October 7, 1890.

SUSAN ROGERS: And where?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: <Cincinnati Ohio>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Why and when did you come to <Flagstaff>?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, I kinda got tired of the snow and the ice. I drove a horse and wagon for a big express company there for three years. When I was only startin' out, fourteen years old. It was pretty hard goin' for the horses in the streets. Their shoes would catch in the streetcar tracks and pull 'em off and this and that. So I decided to come to <Arizona>.

Well, while I was deciding, I met a man that was here for years, Henry Albers. I met him in <Cincinnati>. And he told me about <Flagstaff>. So I quit my job and then came to <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what year was that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Nineteen eight [1908].

SUSAN ROGERS: I read on your little sketch you gave me you came on a train. 

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Uh-huh. Can you tell us a little bit about that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, it was single track then, and the train went from <Cincinnati> to <St. Louis>, <St. Louis> to <Kansas City>, <Kansas City> to <Albuquerque>. Then I had to change trains to come to <Flagstaff>. The train, when it got to <Albuquerque> went south to <El Paso>; it didn't come out straight on through. But that was the situation. Got here in June - June 3, I think it was. It was raining.

SUSAN ROGERS: What was that first day like? Where did you stay?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, I stayed at what is now the Pine Hotel, but it was different then. It's an older building, and occasionally they used it for kind of emergency hospital, too. The mill company, A L and T Mill Company, had their own hospital, Mercy Hospital. I don't know whether the citizens downtown could use it or not, but they did use the Pine Hotel occasionally, I guess, for emergencies.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let's backtrack just a little bit. Can you tell me a little bit about your parents, even though they didn't come to <Arizona>? What were their names?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: My father died when I was just a small kid. His name was Joe Kramer. My mother's name was Sally or Sarah. She did come here later, of course.

SUSAN ROGERS: She did?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, quite a few years later.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did she live in town?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: She got married a second time to a Joe Bender. He was a cook at a restaurant. They had restaurants around town here, around the country.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you have any brothers and sisters?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: [No.]

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you're the only one.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, when did YOU get married, and did you have children?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, I got married in 1920, and I have a son and I have a daughter.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you meet your wife here in <Flagstaff>?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yes. My wife, her folks came here in 1902 - Josephine Rau(?) [phonetic spelling], it was quite a well-known family. I came back from the First World War in June of 1919. We were married in June of 1920. My daughter's the oldest, and then my son.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, when you first arrived in <Flagstaff>, for the first couple of years you were here, do you remember any particular buildings that stood out in your mind?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, for a while, I used to remember where each one was.

SUSAN ROGERS: Too many now, huh?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah. I DO remember the post office was in where Valdis [phonetic spelling] Photo Shop is now. On the corner next to Fronske’s there. That was the post office. Front Street, from Leroux to San Francisco was pretty much the way it is now, only there were different businesses. And when you went east from San Francisco to Agassiz, the building on the corner where Joe's Place is, that was still there, but it wasn't the same building - it's been remodeled. But there was a big gap all the way down to the Pine Hotel, which is the Saddle Shop and the Grand Canyon Cafe. And then there was another gap from the Pine Hotel down to Agassiz. And on San Francisco Street, from Santé Fe to Aspen, all was pretty much like it is, but there was quite a little gap in there, too. Where those two ladies' shops are in there, there was a gap in there. Where the Moore Drug is, and what used to be the Coconino Cleaners, that's the same. Only where the Coconino Cleaners is, was a bar, a saloon. And the corner, if I remember, was - you know, I don't remember if that was Shurr [phonetic spelling] Drugstore or not. But where Joe's Place [is], was the drugstore. Of course, there was no Monte Vista Hotel.

SUSAN ROGERS: There wasn't, when you first arrived?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No, that was a gap in there. The post office was after that. That is, the post office next to the Monte Vista. There were four different change of post office, as I can remember. Of course the courthouse was there. And where the First Federal Savings is, that was C.B. Wilson's law office - that was there. But it seems to me like - oh, no, there wasn't a gap, either! Because when you go from the First Federal and come back this way, the building right next to it, was a residence that C.B. Wilson lived in. That's C.B. Wilson, SENIOR, now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Next to that was a pretty good-sized rooming house. And then there was a gap 'til you get to where the First National Bank is now. That was the Hennessy house.

SUSAN ROGERS: What was the Hennessy House? Was that a hotel?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, you mean that's somebody's house.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yes, Hennessy, was a sheepman, had a sheep outfit. He owned TWO houses there - the one where the bank is now, and then one north there, if I remember right. I think the first telephone office in <Flagstaff> was the second outfit there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what about houses that you lived in? Where did you first live when you arrived?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, now, you mean just renting?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, of course I stayed at the Pine Hotel for a while. I worked in Babbitts' delivery barn for a while. And then I went out to this horse outfit down on Anderson Mesa. Of course I stayed there, camped. When I came to town once in a while, I stayed at the.... Oh, how do I explain that? Down here on the corner of Santa Fe and Sitgreaves, where the Sportsman is. 

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh. That was the Bob Gleason [phonetic spelling] house there. He was one of the owners that I worked for, I stayed there. After that ___________.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want me to turn it off for a minute?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah. (tape turned off and on)

SUSAN ROGERS: Why don’t you tell us about some of your adventures with your horses - horse adventures on Anderson Mesa?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, I met one of the cowboys from this horse outfit at Babbitts' delivery barn, and they said they needed an extra man. So I went out there and the camp was at Sawmill Springs, down at Anderson Mesa. Now this outfit, there were eleven men in the outfit, and they were gathering, catching wild horses for the British Army. The British Army had lost a lot of horses in the Boer War in <Africa>, so they were buying these wild horses. And they sold 'em for fourteen dollars a head at the stockyards here, east of <Flagstaff>. There was lots of game in the country then, quite a lot of those wild horses. They roamed up and down the mesas in summertime. In the wintertime we dropped off of the mesas down into <Canyon Diablo> and Canyon Padre country, handled the horses down there. Then in the spring, went back up on Anderson Mesa again. Somewhere along about, I think it was 1910, some men came out from <Nebraska> and bought the whole outfit, bought brands. They bought some brands, that, oh, maybe had six or seven horses in it. I was paid in horses, ‘cause I was more or less green (?). For instance, I had, I think, five or six head of horses and a brand, and this <Nebraska> outfit took those horses back there and sold the brands. That is, they didn't take all the horses - they sold the brands. Maybe twenty-___ head of my horses, I only had five or six - they finally got caught up and went and served time in the penitentiary. Then later [I] went up to the Bob Gleason Ranch at Little(?) Springs.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that North of the Peaks?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, north of the prairie. Well, north of Hart Prairie. I stayed THERE for a while. (tape turned off and on) Then I took up a homestead - I don't remember what date, but the year was 1911 - at Riordan. You know where that's at?

SUSAN ROGERS: It’s- which direction?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Where that A-1 mountain interchange is. Took up a homestead there, and lived there for five years. Had some horses there. And after that, I came into town and worked in the barn. I guess I more or less ran the barn, for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Mill Company, for three years, or early 1918. Then I went in the Army, and I served eleven months in <France> in a combat outfit; machine gunner. I was discharged in June 1919. And for some reason, I didn't seem to be interested in horses anymore. So I drove a taxicab for years. There were eight taxi cab outfits here then. That is, the average person didn't have a car. And then, after the year I went to work in a garage, I guess I done everything in the garage except mechanic. Parts man, pumped gasoline, kept the books; Studebaker agency. I worked there from 19, I think, '21 or '22, 'til 1942; twenty years. So I had an offer to work in the county assessor's office, and I went there in the middle of 1942. Worked there 'til 1960 ______ and then retired at the age of seventy. You had to, then. So for the last fifteen years, I just worked around the house and worked in my garden - I have a garden in the back.

SUSAN ROGERS: How long have you lived in this house?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Fifty-two years, 1922. Fifty-three.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you and your wife build this house, or did you buy it from someone?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No, I bought it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let's go back to when you were on the homestead. Can you tell me how you GOT a homestead, what you had to do in those days to set one up?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, you had to put in five years. I'm not sure about so much a year, but I stayed there all the time. But you had to build a house, and to develop water, which was no trouble for me out there. There was plenty of it. And of course you had to cultivate, if I remember, it was ten acres or more - whatever you wanted. But I might add it was a tough job, and you more or less starved yourself.

SUSAN ROGERS: How come there was so much water out there? Usually <Flagstaff>....

CLIFF J. KRAMER: There's usually water west of here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh. And it's easy to get it. What did you grow?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, we raised SOME potatoes, a little truck garden, and some oats, hay for the horses in the winter.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you grow potatoes?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: That seems to have been a big crop.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, they raised potatoes up at Hart Prairie. Those ranches up there used to have the best potatoes, some of them. But of course we raised horses. Other than that-

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, is your house still out there, the homestead?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No. After I sold it in 1920 or 1921, before I got married. And several people had it and they rented it out. I used to go out there every summer just to look around. They burnt the house down, tore the corrals down, tore the barn down, tore the fence down, filled the two water tanks - dams, I should say - they were not steel tanks, but dams - filled them full of old tires and everything else, and it's just a mess. But it's owned now by the O.T. Cattle Company, which has a place out on Fort Valley Road, also. They just stay there in the summer I understood.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, tell me a little bit more about....

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I hunted squirrels.

SUSAN ROGERS: What?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: In the wintertime, used to hunt squirrels. There were lots of squirrels out there. I don't know whether you're familiar with it or not, but there's a lot of open country just east of the ranch now. It all burnt off. It was all heavy timber when I was out there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, I bet.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, that forest fire there burned it off.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, can we backtrack a little farther and tell me, describe some of the different ranches you worked on.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, I worked course for this horse outfit. And then I worked for.... I guess I didn't work for 'em, I HELPED 'em one summer, the C.O. Bar, up in Hart Prairie. This is Babbit’s

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, did you stay on their ranches? Did they have ranches, or did you just camp every night?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, they had kind of a headquarter ranch at Hart Prairie, coming up the slope a little bit there. And then I stayed at the old Gleason Ranch, at <Little Springs> sometimes. But that was about the size of it there.

SUSAN ROGERS: What did you actually do when you rounded up horses? Just tell me what you did in an ordinary day or an ordinary year.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, the horse wrangler, herded the saddle horses, and occasionally helped out with the wild horses. The wild horses, one man couldn’t herd them you know, ‘cause they’d get away quick. But occasionally they would run some of the wild horses in with the saddle horses, the gentle horses, and that kinda settled 'em down. Oh, they ran 'em down in relays. They ran down the wild horses in relays. They also had traps, corrals. They build, oh, big corral in the timber, and then they would make wings - some of 'em were a half-mile long, spread them, ‘course the farther they got, the wider they got. Then when they ran a bunch of horses, they'd run 'em into the wings, of course. Well, once they got 'em into the wings, they'd have to get right behind 'em and push 'em for sure to get 'em in the corral. That was the general procedure. And then they broke some of 'em to ride. They had two or three broncobusters there, broke 'em to ride. There's lots of things happened, but I just....

SUSAN ROGERS: You can't think of 'em? Tell me one story, one particular incident. Can you remember anything? Maybe almost losing a bunch of horses or something?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Oh, yeah! Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, tell me.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: But I wasn't on that drive. Just before I got there, they were telling me about, they had some 250 head of horses that they were driving to the railroad. The stockyards were east of town. I don’t know if I can explain where it is to you now. But you know the first railroad crossing east of downtown? 

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. I think Enterprise.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, by Butler, sort of.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, it runs right down into there, and then separates. Well, the stockyards are just off that road there. But they were driving those horses, and they got 'em, oh, about a mile south of the stockyards there, and a whole bunch of newspapers from the railroad track blew down there and blew into the front of that herd. And those horses just stampeded and scattered all over the country - every one of 'em went back. They didn't have ANY of 'em!

SUSAN ROGERS: They had to start all over. Did they get any of 'em?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, they got some of 'em, but they just scattered all over the country. A horse usually goes back to where he was born - sometime in his life. It’s odd, but he does. Quite a few of 'em went back to Anderson Mesa.

SUSAN ROGERS: How about when you were wrangling horses? Did anything kind of scary ever happen that you can remember? A big episode?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, I can tell you one instance.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Usually, the new man gets a little initiation. Well, they was talken’, Sawmill Springs country was awful wild uh, primitive. And they were talkin' around the camp about the bears, the deer, and such, or the coyotes with the fur on their horns, and so on. And there was a lot of bull(?) bats there. I didn't know it at the time, but evening they fly around there, and they made a noise just like a bear. So then one night they was all, after supper, all sittin' around the fire. They changed horses quite a bit, so they had their night horses all saddled and so on, around the trees, tied. And sittin' at the campfire there, and we were talkin', and all of a sudden one fellow jumps up and pulls out a .45 and says, "There's that danged bear again!" He shouts off into there. Another fellow come out and said, "I think I see it too!" So HE gets up and shoots. It's a wonder they didn't shoot to kill the horses! So they kept doing that quite a bit. Finally one of 'em said to me, they brought up the subject that somebody's gonna have to stay up all night so that bear don't come in there and get the horses, or us, this or that. So I had a little .22 pistol, and I said, "Well, I'll stay up." They said, "We kinda wondered, 'cause the rest of us are all tired, and so on." So this one fella, the fella that took me out there, kind of a friend of mine, said, "Here, I'll give you my .45 and my cartridge belt, and so on." He gave it to me and I strapped it on I sat with the gun there. He said, "It'd be a good idea if you climbed up that tree a little ways there." So I climbed up the tree a little bit. And I could hear those fellas once in a while laughin'. Some of 'em were in tents, and some were just out in bedrolls. So I sat there ‘till daylight. So they called me down, kinda laughed, this fella says, "Give me my gun back." So I gave him his gun back. He flipped open- those .45 have a loading gauge. Flipped it open, every one of those cartridges had been fired. They were all gone! (laughter) So that was that! They didn't let me forget that, either.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did anybody have any homesteads or big ranches out on Anderson Mesa that you remember?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: There weren't very many, no. The only fenced land, by the way, was deeded land, like a pasture or something - or the homestead. I'll have to take it back. There was one or two ranches on the rim before you dropped down into Canyon Padre or <Canyon Diablo>, and that country. But the rest of it was wide open. Like I said, the only fences were a man’s pasture, or something like that. You could just start out and ride from <Flagstaff> here; go out, far out into the country without striking a fence.

SUSAN ROGERS: So did you used to see lots of wild animals then?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yes, there was lots of wild animals: antelopes, there were antelopes by the HUNDREDS of herds. Of course the deer. There was quite a few deer, but there were more of 'em in the mountains. There was Mahan [phonetic spelling] Mountain there, Hutch (?) Mountain, Pine Mountain.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to hunt yourself?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Not too much, no. I done more huntin' I guess when I was out to the ranch at Riordan. I wasn’t very good outside of squirrels. In fact, I guess I prit' near lived on squirrels in the wintertime.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any episodes with bears? Were there a lot around or not?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: A lot around, but I never saw them. (laughter) Not that ______________. But I???ve- uh, when we was at the <Little Springs>, I've trailed 'em, seen their fresh tracks in the aspen, where they tore logs apart to get the ants and they sucked the... there's kind of a honey on the aspen leaf in the summer, and they’d get the leaves, suck some kind of a sweet substance off of that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you take any trips around to different areas when you lived here, like maybe <Oak Creek> or the <Grand Canyon>?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I never saw the Grand Canyon until 1920. (chiming clock obscures comment) I drove taxi from here.

SUSAN ROGERS: You didn't see it on any of your horse adventures there?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No, because________. I take it back. I came close one time, the Coconino Basin, which would be between Grand View and <Cameron>. But that’s as close as I was to it then.

SUSAN ROGERS: How about the <San Francisco Peaks>? Did you go out there at all?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, when we got to <Little Springs>, rode up a ways, two of us, tied our horses to trees before it got too steep. Walked up the rest of the way. And it was July. There was snow 'til- heck won't have it in those little canyons up there. I’ll bet some of them snow was twenty foot deep. Cows walked across it.

Then in later years, when they built that Weatherford Road, drove a car up in there. You could drive up, I guess they called it Humphrey Peak. No, it wasn't the highest one. You went up to Doyle’s saddle. And then on the inside of the basin, switch backs. Went up to the top, and when they got up to the top, there was room for maybe two cars, three cars.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, was that a toll....

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

SUSAN ROGERS: You were telling me how much it cost a car to go up the Weatherford Road.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: It cost a dollar a car, I'm pretty sure. For a ways up, it wasn't too bad, but after you went through Doyle's Saddle, it was on the inside of the basin there, the peaks (?) as they call it, and those cinders - it was quite a strain on a car. You had to prit' near go up in low gear. And the altitude was high.

SUSAN ROGERS: About what year was that? Just average, you know, when that Weatherford Road was in operation.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I don't know when, can't remember.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was it the twenties or thirties? You can't even remember that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Oh, maybe. It must have been after '38, 'cause my car was a '38. Could be 1926- between, somewhere in there. I had 2 cars.

SUSAN ROGERS: Probably somewhere in the thirties, right?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah, right around there.

SUSAN ROGERS: You said that you ran a taxi....

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No, I WORKED for a taxi, and I had three cars, three car company.

SUSAN ROGERS: Who ran that company?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, it was the Shamrock Taxi Company, a Mr. Ventnor and Mr. Peck, [phonetic spellings] if I remember right. But there were three or four other guys that had just one car, individual. Of course they made a lot of trips around town, but they made trips OUT of town. They took the lumberjacks out to the logging camps. They'd bring 'em in on Saturday; they'd spend Saturday night, and take 'em out Sunday morning after the bars closed. And of course there were various camps. One of 'em was out by Rogers Lake, one of 'em was north of Kendrick Park, one of 'em was south of, they called it the Cliff. Do you know where the Cliff buildings are? 

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh. Well, down in that neighborhood. And one of 'em up by Sunset. And there weren't too many cars, so....

SUSAN ROGERS: How much did it cost for them to rent a car and have you drive it?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, when I took a party of seven - I drove a Studebaker seven-passenger touring car. It cost 'em fifty-five dollars - five dollars for me to stay overnight at the Grand Canyon. We left here about nine o'clock in the morning, and got out there about half past five. So we had to stay overnight. Then you came back the next day, yourself sometimes. But that was the fare then. And out to the loggin' camps, close by, was usually two-and-a-half. The fares around town were fifty cents.

SUSAN ROGERS: What kind of people were you usually driving around? Townspeople, or people who came in on the train?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Townspeople, or the people coming on the train, yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you know any lumberjacks yourself?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, I knew the Matsons - Andy Matson ________. And I knew quite a few of the other ones. One was Pat Murphy - he was the foreman. The Greenlaw Mill camp. They had a sawmill out to Greenlaw Mill out here, you know, too. 

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh And Pat Murphy ran the camp south of Butler, somewhere close to Cliff Dwellings, let's just call it that. Then there was Bill Lymons [phonetic spelling] that ran a camp. I think they were south of Rogers Lake.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you ever go and visit these camps? Can you describe them at all to me? (chuckles)

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, I took these lumberjacks out early Sunday morning. The camps were made of one-man shacks, one-ROOM shacks. And those shacks were on skids. When you got ready to move the camp, the loaders picked up those shacks put 'em on a train - logging train, then - then the trains just pulled 'em to the next camp. That was the situation there.

There were three logging roads, logging trails. A L and T, and the Flagstaff Lumber Company, which is now Southwest, and the Greenlaw Lumber Company. Greenlaw Lumber Company mill was, don’t know how to explain to you, I would say, somewhere about where that interchange, the east interchange, is on I-40 out there. There was a railroad spur ran into it, of course. The railroad station out there was Cliffs. That was the new (?) station.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did these lumberjacks cause a lot of problems when they did come into town?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I'd better say no.

SUSAN ROGERS: (laughs) Which means yes! Huh? You don't remember any incidents that you can relate?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: They got drunk.

SUSAN ROGERS: Just normal.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Normal, yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: But nothing, any special crimes happening or anything?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: When you worked with the horses, did you used to live out there like all year round, or did you come into town part of the year?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: When I worked with the horse outfit? 

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. Lived all year round.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you have any kind of social life at all?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Only when you come to town.

SUSAN ROGERS: And how often did you get into town, maybe?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Sometimes three months, I think. One little interesting - it was interesting to me - in the wintertime when they were down in this lower country, as they call it. We'd ride over to <Canyon Diablo> railroad station there, put our horse in the corral there - the man would feed them in the trading post there - get on the train and come to town. When we were ready to go back, why, you'd get on the train. Of course the trains then stopped at various stations. And there was another little station at what they called Angel. That's this side of Canyon Padre. Used to do the same thing there, ride over to the railroad. By the way, <Canyon Diablo> was always supposedly the bad canyon; but Canyon Padre was the worst one to cross in the old days.

SUSAN ROGERS: Why was that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No bridge there. Have you ever been down there?

SUSAN ROGERS: I don't think so.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: ____________. Rough on the wagon ________. <Canyon Diablo>, you could cross it in two places in a wagon, called the Four-mile Crossing and the Six-mile Crossing. That was so many miles from the railroad, four miles to the railroad, six miles. The Six-mile Crossing was about where Meteor Crater is, down there by Meteor Crater, which was called Coon Mountain - where that meteorite is. There were a lot of meteorites layin' around there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Really?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Pieces, all over there. I didn't know what they were.

SUSAN ROGERS: Would there be big dances when you came into town?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Uh-huh.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where would they be held?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, sometimes in the Orpheum Theater, which is where the building is now. They had folding chairs then. They moved 'em all and we had a big dance floor. And they also had a dance hall where the Coconino Motors is now. Where Beaver and Santé Fe, behind that Shell station. That was when I came back from the Army, so that'd be 1920. But you know about the Orpheum Theater caving in with the big snow?

SUSAN ROGERS: Why don't you tell me? Do you remember when it happened?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: It happened on New Year's morning about six o'clock. They had a big dance in there New Year's Eve. That was 1915-16. It just turned over from '15 to '16. Had a big dance in there, big crowd. And I guess it heated up the snow, formed ice. And I understood, if I remember, at six o'clock the next morning, it caved in. The only thing that was left was the projection room. It stood up a little higher than this room here. So the rest of it was- _______ Have you seen pictures of it out there?

SUSAN ROGERS: I've seen one or two.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I give them some out there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, uh huh. I saw one. Let's see I read on your little bio-sketch, something about meeting an outlaw once. Do you want to tell me about that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Pegleg, yeah. (tape turned off and on) Sometime in early 1915 I was up to Hart Prairie, helping a man do some work at his ranch there. When we came back to the house, this man, who used to be a foreman for Babbitts' C.O. Bar outfit, [Tack Gaddis]. Just as he walked into his door he said, "There's a strange track there. One shoe and a heel." He went in the house and he said, "Somebody's been here and he stole my rifle!" This was toward evening. So he tracked him for a ways, it got dark. This man, who they called Pegleg, had fooled around in Fort Valley, stealing groceries. And there was some incident- one sheepman told me that what he couldn't carry, he was a foot, he'd take out and bust over a log - flour, beans, sacks of onions. Well he evidently would leave here in the winter and come back in the summer. So one time I was ridin' to work, bareback, over towards A-1 Mountain and Babbitts had a big pasture there, a whole section with rail fence around - the old rail fence. I was riding down this fence, looking for my horses. I'd turned 'em out to graze. And I saw a sack fly over the rail fence, so I kinda backed off a little bit, and here came a man climbing over. And this man had a peg leg, a big overcoat on. He had a .30.30 rifle stuck down his overcoat collar, along the inside there. There had been lots of trouble with him, and I knew who he was then. I just rode up easy like, and I said, "Did you see a bunch of such-and-such horses around?" He said, "No, I didn't." I said, "I've been lookin' for 'em, I don't know where they went." And he stood there and watched me for a long time. Then I said, "Well, I guess I'll ride down the fence." He was still watchin' me, and I don't know where he went. So I came back to the ranch at Riordan there, and one of the riders came into the ranch, a local boy here, and I told him, "Roy, you'd better watch out, I just saw Pegleg up there by the A-1 pasture." So he comes to town, tells the sheriff. The sheriff was Tom Pulliam then. So the sheriff goes out there, and they cornered him, I think the next day, just west of Riordan there, in a little draw. When the sheriff approached him, he drew down the .30.30 rifle on him, told him to get out of there. He wasn't going to be taken in or anything. So the sheriff got quite a few of his cowboys from the C.O. Bar outfit, which was over in Fort Valley then, and they surrounded that draw that night. The next morning, he was gone. And he went on for another year or so. Then one summer he walked into what they called the Wild Bill Ranch between Bellemont and Kendrick Park - that's as close as I can tell you. Or Wing Mountain, if you know where that's at. And he stayed there in one of those shacks, and also this cow outfit was there too. They had a county ranger here - Johnson was his name. As I understood, he'd been a Texas Ranger. But they sent him out. Somebody got word to him that Pegleg was out there. So they sent him out there, and he faced Pegleg. Now, I wasn't there. This is hearsay. Pegleg came out of the cabin, Johnson told him he was under arrest. Pegleg just reached in his pocket and pulled out a six-shooter, and Johnson shot him. So that was the end of that. But he had caused lots of trouble around the ranches, stealing food, breaking into places and that. But the supposition was nobody ever talked to him, but Johnson talked to him, of course, and I talked to him, and the sheriff talked to him.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, one more thing I read about you. Can you tell me about some practical joke about the night that McSweeney died?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Who?

SUSAN ROGERS: McSweeney. Do you know anything about that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: That's funny. (tape turned off and on) Let's see; let's hear a little bit about when you were county assessor. How did you get that job?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Well, Mr. D.L. McKinney was the assessor. Previous to that, he'd been the under-sheriff for the county here. In fact, he lived here, I guess, since 1902. He approached me, and I made a remark once that I wouldn't mind working up there. At the garage where I worked, I took care of transferring titles on cars, which was part of the assessor's job. Up there one time I just made the remark, "I'd kind of like to have a job here." At the garage you worked seven o'clock 'til nine o'clock, holidays and everything. So he came down here to the house one day and wanted to know if I would like to have a job and I said, "Yeah, I'll try it." Of course, like I say, I knew a little bit about vehicle papers. So I went up there in 1942. There was the county assessor and a lady deputy and myself. At that time, 1942, wartime, we sold, like in the license year, January, February, 4,000 license plates, which was quite a chore. Now they sell 24,000.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right!

CLIFF J. KRAMER: But, oh, assessment work, notices to send out, had, of course, motor vehicle car transfers all year round, to some place. With only one little office then. It ain't like it is now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: And, oh, it was interesting. To me, after workin' all day long, all holidays, Sundays and everything, it was quite a change. I worked at that 'til 1960. And them I retired.

SUSAN ROGERS: You talked about World War II, when you were here in <Flagstaff>. I was just wondering how it affected <Flagstaff>. Were there any special happenings or restrictions?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Oh, yes, there were ration stamps, ration cards, ration gasoline, groceries. That is, you had to have stamps to buy groceries. And if you needed a tire, you had to go before a rationing board and tell 'em your story, that you had a need for this or that. They didn't just give 'em out to anybody.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there any special celebration at the end of the war here in <Flagstaff>? Do you remember anything?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yes. They had one fire truck, if I remember. It would have been '45, wouldn't it, when the war was over? I think they had maybe two fire trucks, I'm not sure - but anyway, one of 'em drove all around town with children and students and this and that on it, and so on. I don't remember.... Of course, I was working; I don't know what all went on, and so on.

SUSAN ROGERS: How about that flu epidemic of 1918? Do you remember that?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I was in <France>, and it hit us in early September, and it sure went through the Army now. Personally, I was sick half a day.

SUSAN ROGERS: That's all?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: That's all. Just before we went - it was a trench war, we were in the defense sector of trench war. Before we went to the trenches, they lined up the company, asked all those who didn't feel good or were sick, to step out. Half the company. The company was a machine gun battalion with 150. The rest of us went on up to the front. Those who stepped back either went to the hospital or they helped the cook, the field kitchen, about two miles behind the troops, behind the lines. And I might add they got the worse of the war than WE did. The Germans shelled the kitchens and not.... Passed right over our heads.

Here, I guess the flu epidemic was November. 

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Right. I lost an uncle here. He was a young fellow, only ten years older than I was ________. A lot of people died here in <Flagstaff>, I understand.

SUSAN ROGERS: That’s what I understood, yeah. How about some of the celebrations in <Flagstaff>? Do you remember some of the early Fourth of Julys?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yes, the early Fourth of July at the rodeo grounds was on the south end of San Francisco Street, which I think is College now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Stadium.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: There was no fence around it, but the mounted spectators formed the fence. And they had bronco riding. By the way, the bronco riders then didn't have no corrals and chutes to saddle their horses. They had to saddle 'em right there out in the open. It took sometimes two men, three men, to do it. Sometimes they had to throw 'em DOWN and do it.

Oh, there were a few cars, not very many. They made a big round circle. Of course if the horse threw the rider off, why, he couldn't get out of the circle - the spectators on horseback kept 'em in. But the riders in those days rode 'em until they either got throwed off or would quit. I understand now there's so many seconds and you gotta get off, or they jump off. Not in those days - they rode! But they had every Fourth of July, I don't remember parades, but they might have had.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about Christmas? Were there any special Christmas traditions that you remember? (pause) Nothing special, huh?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Nothing special.

SUSAN ROGERS: How did you spend Christmas when you were out there rounding up horses?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I've gotta think a minute! (tape turned off and on)

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, why don't you tell us about New Year's.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: New Year's, let's see, would be of ending 1918, and the new year of 1919. I'd sit in the front door of a one-room line cabin, just off the Canyon Padre. I was taking care of a little bunch of horses there over the winter, watching the moon come up over the Twin Peaks north of <Winslow>. New Year's morning.

SUSAN ROGERS: You always remember that, huh?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I remember that, 'cause I sat there and thought, "What am I doing all by myself? Just a few horses!" (laughter)

SUSAN ROGERS: Right! I think we've hit upon quite a bit. Can you think of anything else? Did you ever have any adventures with the Indians at all? Did you ever come in contact with them? Any particular things happening?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Oh, not especially. One winter we took our horses north of here, a little northwest of Deadman's Flats, got 'em out of the snow - the snow was pretty heavy at Riordan there. One night a couple of Indians ran through our camp, just as hard as they could ride a horse through there. So the next night we stretched a lasso of rope from cedar tree to cedar tree. They must have seen us do it, I guess. They didn't come through. That's the only....

SUSAN ROGERS: You never had any problems with them?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No. We didn't have any, of course, at Riordan. We did have a lot of snow; 400 feet higher than here. In fact, I got 'em in the shed there, a pair of homemade skis 

SUSAN ROGERS: Really? out of board. A little ol' strap over - not all that fancy hook-up like they got now.

SUSAN ROGERS: They worked, huh?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you have to do quite a bit of - was that cross-country skiing?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No, no, just skiing out to get your horses.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh!

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Or huntin' squirrels. You see, I only had ninety-five acres there. They wouldn't give you any more on account of the trees.

SUSAN ROGERS: Go ahead.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: We just turned the horses out as much as we could. Well, one winter, it was a winter like this one here; I turned the horses out and comes a big storm all of a sudden. So I put on skis and went and looked for 'em, and I found 'em at <Bellemont>, which is west of Riordan. And I had a heck of a time drivin' 'em back on skis, as the snow had a crust on there and it was hitten their knees, kind of cuttin' their knees. So I got in front of 'em and made a trail with the skis, tramped down the snow there, and they followed me on home, because, of course, they had hay at home.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: I finally got 'em home. Boy, there were several years there we just skied right over the fence. It was that high!

SUSAN ROGERS: You're a pretty good skier then, huh?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No! Oh, no. (laughter)

SUSAN ROGERS: In those days you were.

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No, just....

SUSAN ROGERS: You never skied at the Snow Bowl?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No. No, just rough, that is went up a hill, you just hoped you got up there. You went down the hill, you hoped you didn't go too far or too fast.

SUSAN ROGERS: Nobody taught you how, huh?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I think that just about covers it. Can you think of anything else you want to add?

CLIFF J. KRAMER: Can't think of anything.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. (tape turned off and on)

CLIFF J. KRAMER: When we were in <France>, we went up to the front in the trenches, and they always walked on either side of the road - not IN the road - on either side of it. So in a machine gun outfit, the gunner carried the tripod, about fifty-eight pounds. And then the number two man carried the gun barrel, which was about thirty pounds - a water-cooled Browning machine gun. We were walkin' up the road, goin' to the front there. One man from <Kansas> was carrying the gun, and he was kind of disgusted. He said, "For two cents I'd throw this gun away and go home!" Across the ocean, 3,000 miles! (laughter) That tickled me. Nowadays, it's a small matter. But in THOSE days, when we took sixteen days to cross the Atlantic, eight days coming back, he was gonna walk home! (laughter)

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, thanks.


