SENATOR HENRY FOUNTAIN ASHURST INTERVIEW

May 19, 1959 and October 9, 1961

George Babbitt Collection, 5 7-15 a, 57-15b 



[BEGIN SIDE A]





Babbitt: By gosh, Henry, it's good to be with you this afternoon. This is May 19, 1959, and I'm sitting here in the Monte Vista with a very dear old friend of ours, and an outstanding citizen of <Arizona>, the former senator Henry F. Ashurst. The senator has very kindly given us some time to record an interview, which we are going to file in our historical record, which I'm sure in years to come will be precious information on the early days of <Arizona>. Henry, where were you born, please? 



Ashurst: I was born in the town of <Winnemucca>, W-I-N-N-E-M-U-C-C-A, the state of <Nevada>, September 15, 1874. My parents were from <California>, they were on their way to <Arizona> with a bunch of sheep. I was born on the way. Now, most all men claim they were born in a covered wagon. We were not able to have a covered wagon, so I have the distinction of having been born in an uncovered wagon. The covered wagon is comparable to the Cadillac. Not everyone can afford a Cadillac, and not everyone in those days could afford a covered wagon. And my parents, with their sheep, reached what was then called Stone's Ferry on the Colorado River, and crossed at Stone's Ferry in December '74 [i.e., 1874], into <Arizona>. <Mohave County> being one of the original four counties of the Territory of <Arizona>, they landed and stayed there a while at a town called <Mineral Park>, county seat of <Mohave County>. 



Babbitt: And you spent some time at <Mineral Park>, and then where did you go, Henry? 



Ashurst: (unclear) went to <Phoenix> and <Mineral Park>, then went to a ranch south of the present town of <Williams Arizona>. There was no <Williams> there at that time, and further north, that county abounded in elk, that are now extinct. That is, natural elk that were indigenous to the forest at that time. They are extinct. Then a great drought came, and my father found a spring out on what is now Anderson Mesa. He lived there with his family for some years, and after his death, which occurred in January 1901, we sold the place to Babbitt Brothers, called the Old Ashurst Ranch. There's still, I understand, the log cabin there. In that cabin, I learned to read and write. My parents employed a very eccentric old Irishman named Joseph Perry, as teacher, and he taught the school, had three pupils. It was a hundred miles to the nearest school at <Prescott Arizona>. There was no <Flagstaff>, no <Williams>. 



Babbitt: Later on, then, didn't you come to <Flagstaff> and attend school? 



Ashurst: In 1883, we moved to town because a school had been established here, in a log hut. And Mrs. Eva E. Marshall was the teacher. I had the pleasure today of talking to an old friend, Mr. William H. Switzer, who attended the school and is one of the few survivors of the people who attended in that log hut schoolhouse in the fall of 1883. Mr. Switzer is now ninety years of age. His father was a pioneer, one of the early builders of <Flagstaff>. His father's name was William A. Switzer, and his mother lived to be ninety-six years of age. 



Babbitt: I remember a number of years ago you told me about some sort of an experience. I believe they took some children out of the school and hanged them. There was something about cattle rustlers. Do you remember that, Henry? I think you told me you ran and hid behind a log or something. 



Ashurst: A lot of myth has grown up about the early days. They were not as bad as now depicted. There was a good deal of chivalry. Of course at that time, there were men who stole cattle, and they were frequently hanged--some by law and some by noose law. But what we regarded at that time as the most contemptible of all crimes was stealing sheep. No man could descend lower on the scale, than to be a sheep-stealer. In fact, to call a man a sheep-stealer was justifiable--you were justified in making any resistance to such an epitaph, to be called a sheep-stealer. 



Babbitt: You lived at the time, as I remember, out east of town, right near Switzer Canyon Ranch, didn't you, Henry? 



Ashurst: Yes, when we moved to <Flagstaff> in 1883, my father built a rather small modest lumber house. We lived there for five or six winters, then moved to a house in the Brannen Addition. The Brannen Addition being a tract of land [preempted?] by Peter J. Brannen, a merchant of this city, who really gave <Flagstaff> its name. It was called Antelope Springs until Mr. Brannen gave it the name of <Flagstaff>, recommended to the Post Office Department that it be called <Flagstaff>. There is another town, <Flagstaff>, in the state of <Massachusetts>, but no other town named <Flagstaff> of which I know in the <United States>. 



Babbitt: Henry, after you had attended school, then you got into politics? Or how did you get into politics? 



Ashurst: So far as I am able to remember, I cannot recall when I was not interested in politics. I never went hunting, I never went fishing, I cannot drive an automobile. I never danced, I don't ride, hunt, fish, swim, dance, tennis, golf, or baseball. (bobble in recording) ... history and philosophy and law. So I was one day, one cold day in 1893, riding my horse down the Front Street of <Flagstaff>, and Sandy Donahue, a famous man, keeper of the Senate Saloon, sheriff of <Coconino County>, came out and accosted me and said, "Come right up to the jail." I was a little disturbed. I thought he wanted me for some illegal branding of cattle. He said, "I want you to take training for a month and learn how to become the jailer." For the first time in my life (unclear) responsibility. But after being trained for a month, I became the county jailer, which they called a turnkey. Sixty dollars a month, which was a princely salary. And my room, the jailer's room, was the only room in <Flagstaff> which had inside plumbing. 



Babbitt: About what year was that, Henry? 



Ashurst: Well, I began my duties in March 1893. I served for the rest of '93 and all of '94. Mr. Donahue was not a candidate for reelection, and Ralph H. Cameron was elected sheriff. Mr. Cameron subsequently was our delegate to Congress, and subsequently was also <United States> senator from <Arizona>. As delegate to Congress, he introduced and passed a bill transferring <Arizona> from territorialhood into statehood. Mr. Cameron died in 1953, and was buried at the <Grand Canyon>--was one of the real pioneers. (unclear) Thomas F. McMillan, a native of the state of <Tennessee>. He was the first white settler in what is <Flagstaff>, and built the first house in what became <Flagstaff>. Mr. McMillan died in 1906. I remember the newspapers of that day were [salty?] in their words. They made their news items startling. Mr. McMillan was married in <San Francisco> to a very charming and witty lady. The newspaper carried the item "Great News! Thomas F. McMillan has Committed Matrimony!" (laughter) 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Ashurst: (unclear) Mr. McMillan's partner, Jim Goodwin, heard about Mr. McMillan having committed matrimony, he thought it was suicide! But I do not believe that anyone believes that matrimony is necessarily suicide. 



Babbitt: Well, Henry, the first political office for which you ran and was elected, when and where was that? 



Ashurst: I think I got the fever in my blood working for Sandy Donahue, a good politician when I was the jailer. So in 1896, I was nominated by the county convention for membership in the territorial legislature, and was elected. We had twenty-four members of the house, and twelve members of the senate, all accorded to council. [I served sixty days. (?)] Then was admitted to the bar and opened a law office in <Williams Arizona>--not <Flagstaff>. And in 1898, I was re-elected to the house of representatives for the territory, and was chosen speaker of the house of that legislative assembly. Strangely enough, our present senator, Barry Goldwater's, uncle, Morris Goldwater, was president of the senate at the time I was speaker of the house. 



Babbitt: Then you continued in public life and ran for the senate? 



Ashurst: Well, then later in 1902 I ran for the state senate and served in the state senate or the council. Then in 1904, I was elected to the office of district attorney, was re-elected in 1906. Hence I served the year 1905, 1906, 1907, and 1908 as district attorney of this <Coconino County>. On January 1, 1909, I moved my law office with my wife and my stepson John Wessel Renault [phonetic], to <Prescott Arizona>. And in 1910, the delegate chairman secured the passage of a bill proposing that <Arizona> become a state. And when the bill was [signed] into law, I entered the race for the United States Senate with six other gentlemen. We toured the territory for a hundred days, speaking night and day. Two senators were to be elected, and I was (unclear) at the time (unclear) Democratic ticket, and subsequently lost at the general election. At that time the constitutional amendment that provided that the senators should be elected by a direct vote of the people had not been passed. Whereupon, it was necessary that the legislature of the territory in joint session should elect senators. And Mr. Marcos Arelios Smith [phonetic] was elected senator, and I was chosen also. We went to <Washington> on the same train. There in <Washington>, under the Constitution of the <United States> when a new state is admitted, the senators must draw lots to see what term they will get: a two-year term, a four-year term, or a six-year term. Well, my good luck was with me, and I drew a six-year term, and was re-elected for four more six-year terms, and was defeated in 1930 by Ernest McFarland [phonetic], who subsequently became governor for some time, and was (unclear) defeated, I understand, by Barry Goldwater, for the United States Senate. I'm entirely withdrawn from politics. I had nearly fifty years of political life, enjoyed it, it was stimulating, but I've entirely withdrawn from politics. 



Babbitt: As I remember, you were chairman of the powerful Judiciary Committee for a number of years. 



Ashurst: Yes, but the Senate is very strong on protocol and what we call seniority. That is, the longer you stay there, the more you reach the top of a great committee. When I was admitted to the senate, I asked to be appointed to the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. Being a lawyer, I thought I belonged there, and I might be of some service. Well, I had to wait, I think, some twenty-three years before I could reach that place. But then patience served me--one of my few virtues--and I know of nothing that cannot be accomplished if one may practice patience. And I was willing to wait twenty-four years for such a good place and a good chairmanship of the Judiciary Committee of the Senate. For there we had to pass upon--well, it was the supreme court for the senate--we had to pass upon the constitutionality of the laws, as well as their desirability, and their practicability. 



Babbitt: Henry, I'd like to get back--we all know that you were one of the outstanding senators of the <United States> for many, many years, and we of <Arizona> are immensely proud of you. In fact, I was at a meeting in <Washington> not long ago, and they still tell me you're one of the most beloved and respected and potent individuals in <Washington> today, because of the friends you made during your years in the senate. We of <Arizona> are very proud of you. We hope that you come back and spend more time with us. I think you've covered your political career pretty fairly. Do you have any reminiscences about the early days of campaigning in <Arizona>? 



Ashurst: Yes. I was speaking once in a town called <Ajo>, A-J-O, <Ajo>, <Pima County>, and on the front seat was a man who had lingered too long where the bubble of joy dances in the cup of pleasure, and during my speech kept yelling out, "You know me, don't cha, Henry? You know me, don't cha, Henry?" And the audience said, "Throw him out!" I said, "No, don't throw him out. I do not believe I know his face, but his breath is very familiar." (Babbitt laughs)



Of course I could keep wheeling this tape for many minutes on reminiscences in politics. And that's one of the thrills of politics, you meet with some new experiment every day. You're present not only as to what kind of a speech you are to make, of what is good for the community, and what sort of a law should be passed, not only for your state, but for the nation. But you're present to try to remember names. People are flattered if you can call their name. Now, ex-Governor Hunt, and ex-Senator Cameron, and Senator Hayden and Senator Goldwater are masters of remembering names. They never forget a name. I was not especially good at remembering names. I could remember speeches and incidents in history, and all that, but to remember names was not so easy. But to meet a gentleman and say, "Why, your face is familiar," he just laughs at you, he thinks that's sort of old hat, when you tell him "your face is familiar." He doesn't want that, he wants you to know his name. And you call his name, he'll go home and tell his wife, "I'm gonna vote for that man, he's thinking of me, he knew my name. He's thinking of me." 



Babbitt: Henry, what do you think about the future of <Arizona> now, since you've seen it from the very beginning? 



Ashurst: Well, I know no power of language that I possess, or that any other man possesses, can describe the changes that have come in <Arizona> in the last sixty years. And the changes that have come in twenty years are startling. I left <Flagstaff> fifty years ago, and now--I came back during several critical campaigns--but when I landed here last Sunday, the seventeenth of May, I was as much of a stranger as anybody could possibly be. I couldn't locate but five houses that I knew. The courthouse had even changed its face. They had put another addition on the jail. The door which I used to enter, that was sealed up, and a new door was opened. Fields have been leveled here. I can't find River de Flag. They seem to have covered up that stream that used to run through <Flagstaff>. It's amazing the progress, the changes that have been made. But that's true of <Holbrook>, true of <Winslow>, true of <Phoenix>, true of <Tucson>, and it's the natural order.



I desire to say this: If you are in the East, it seems as if nearly four out of every person you meet ultimately expects to go to <California> or to <Arizona> to live and to die. I think that is a fair proportion. You ask five persons where they expect ultimately to reside, and they'll tell you Southern <Arizona> or Southern <California>. A great many now are beginning to prefer Northern <Arizona> because of not only its beauty, but its more moderate climate, such as <Flagstaff>, <Williams>, <Winslow>, <Grand Canyon>, (unclear), <Kingman>. 



[END OF TAPE 57-15a, BEGIN TAPE 57-15b] 



Babbitt: Good afternoon, folks. This is Monday, October 9, 1961. I'm George Babbitt, and I've had an effort for many years in trying to record some of the famous old-timers of <Arizona> in general, and Northern <Arizona> in particular. Today we are particularly fortunate in having a very dear old friend of ours for many years standing, with us here in our room in the Monte Vista Hotel. Our friend is our great former senator from <Arizona>, Senator Henry Fountain Ashurst. We are also pleased to have with us [the senator's son?]. The senator and his son are on their way to <Hollywood> where the senator, I believe is going to take the part of a <United States> senator in a movie. I've had the pleasure of recording Senator Ashurst before, but he is very familiar with things of early <Arizona> history, particularly (unclear) <Flagstaff> (unclear) education (unclear) <Flagstaff>.



Senator would you mind telling us when you first came to school here, and the names of some of your classmates and your teacher and what you studied there? Thank you, Senator. 



Ashurst: Thank you, Mr. George Babbitt. <Flagstaff> was really founded in 1882. And in the summer of 1882, some of the pioneers organized a school district, near the present Arizona State College, a teacher was employed, Mrs. Eva Marshall. She was a great-great-granddaughter of (unclear) Tyler, who was a Revolutionary War general. Mrs. Marshall was a cultured, fine teacher. The school was started on the first Monday of September, 1883. My parents didn't reach <Flagstaff> and their ranch until about the second Monday of September '83, when I started to school. And among the fellahs who were there at that time, outside of myself, only one is left of whom I have any knowledge. That is William H. Fletcher, whose father and mother were the pioneers in the early days of <Flagstaff>. And Billy Fletcher, as we called him, is now (unclear) and alive, ninety-two years of age, a respected, honored citizen of <Flagstaff>.



Barbara Alsip [phonetic] (unclear) in school. Among others, Ostoria Gibson, who was a rude, rough fellow, but his (unclear) and became one of our most learned men in this part of the country. He became a clergyman, a great power, great character, and great (unclear).



There were three boys named [Safford?]. Their father was an editor. He was one of the earliest editors, possibly the second editor of the Sun, which was at that time called the Champion. The first newspaper in <Flagstaff> was called The Daily Flag, about the size one foot long and ten inches wide. It was edited by a man who we called Mr. (unclear). He sold out to A. E. Fain, who published the Champion. The Champion later became the Sun. Then we had two papers: the other one called the Herald, and one called the Sun. The teacher said to me, "We need a pupil to write articles weekly for the paper, and Henry Ashurst, you will write for the Herald." I said, "No, I want to write for the Sun, because I chose that paper. I can use language I couldn't use in the Herald." So I began my articles. "These weekly articles are written by Henry Fountain Ashurst. They are written for the Sun, and we expect to cast into the Sun such brilliant (unclear) shining with increased splendor and brightness." You should look up the power of the sun (unclear) that language. Every day I began to use [figurative?] language.



Well, a few months later, in 1883, a schoolhouse was built on the site of the present state college, Arizona State College here. <Flagstaff> was always hospitable to religion, science, and education. I do not wish to (unclear) but it is a fact that among all the <Arizona> (unclear) there is hospitality toward religion and science and learning. And indeed, as is witnessed by the fact that the Arizona State College is here, the Lowell Observatory is here, (unclear) discovered the Lowell Observatory. (unclear) Lowell Observatory. Dr. Lowell died in November 1916 at the age of sixty-one. It was (unclear) thing, because of the fact that (unclear) observatory discovered this remote planet. Although Dr. Lowell did not live to see the publication of the discovery, he predicted it and told his astronomers where and how to find it. 



Babbitt: I was wondering, you mentioned a moment ago several of your schoolmates. Do you recall the names of several others? 



Ashurst: Oh, yes, yes! There was the Hart family (unclear) <Oak Creek>--all red--headed. The father was (unclear), their hair was flaming red. His sons were Rueben Hart and Leslie Hart, Elmer Hart, and Luther Hart. Owen Wesley Hart later became very famous as a financier. Nearly all the pioneer cattlemen of this district (unclear) Babbitt brothers, my father, Norman Church, many other cattle people, that depended upon the judgement and [audacity?] of Owen Wesley Hart to buy or sell our cattle.



Among others in this group, (unclear), a Scott boy. Hugh Anderson, his father was a typical Scotsman. Hugh was one of the few who rode to school, came four miles from his father's ranch, to attend the school. Mr. Fletcher also rode to school. The rest of us trudged through the snow, sometimes ten below zero, to reach the school, (unclear) The second teacher was.... (unclear) redheaded people so much. The second teacher was William Van Home who was a very strong man physically, believed in corporal punishment, and believed in exercising it. And any fellah who didn't (unclear) who did not have his lessons, he would [wave?] and wave hard. 



Babbitt: Do you remember about what year this would have been, Henry? 



Ashurst: Mr. Van Home came here in August 1885. He only taught one term, and then began to practice law. About that time we had a phenomenon to happen. We had, at one time, six red-headed lawyers here. There was William D. Stewart, and Edward M. Bowie, J. E. Bowen, and Richard H. Jones, Henry B. Morris, and William L. Van Home [all phonetic spellings]. And when those six red-headed lawyers got into a (unclear) case, they (unclear). And the justice of the peace was red-headed. His name was Dan Coakley. 



Babbitt: That's a very interesting (unclear). Senator, other names from the school, do you remember? 



Ashurst: Well, yes. I remember well. One of them was named Edward Ricken [phonetic]. He never smiled, but he was a boy from (unclear). And he would resent anybody suggesting (unclear). [something about the state of <Maine>] Among others were the Hawksworth [phonetic] family. Mr. George Hawksworth, the patriarch of the family, was a tinner, a tinsmith. He was the father of three sets of twins. Mrs. Martha, his wife, has something to do with the production of these sets of twins. They were very knowledgeable people, and became highly respectable members of the community. I do not recall that in all the early <Flagstaff> days, anyone who was a pupil actually [went wrong?]--one whose name I'll not mention, doesn't mean anything, 'cause the family all is dead and gone now. But among all that great (unclear) students, they all were more or less practically (unclear) economy, (unclear) smoke a cigarette or to chew gum was a social error never forgotten, never forgiven.



(unclear) red-headed men, we had a saloon keeper here, a man of tremendous ability and audacity, J. J. Donahue, Jerome J. Donahue. He had the Senate Saloon. He had a silver bicycle. His (unclear) for his fine team of horses was silver mounted. And this county of Coconino was created by the legislature in 1891. The governor called a special election. At that time, (unclear). Sandy Donahue, as he was called, was in Oswego, visiting his parents. Election called, no hope of the Democrats winning if Sandy was gone. So Mr. George Babbitt, a rather esteemed citizen, father of the gentleman who has introduced me and who is promoting this tape recording of mine, (unclear) said, "Well, I'll telegraph Sandy to come home, if we're going to have the election, (unclear) election (unclear) come." Well, I remember (unclear) very well, (unclear) Donahue (unclear). "Come home at once. We're going to have an election. No chance to win unless you get home." Well, Sandy came home, and with that vigor and that tremendous influence among men, the Democrats didn't carry all of the [seats?], but they carried most of them in the early county. And the county at that time was a Republican county. Well, as to the teachers, <Flagstaff> has been happy, from the nature and character of her teachers. The teachers at that time seemed to have a consecration, a devotion, that was very rare. The teachers all came from the East, they had college degrees. At that time, a college degree meant something. When you had a degree from a college or especially from a university, your success was assured if you (unclear) hard work.



Well, the next teacher after Mr. Van Home was George Y. Crothers, who was a medical student, and he would see how far he could punish a patient without producing any pain in him. And he had eight or ten switches and whips always right in a quiver by the side of his desk. And him being a physical giant in strength, he could handle the biggest boys we had. And many, many people (unclear) stayed away from school in fear of Mr. Crothers' whips and lashes.



The next teacher was a lady. Our first teacher was a lady, Mrs. Marshall. Our next teacher was Flora M. Weatherford, the sister of John W. Weatherford, who built the Weatherford Hotel. Miss Weatherford was a devotee of literature, and she made me study Shakespeare, she made me stand up and recite (unclear) and Casius and Mark Antony, hour after hour, a precisionist in elocution. She married Robert Feeney [phonetic], a prominent cattleman down on the Beaver Creek, in now <Yavapai County>, (recording turned off and on) 



Babbitt: Senator, I want to beg your pardon for that interruption. Unfortunate (unclear) much more interesting and valuable to me (unclear). 



Ashurst: (unclear) to teacher George D. Crothers, a most unusual man. As I say, he majored in medicine, and he made the science of medicine so attractive that I even thought for a few fleeting moments of abandoning my law studies and taking up medicine, Professor Crothers made it so attractive. Then the next teacher after Miss Weatherford was John Wilson [Walsh?], (unclear) <Arkansas>. Six feet, six inches in height. Later, his brother Henry B. Walsh, (unclear) became chief justice. John Walsh majored in philosophy, and required us to study philosophy. I remember one day--I must tell you this story--his strong partisan (unclear) cold winter mornings (unclear) "a great calamity has happened to our country. Such a serious calamity that I am emotionally upset so that I cannot teach today." We all stared in bug-eyed amazement as to what was happening to our country. He said, "Senator James (unclear) Ingalls of <Canada> says (unclear) election." Well, I found out later that those two people had emotional upsets over the defeat of a <United States> senator. At least I do not know of anyone who was emotionally upset over my defeat. I know that I was not! (unclear) the teachers. Les taught Greek and Latin both, and required proficiency. He taught one year, and then studied law, became a famous lawyer in <Bisbee Arizona>.



The next teacher was L. I. Kiggins, K-I-G-G-I-N-S, who majored in business, required us all to take [picturepane?]. Very worthy man. He became a sheepman.



The next teacher was Harold L. Weims, long black moustache, and (unclear) whiskers--that is, sideburns. And he majored in bees. He required us all to study the life of the bee, and it became very important to me many years later in the senate. I spoke an hour-and-a-half on the life of the bee, and received a considerable number of comments. I was told by the leader of the senate I must speak an hour-and-a-half in a filibuster--just keep going. And I knew more about bees than I did about the bill before me.



At the end of Mr. Weims' tutorial session, he moved to <California> to engage in producing honey (unclear) honey. I left the public schools then forever.



Now here is a strange thing--seems strange to me--every one of those teachers had an emphasis on some particular and different thing. And they required all the patients to study it, (unclear) history. Every student was required to be precise on history. The red-headed teacher, Van Home, required us to study law. Mr. Crothers required us all to take [physiology?] and hygiene. (unclear) at that time, although water was very scarce, we didn't have much chance to wash, (unclear) hygiene. Miss Weatherford majored on Shakespeare, required us all to take Shakespeare. And as I say, Weims majored in philosophy, (unclear). And Kiggins on business. And Harold Weims on bees. And I've noticed as I've gone through life, most every one of us major on something, that'd be a good thing. 



Babbitt: Senator, you were talking about the various community teachers. (unclear) ask you when you went to school, how many years did you attend the <Flagstaff> schools? 



Ashurst: Well, I began when I was eight years of age, and I left school when I was seventeen. 



Babbitt: (unclear) these teachers didn't stay too long, their training wasn't too good. 



Ashurst: Yes. Only one taught two terms--that was Crothers. All the others, even Miss Marshall taught two terms. All the others taught one term. They received what at that time was a fabulous sum, $100 per month. A hundred dollars then would buy much more than $300 would buy now. You got a splendid meal of a beefsteak for 25 cents". Later on, a beefsteak meal cost 500. Your rent, your room, (unclear) about $10 a month. A good house could be rented for $20 a month. 



Babbitt: Another thing that I was interested in, you talked about the role of specialties (unclear) emphasized. What other (unclear) did they give in their curriculum? 



Ashurst: Well, we studied--that is, we'd take the highest class. We studied natural philosophy--it was called physics then--natural philosophy: how fast would a falling object approach the earth. (unclear) ourselves as having opinions as ridiculous (unclear) moon. Our natural philosophy taught us that. That was physics. Then in addition to physics, taught Greek and Latin, geography, grammar, of course history of the <United States> and the history of England, diction, and we had a class in writing. And of course arithmetic. But only one pupil took algebra. That was Billy Switzer, the celebrated Billy Switzer, ninety-two years of age, (unclear). I guess it's really called the town of <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: What grade--you said they taught natural philosophy, what grade.... 



Ashurst: Well, a boy of fifteen, a girl of twelve or thirteen, would go into natural philosophy class. Those under that did not take natural philosophy, but did take history. We just had first division. 



Babbitt: Senator, you must have started at what age, would you say? 



Ashurst: About six. Let me see, yes, about six. 



Babbitt: And then they attended for how many years? 



Ashurst: From September until about the last of March. 



Babbitt: And how many years would they attend, then? 



Ashurst: Well, there'd be about six years in this Flagstaff School, In 1895, the schoolhouse now called Emerson School was started. The (unclear) school out where the Arizona State College is, they moved it to Emerson School, which is now a brick building. That would have been in 1895. 



Babbitt: How long was the school day? 



Ashurst: No school on Saturday. School from nine o'clock in the morning, recess of fifteen minutes at 10:30, one hour for lunch--called it dinner, no such word as lunch at that time, here. Then, until three o'clock, with an intermission of fifteen minutes at 2:45. So we were in school about five-and-a-half hours. And we were taught how to (unclear), how to take the barb of a bee sting out, and how to trim our fingernails. All those useful and necessary things were taught right in the public school, and prizes were given to the boy or girl who could show the most inventiveness. For instance, one boy made quite a [cartoon?], and received a dollar, which was big pay at that time. 



Babbitt: You say you had a recess between 2:30 and 2:45? 



Ashurst: Two forty-five. 



Babbitt: And how long did school continue? 



Ashurst: An hour and a quarter more. We were all glad to go to school because we went home and had to work hard. We went home and had to milk the cows, get in the wood, and do many household chores. School was sort of a privilege, you didn't have to work so hard. (unclear) and they had a tin bucket where you had a compartment with hot coffee in it. (unclear) it had a cup on the top. Buckets all sitting there. And the privilege of bringing water to the school (unclear). A good student would be permitted to chose his own companion and go get a bucket of water, a big bucket (unclear) bucket (unclear). Pretty close to, more than a quarter of a mile to get the water for the school. One student must never take more than one tin cupful of water. Water was too scarce here. 



Babbitt: Was that up at the Old Town Spring? 



Ashurst: Yes, we went to Old Town Spring for the water. That's the Old Town Spring. That's where we went for the water. <Flagstaff> was first called Antelope Spring. That little spring was called Antelope Spring. Water was scarce here at the time. 



Babbitt: Another thing about the students attending school: I have heard (unclear) comment has been made that some of the students were quite along in years. 



Ashurst: Oh, yes! I went to school with several who were twenty-five, twenty-eight, thirty--learned to read and write. And one of our teachers, one of our scholars (unclear) tough students in that school. One of our boys was [mobbed? killed?] in jail. 



Babbitt: What was the crime? 



Ashurst: He was charged with killing a man by the name of John Berry in 1887. [They threw them both into jail?] There was never a legal execution in this county. But things (unclear) unnecessary killing, but western life was rough at that time--had a rough side, at least. 



Babbitt: The teachers (unclear). 



Ashurst: Well, the only one who could handle the tough ones was Crothers. The others just stood 'em up and said, "John Smith, you are incorrigible. You're a bad boy, and you don't do any good. You're expelled. Do not come upon the school grounds again." That ended it. They just didn't put up with the bad ones. They didn't try to beat them or handle them--just expelled them right there. And it was a terrible disgrace to be expelled from school. Nobody wanted that, 'cause you couldn't even get a job as a bartender if you'd been expelled from school. 



Babbitt: Was that purely at the discretion of the teacher? 



Ashurst: Absolutely at the discretion of the teacher, (unclear) And they used to go to the first (unclear) sustain the teacher every time. And if they hadn't sustained 'em, we couldn't have had a school. 



Babbitt: They didn't have what you call a PTA in those days? 



Ashurst: Oh! (laughs) The trustees came every Friday. Every Friday the trustees came, and they'd say, "Stand up there (unclear) past week. (unclear) geography." Those teachers stood me up and said, "Henry Ashurst, you seem to be deficient in geography. I'm going to give you a test. Where are the Straits of Bab el Mandeb?" Well, I never paid any attention to the Straits of Bab el Mandeb, but any unusual name attracted me, so I had looked it up some weeks before. I found it was near the Gulf of Aden, somewhere down at the south part of the Red Sea. (unclear) All right anybody who knew that (unclear) geography. 



Babbitt: (unclear) trustees (unclear). 



Ashurst: My greatest victory was the teacher said, "Now, I write on this blackboard the list of the presidents. I'll leave it there for tomorrow. And tomorrow I shall expect every one of you to tell the names of the list of the presidents." Well, that teacher left out William Henry Harrison, who served one month as president. Well, in the course of the day, I said, "(whispers) Teacher, you left out one." (unclear) "I'll give you a penny if you (unclear)." I was afraid to. Well, stood me up, (unclear) William Henry Harrison. The teacher said, "That wasn't on the board." I said, "But it should have been." That was my greatest victory. My election to the senate wasn't any greater victory than calling that teacher down. 



Babbitt: Which teacher was that, Henry? 



Ashurst: That was Mrs. Marshall. And she was a history teacher! (chuckles) Then (unclear) what presidents had beards? (unclear) answer. And lecturers would come. They'd come lecture on all possible subjects. The lectures were free to the school and all other persons (unclear). And they lectured on every subject, free admission, (unclear) taxation, <Europe>, North Pole. Lectured on all conceivable subjects.



And when General Graham [phonetic] died in 1885, the town went overboard in its sorrow, and had a great hall rented, with many speakers and much (unclear) music, funeral music, all in the memory of General Graham, which was in 1885. That's the year the University of Arizona was established by the legislature of the territory.



Now, the present Arizona State College was established by the legislature in 1899. It began with two teachers and about twelve or fifteen students. Now we know the wonderful expansion and growth, and the dignity it has, and reputation for scholarship and learning that it now carries. 



Babbitt: Didn't you introduce a bill in the legislature.... 



Ashurst: I (unclear). I introduced and passed a bill creating that Arizona State College. And in my (unclear) speech I pointed out that if you will establish this school--the building was there already, it had been a reform school--(unclear) from a reform school to a teachers college, now a state college. And in my (unclear) speech I said, "Now, if you will advance us the money, (unclear) teachers, the city will provide the apparatus--that is, the desks and the slates and the books."



[END TAPE 57-15b, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Ashurst: Whereupon Barry Goldwater's uncle, Morris Goldwater, was a member of the legislature, said, "Well, I'm going to vote for this bill. They showed me that when they send a man down to the legislature that doesn't know that there's no 'rat' in apparatus, the word is app-a-rate-us...." So I had learned. I was the first pupil in that school because I learned how to pronounce the word app-a-rate-us, and it isn't apparatus, (unclear) present senators taught me that. (laughter) 



Babbitt: (unclear) what type of books did you use? 



Ashurst: Well, the trustees decided that. <California> had their own book system. They tried to sell us the <California> system, but we concluded--that is, our trustees concluded--Feckenboss [phonetic] furnished the books by contract. They were a great book firm at that time. And at that time, John F. C. Abbott [phonetic] was a great book firm. We didn't use McGuffey's readers. We had a different set of books, but they were very good. Nearly all the rest of the schools used Feckenboss, except <California>. They did not use. The have a <California> state series. All of the others, nearly, used Feckenboss books. D. Appleton and Company (unclear) leaders, and we'd have to recite poems every Friday, every scholar, every one, from the smallest to those with whiskers had to recite something on a Friday. 



Babbitt: Did you buy the books yourselves, or were they furnished by the school system? 



Ashurst: Bought by the parents. We refused to accept books. It was an insult, we thought, for the state to furnish us books. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Ashurst: There was some talk about the state, the territory furnishing the books. Everyone felt that to have received any gift, grant, or benefit, or largesse from the treasurer of the territory was a disgrace. We would reject the books, (unclear) with scorn and contempt, and bought our own books. The books were sold by Dr. D. J. Brannen, who was a very prominent physician here--was also postmaster and sold school books. He was very generous, he would trust any student. All you did was walk in and certified that you were a student at the <Flagstaff> School, and you could buy on credit any books. 



Babbitt: Did you pay a tuition? 



Ashurst: Nope, no tuition. No tuition whatever. No, not at all. 



Babbitt: Now, these trustees, how were they chosen? 



Ashurst: Well, the trustees were chosen one every year--they served three years. For a while, one every year, and then later three were chosen at a time. The elections were rather fiercely contested, and above all strange things, women could vote at a school election. But they could not vote in another other election, except a school election. That was along '85, '86, early '90, women voted at school elections. And they were all right. Every lady (unclear) in the town was out electioneering for her favorite for schoolteacher, because she might have a relative or a friend she wanted employed as teacher. And as I say, at that time, the principal received a hundred dollars a month. And later, we had two assistants, $75 a month. For a young lady, receiving $75 a month, would be like, oh, $250 at this time. 



Babbitt: What were the trustees (unclear)? 



Ashurst: There were always three, and I remember Billy Switzer's father was one of the famous trustees, chairman of the board. And they certified as to the business of [coal?]. We had a janitor, who got $30 a month. The janitor swept out the school in the afternoon. He lighted the lamps for all evening meetings. And he provided for the wood to be brought in. We had a great big woodshed. I suppose it was a shed 100 feet long and 20 feet wide, where the wood contractor would bring the wood. And then a [bad?] student was sent out to saw the wood to appropriate lengths for the stove. And it was quite a privilege to be chief of the fire, big fireplace. One day when it was cold and the door was shut, the heat from the stove, and no drafts, no ventilation, one of the boys put a rubber poker chip on the stove, and I never! But boy, did I smell a smell that smelt like that smell smelt! (laughter) The teacher said, "Who did that?!" And one boy said, "Henry Ashurst." Well, I was shocked! And a little blue-eyed girl--I fell in love with her and have loved her ever since--she said, "No, teacher, Henry didn't do that." Teacher said, "What is this horrible stench?" "Jimmy Jones has taken off one of his boots." (laughter) 



Babbitt: Well, the trustees took the place of the superintendent of schools, I suppose, in present day. 



Ashurst: We had a superintendent of schools, but he was in <Prescott>. I was speaking of this county, <Yavapai County>. The superintendent of schools lived in <Prescott> and he came once a year to visit our school (unclear) efficiency. So when <Coconino County> was created, the probate judge was also superintendent of public schools. And I remember Mr. Edward J. Babbitt (unclear) was elected superintendent of public schools--one of the first, if not the first in this county. And he served with good distinction, being also probate judge, which was a court of record then as well. There is no public judge now, it's merged into the district court, the senior court. And this probate judge, ex-officio school superintendent, had considerable power, but he couldn't discharge a teacher, and he couldn't make suggestions more than approve accounts and take care of the [Fox River?] schools. 



Babbitt: What you're saying, there was no objection, particularly, on the part of the parents to corporal punishment? 



Ashurst: We had three or four parents that bitterly objected to any corporal punishment. Only a few boys probably received corporal punishment. John W. Ross--John Wilson Ross--I noticed one day a bulge in his hip pocket. And I thought to myself, "Can it be that our teacher, who teaches Latin and Greek and (unclear) carrying a pistol? That bulge is suspicious." So one day, two boys [committed] some little minor infraction. He lifted his coattail and took out the biggest [revolver I ever saw?] and pounded away on those fellahs. That explained the bulge in his pocket. From that time on, I feared much more that bulge in his hip pocket than I ever feared the bulge made by some fellah carrying a pistol on the range. 



Babbitt: How many youngsters would you say were attending school? 



Ashurst: Well, in the principal's department, there the scholars were (unclear) upward. There would be forty. In the other department there'd be probably forty— (unclear) from five to twelve. And another teacher. The teacher was responsible for the conduct of the student and pupil from the time he left the school door 'til he reached his own door. That was because some of our larger boys would get angry at another boy and pound him up on the way home. So there was a rule that any assault, any indecency, anything that any other student did to a student on his way home or on his way to school, was just as if he had committed that infraction in the school room. And it arose from the circumstance that in the constitution, the senators and the representatives to Congress are immune from arrest by going to and from their home to Congress. So that rule was established when the constitution was formed. It was a good rule, and many a boy was walked before the school, having said some indecent or improper thing to another boy, when the boy was on the way home. He should study law! He should have inflicted his assault on a Saturday or a Sunday (laughs) to not incur the rigor of this punishment. 



Babbitt: Did one teacher handle both the younger (unclear)? 



Ashurst: No, two teachers. The rule, they had one teacher up to 1886. Then they had two teachers. As I said, one teacher was Miss Weatherford. She taught first as an assistant, then as a principal. And one of our finest teachers was Clara Louisa Coffin. Famous family here. She was probably one of the most beautiful women of our town. And she married Dr. Percy G. Cornish, who became a famous surgeon, and later was a surgeon for the Santa Fe Railroad. The Santa Fe at that time was called the Atlantic and Pacific. It was not called the Santa Fe until about 1894 or '93, something like that. It was called the Atlantic and Pacific. 



Babbitt: I think we've pretty well covered the school system in <Flagstaff>, except that, if you have a minute, I'd appreciate you giving us a little more, perhaps some information concerning the opening days of the college, the teachers college in <Flagstaff>. 



Ashurst: Well, it has been called the teachers college when it was opened in the fall of 1899. And the principal was Professor Almon N. Taylor. The assistant to the professor was Miss Frances Bury. They had considerable ceremony with the opening. And on the graduation day ceremonies, they'd invite prominent people from all over the country to come and speak. They'd come as far as from <New York City>. They'd come from <San Francisco>. The governor of the state was generally here at the time to celebrate what you call graduation period every year. And the school grew until, as I say, it has now at present a dignity and (unclear) growth. 



Babbitt: Was Old Main built at that time? Old Main, the famous building up there (unclear). That was built later, wasn't it? 



Ashurst: Oh, no, that main building was built in 1893 or '94. It was not used as a school until '99. It was a reform school, but we never had any inmates, anybody in the reform school. Therefore, in my doing in 1899, I transferred it in name and in title from the reform school to the teachers college. It became Arizona State College. The main building was built in 1894. 



Babbitt: That was primarily then intended as a reform school? 



Ashurst: It was intended to, the building was passed in 1893, a reform school, for wayward boys and girls, for incorrigibles. But we never had, as I said, never had an inmate in it, as a reform institution. It stood there, (unclear). I was a member of the house of representatives of the territory. I introduced a bill to transfer it from a reform institution to a college. That was history. 



Babbitt: Somebody told me that my father and the old gentleman who was the editor of the Mohave Journal Miner used to come down and help you lobby. Do you remember that? 



Ashurst: His name was Anson A. Smith. He was the editor of the Mohave County Miner, (unclear) man, very fine and scholarly man. Your father always was.... The Babbitt people, they came, five brothers came in 1886: David, George--your father, Charles J., William and [Valora?], Edmund J. But George was the only one—well, Ed Babbitt, the judge, ran for office and was in the state legislature--the only one took much interest in politics was George. He was a natural politician and he served as treasurer of the county many years, and he served as supervisor many years, went to conventions and was chairman of the state central committee many years, of his party. Plenty interested in politics, very (unclear) man. 



Babbitt: My Uncle (unclear) told me that he and my dad several times went down in a buggy from here over to <Williams> and <Jerome> to <Prescott> to (unclear) legislature. 



Ashurst: I remember very well when they came down. I think Mr. Babbitt, your father, and Mr. Smith, and a lawyer named Thomas S. Bunch, and a lawyer named [Ellingwood?], called me into a meeting, helped me draw the bill. I didn't draw it, I didn't have the skill at that time. They helped me draw the bill. I remember it very well, very well. You're speaking of going by buckboard.... 



Babbitt: That was to <Prescott>, the county.... 



Ashurst: The county seat. That was the county seat. <Prescott> was the capital, originally, from 1863 to 1867. And in '67, the capital was moved to <Tucson>. And after ten years, it was moved back to <Prescott> in 1877. Then moved away from <Prescott> to <Phoenix> in 1889. 



Babbitt: I imagine you must be getting tired? 



Ashurst: No, no, I have grown weary of many things in my eighty-seven years, but I've never yet grown weary of talking. 



Babbitt: Well, along that line, where did "Fountain" come into your family? 



Ashurst: It's French. I had an uncle, Fountain Riggs [phonetic], and he was a <California> man, born in <Kentucky>, and I was named for him. Now, among the many blessings of the good Lord and my friends and my people have given to me, not a blessing has ever transcended the value of my name, Fountain. I don't care much for the Henry: there's some kings of England that didn't amount to much, named Henry. And the 



Ashurst: All Ashursts, there's about 20,000 of'em in America, all came from England. And whether they are in a penitentiary or in parliament, if their name was Ashurst, they're related to me. We all belong to the same stock. I like that name. If you want to hurt my feelings, just say Henry F. Ashurst. It's Henry Fountain, not a cistern, a fountain. 



Babbitt: You know, Henry, you remember a few years ago you very kindly allowed me to buy some property. Well, I subdivided that and sold it mostly to colored people, and we called it the Booker T. Washington Subdivision, but (unclear) very simple question, was Booker T. Washington Subdivision (unclear) Fountain Street named in your honor. 



Ashurst: I remember! Saw that street the other day--I was looking for it. A man told me, "Well, that's all right." I'm not offended because you named a street after me in the middle of the Booker Washington. That's all right, I'm not offended, (laughs) 



Babbitt: Well, I don't know, the people down there think real highly of Fountain Street, (recording turned off and on) 



Ashurst: About the lawyers. 



Babbitt: You remarked a while back, we digressed, and you mentioned, I believe, six red-headed lawyers. There must be some more episodes about the early days of lawyers here. 



Ashurst: Well, not only were there six red-headed lawyers, but the justice of the peace was red-headed. His name was Dan Coakley. And a big politician of the county was red-headed. His name was Jerome Jerry Donahue. This afternoon I went with Mr. Renault, my stepson, by the county jail. They were building an addition to it. I looks now just as it looked in 18[91?]. That'd be 61 and 9, about 70 years. Looks just the same. At that time, the only inside plumbing in this town was in the jail. We had a big cistern on the top, inside plumbing. The job of jailer was the most important and dignified position that anyone could hold. The jailer, at a certain time in '91, I think, although it might have been '92, was Henry F. Banta, B-A-N-T-A, not (unclear) Banta, this was a lawyer and a politician, had about (unclear) years in the jail. And in the jail was a man by the name of J. J. McGuire, a blacksmith. He could twist up a good little horseshoe. He was accused of having stolen $3,200 in gold. Our good Uncle Sam doesn't allow us to have gold coin now, but in those days we had golden coins. McGuire tired of being in jail, and whispered to Mr. Banta and said, "Banta, I know I'm going to the penitentiary. I have this $3,200 I buried out under the tree here. Now, you let me out tonight, and we will exhume, dig up this $3,200. You'll keep half, and when I come out of the penitentiary, I'll have $1,600." Banta said, "That's about it! I'll be here at midnight to let you out." He quietly walked in, without arousing the other prisoners, and opened Mr. McGuire's cell, and McGuire just grasped him by the neck and nearly broke his neck--bound him and gagged him and threw him into [a tool box?], let all the other prisoners out! (unclear) McGuire, being a man who weighed 250 pounds or more, forgot to take heavy boots with him, put on a pair of light slippers. He couldn't walk over about two miles. The sharp rocks (unclear) can't even walk, cut his feet, so he just sat down under a tree and said, "Here I am, come and get me." Told the whole story on Babbitt. So when I was appointed jailer, I said, "That capitalistic Henry F. Banta and Henry F. Ashurst, I'm going to be mighty careful about myself in there." I became a jailer, and the greatest moment of my life was when I carried the food up there, great big coffee pot, and a long stick like a Chinaman, you know, the pots on the end and the food on this end, and carrying the food up to the prisoners in the jail. And I'd buy them little knickknacks and little favors. When they got out of the jail, they all voted for me for years to come, as long as they lived. Everybody on whom I ever turned the key, voted for me! 



Babbitt: We talked about the jail. (unclear) quite a famous old sheriff. Wasn't it John Francis? 



Ashurst: John W. Francis. One of the teachers took sick, Mrs. Marshall took sick in the spring of '84. John Francis was employed for one month, and he asked the trustees if he could smoke cigars while he was teaching. They all unanimously declared that he could smoke a cigar at noon if he went out into the woodshed, but he must not let the scholars see him smoke. So Mr. Francis, our teacher, would go out into the woodshed and smoke his cigar at noon, after his lunch. We suspected something, we could smell it. But that was quite a social error, for a teacher to smoke. 



Babbitt: Was Francis a good sheriff? 



Ashurst: Francis was a very brave man. He was from <Missouri>. He was a very brave man, and he was a sagacious officer. He knew in advance who would be likely to commit crime. Very brave, very sagacious. But one defect, he was hot-tempered. He couldn't control his temper--very warm-tempered. But a brave, honest man, and well-respected. And even after <Coconino County> was created, he became sheriff many years, served many terms as sheriff in the county of Coconino, being a deputy in territorial days. 



Babbitt: Didn't he go out and quell an Indian uprising here, bring in a (unclear)? 



Ashurst: Oh, yes. hi 1892, the Navajos (unclear). They got their war bonnets on, and they chanted around, and threatened to invade <Flagstaff>. But Mr. Francis organized a company of about fifty men, and went down and pacified them, in 1892. Francis was succeeded as sheriff by Sandy Donahue, served two years. Then Sandy Donahue was succeeded as sheriff by Ralph Henry Cameron, who became the father of statehood, and also a United States senator for six years. He was succeeded by Senator Hayden, who's now a very worthy senator. 



Babbitt: You mentioned politics a time back, about (unclear). How did you happen to get into the political game? 



Ashurst: Well, in early times, the teachers required me to study history. And my father ran for the legislature in 1886, went to the legislature. The capital was <Prescott>, and I went down to see the legislature in session. I saw them there, four dollars a day to be there! What more does a man want on earth, than to be elected to the legislature, four dollars a day! And thirty cents a mile on the way. So I concluded just as soon as I was twenty-one, to run for the legislature, and got into the law business that way. Of course, as a jailer, you're in direct contact with the law all the time, because they'd bring in a prisoner, (unclear) "Mr. Bailiff, bring in the prisoner." (unclear) I really was what they called a stand-in. I studied law twenty-one months, just in the courtroom watching. But I suffered a terrible embarrassment. Babbitt's hall was in the courthouse, and people came by to see the court in session. "Quiet!" (unclear) couldn't make noise, couldn't even talk in the courtroom. (unclear) At that time it was a felony to sell liquor to an Indian. And an officer made an arrest, charged one of our citizens with selling seven jugs of bourbon whiskey to an Indian, (unclear) years in the penitentiary. So the officer brought the whiskey to me in a gunny sack, seven bottles, and said, "Henry, keep this, because the court wants it tomorrow morning as evidence." I locked it up in my room, and the next morning it was gone. I never had such distress in my life. 



Babbitt: Do you know who was responsible for the disappearance? 



Ashurst: And the court, the judge, Judge John J. Hawkins of <Missouri>, said, "Mr. Bailiff...." He had a fierce look on him, you know, big tyrannical moustache. He was a severe judge. "Mr. Bailiff, about sundown last night, seven bottles of whiskey were confided in your care by Officer So-and-So, and during the night they seemed to have disappeared right under your very nose." Well, I was so shocked and upset I hardly remember saying--I got off a witticism without intending it--I said, "Well, what's that you said?" "I said that this whiskey disappeared during the night right under your very nose!" I said, "Well, Judge, isn't that where bourbon whiskey always disappears?" I don't know why I said it. The judge and the courtroom burst out in a laugh, and he said, "Never mind your witticism!" I said, "Judge, please, no witticism intended a'tall." And he said, "Are you the only one that had a key?" "No, the sheriff has a key." He said, "The sheriffs a saloon keeper?" I said, "Yes, sir." "The chief deputy has a key?" "Yes, sir." "He's a saloon keeper too, isn't he?" [The judge] said, "You sit down. You're absolved. I don't blame you." So I got out of that.



But I had a still worse embarrassment. I was fifteen, interested in politics. The county was created. That's the election where my father wired to Sandy to come home. So they said, "Henry have you voted?" I said, "Voted?! Why, no, I'm only fifteen." Said, "Henry, you claim to study law. Don't you know that at fifteen you can vote in a county election?" I didn't believe it. So I went to the teacher, and the teacher was in on the joke. I said, "Professor Ross, these boys have told me I could vote at fifteen in the county." He said, "Yes, you go down and vote." Well, it was a mile to the polls. The polls were in a building with a picket fence around it. I walked up, (unclear) ballot. You just wrote your own ballot and walked up. No official ballot, you just wrote it up and handed it in.



Well, I handed in my ballot, and the man said, "I can't take this ballot. How old are you?" I said, "Well, I'm fifteen." He said, "You can't vote." I thought he was trying to steal the election. I went and grabbed a picket off of the picket fence, I was gonna assault the election officer. Johnny Francis said, "You're committing a felony. To raise a riot in an election is a felony!" They laughed at me, so I got my horse and left town for two weeks, had a nice vacation. (laughter) 



Babbitt: You say they had no printed forms or ballots? 



Ashurst: You just wrote out your own ballot and handed it in. Any kind of a paper you wanted. 



Babbitt: No number? 



Ashurst: No number. The political party printed a ballot, and if you were a strong party man, you went to the headquarters, and you said, "Give me a sample of your ballot." But if you wanted to, you could write it out on anything. You could write it on anything, the man's name, or you could write it out. No secret ballot 'til 1892--no secret ballot. At that time, if they gave a man five dollars for his vote, they made him hold up his hand this way. They got his money when they saw him drop that into the ballot box. And if he didn't get his money, "Hold up your hand so you won't make any change, so you won't shift on us." Then he got his money. 



Babbitt: Did they watch him write the name on the ballot? 



Ashurst: They gave it to him. They gave it to him. And I learned--this was 1894--they had the [Australian?] ballot. And they'd call out, five minutes before the polls would close--very dignified thing, election laws--the crier would say, "Take notice! The polls close in five minutes!" About the time the polls closed, they saw an old man staggering along like he was drunk. As he approached, it was a citizen named John Banfield. He was (unclear) out. He said, "I've walked sixty miles to vote. I've come from a mountain called Apache Maid." Well, he voted, and then they said, "Henry, now you take him up to your jail, and you wash his feet and give him some medicine and food." And I took him up there and he said.... 





