FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Mary and Merced Rodriguez

Interview number NAU.OH.28.36

Merced Rodriguez who has been in the <Flagstaff> area since 1928, and Mary Rodriguez, who is his wife and interpreter. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on December 19, 1975. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, August 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Merced, born in 1904 in <Mexico> 

    Childhood 

    Father had pottery factory 

    Came to <United States> during war 

    Worked in logging camp near Jerome 

    Life described in camp 

    Bosses, Chambers and Koch 

    Repatriation of aliens in camp: Mexicans, Poles, Australians 

    Mary lived in <Williams> 

    Shopped in <Flagstaff> in 1930’s 

    Babbitt’s stores mentioned, shopping for clothes 

    Merced worked for railroad in <El Paso Texas> 

    Moved back to <Flagstaff> in 1930 

    Continued to work for railroad as laborer 

    Mary’s father also worked for railroad 

    Social life 

    Birthday parties, music and dances 

    Catholic Church, Monsignor Albouy, mentioned 

    Mary lived in section house in <Cosnino> with family 

    Merced worked for Saginaw sawmill 

    How logging wheels were used at logging camps 

    Lived in houses on DuPont and Verde Streets 

    Shopping, Babbitt’s and J.C. Penny 

    Mary lived in Milton housing for mill, described

Tape 1, Side 2

    Milton, continued 

    St. Anthony’s school attended by their children 

    Social activities for employees 

    Catholic Churches in <Flagstaff> 

    Guadalupe, history, 1926 

    Early priests, mentioned 

    Sawmill jobs held by Merced 

    Jobs at Guadalupe Church 

    Merced rang bell for daily mass 

    Different Mexican societies and groups at church 

    Mariachis 

    Rumideros 

    Woman’s group raising funds for Catholic School 

    Social activities 

    Orchestra 

    Feast of Corpus Christi 

    Jamaica 

    Guadalupe school 

    Depression of 1930’s 

    World War II rationing 

    Forest fires 

    Fire on south side burned homes in 1940’s(?) 

    Snowfalls in 1949, 1930

Tape 2, Side 1

    Fourth of July, Pow Wow celebrations 

    Homecoming at college, parade 

    Accidents at sawmill 

    Mercy Hospital for sawmill employees and families 

    Dr. Sechrist 

    Company store at logging camp 

This is an interview with Merced Rodriguez, who is the bell ringer at Guadalupe Church, and has been in <Flagstaff> since 1928. [The interview] is being conducted on December 19, 1975, at 213 West Dale, which is the Rodriguezes' home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. The translator and interpreter is Mary Rodriguez, his wife. Mary=Mary Merced=Merced SR=Susan Rogers

SUSAN L. ROGERS: Mr. Rodriguez, when and where were you born?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He was born on September 24, 1904. He was born at <Jalisco>, <Guadalajara>.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: No, <Guadalajara Jalisco>.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I have it backwards! <Guadalajara Jalisco>, <Mexico>. The only thing he can remember in his childhood is about when he started his school. Of course, he was too young to remember much about it, but he started to work real young - he was eight years old. His dad had a pottery factory. They had their own employment. They made pottery. What do you call it when they bake it?

SUSAN ROGERS: A kiln?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes. And they did all that. So he learned that real young, and he worked that with his dad up to the time when he got married. Then, of course, he came here to the States.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, why did he come to the <United States>?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that in the first place, his dad and mother were gone, they had died, and so of course he came here to the States. Also, it was during the war, so he just came here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and you said he was married at this time, right?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, he was married.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he go to <Tucson> first? Or how did he end up in <Flagstaff> eventually?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He came down to <Flagstaff>. He had his father-in-law, and his mother-in-law had already come here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, TO <Flagstaff>?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Prior to his coming. And they were working here. And through him, he came here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, fine. What job did he have when he first came?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He was in a logging camp.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, did he live at Milton, or around <Flagstaff>?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He lived at the logging camp.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me what area that was in?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) It was close to <Jerome>, and he was just twenty-two miles out of <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: I haven't talked to anybody who was in a logging camp. Could he maybe give me a description? Let me tell you a little bit, maybe how many people were there, what their living quarters were, that type of thing.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) They had about 150 men at the time. (Spanish conversation) His type of work that he was doing at the logging camp was taking all the limbs off the trees - I guess you would say trimming the logs at the time. I don't suppose they had the machinery that they have now a days - to do all of that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Were there any families?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Yes, they had families.

SUSAN ROGERS: And how permanent a camp was it? Did they pick up and move a lot, or did they stay?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that at the time he was there, they only lasted a year, and then they had what they called repatriation - you know, when they were taking the aliens out.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, okay, I know what you mean.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (Spanish conversation) He said they just had small places, like cabins, for the families to live in.

SUSAN ROGERS: Talking about the aliens, were there a lot of aliens that worked there, so that they were sent out?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said they had Polish, Mexican, and Australians working at the time, and of course they were aliens, you know.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did they have any water in the houses?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said the company always kept a water tank for them, and they used to haul it once in a while so they'd have water all the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, was there a train that went into the camp?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Yes, they did.

SUSAN ROGERS: What company was he working for?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said about all he can remember is the lumber company. At the time I imagine, he couldn't understand too much.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Chambers?

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: Chambers, yeah.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He said that the bosses at the time were Mr. Koch and Mr. Chambers. They were the ones that he was working for at the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, does he remember them personally? Can he tell me a little bit about them, what type of people they were?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said they were real good people, real good bosses.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: They treated their people real well.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. What kind of social life did they have out there? Did they get into town at all?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) At the time there wasn't much.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he get into <Flagstaff> or any towns at all?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He used to come to <Flagstaff> was about it. (Spanish conversation) He said it was just <Flagstaff>, when he checked out (?) this side and wasn’t anything on the other side.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He said they just had the college, you know, and a few shacks up there close to where the mill is now. There wasn't much. And I do remember, myself, that there wasn't much when we first came here either.

SUSAN ROGERS: When did you first come?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, we used to run back and forth from <Williams> - I come from <Williams>, down here. And before I was married, why, we used to come in and shop.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is this like the thirties or something?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, about the thirties, somewhere around there, 1932.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to come in on the train with your family?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, a couple of times we came on the train. Other times we'd get a ride and we'd come in a car with somebody else. But there really wasn't too much, because I think that the town was just up to where the railroad tracks are out there where you cross the street at what is it, Verde? That's as far as it had gone ________. Really wasn't very much in there. It was just mostly the Front Street stores. Really, you didn't have much of a variety.

SUSAN ROGERS: What kind of shopping did you come here for?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, mostly clothes. We thought we had a better choice if we did come. Of course, <Williams> didn't have too much either. You know, it's just later on it just developed and then we had more. But the same thing for my husband, coming here - you know, there wasn't too much.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any of the particular stores that you shopped in?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, mostly, I think it was Babbitts' who had the store here. And there was a nickel and dime at the time, but I don't remember. They also had an ice cream parlor that we used to love to come to, you know, because we used to go THERE, you know. Outside of that, I don't think they had too much of anything.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, so Babbitts' was the big store?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yeah, Babbitts' was the only large store they had.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's see, let's ask him some more questions. Okay, ask him what he did next after the logging camp.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said he went to <El Paso Texas>, when he got out of the logging camp, and started working for the railroad there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay and then when did he end up returning to <Flagstaff>?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said he worked for ten months one side of <Winslow>. They used to call it Howling.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: Section, Howling.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: It was a section house.

SUSAN ROGERS: Railroad section.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: That's where he worked, you know, after he came back.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He only worked ten months there.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Then he came back to <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and when he returned to <Flagstaff>, is this in 1928, or is this later?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) In 1930.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and what did you do when you returned?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He just kept on working for the railroad.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what was his actual job for them?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that it mostly involved working on the railroad, replacing the old ties and putting new rail in, or anything like that when the railroad needed to be repaired, which of course probably laborer, wouldn't you call it? That's what it was.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and where did he live at that time when he returned?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He lived in <Cosnino> with the guys.

SUSAN ROGERS: That section, okay.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, right up here.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: They had a section house there at the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and did he, like live in the section house, you mean, or there's little houses?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: No, these were all section houses, a big long thing, and have like an apartment house, and each family had so many rooms. My dad worked for the railroad, for many years, too. And we lived in them, so I know what it looked like. And that's what they called quarters for the laborers.

SUSAN ROGERS: About how big are they, how long?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said it was about nine by twelve in the area.

SUSAN ROGERS: Each room is.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) _____________.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I was wondering how many families lived in each section.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish)

SUSAN ROGERS: An average, maybe. (Spanish conversation)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: At the time when he lived there, they had about five families.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, so they really weren't too large then.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: No, not really.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Are there any section houses left, do you know?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I know <Cosnino> has been torn down, because we've driven up along that section. (Spanish)

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: No.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: The one we had here was torn down, too.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Unless <Parks> has one and I'm not sure.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (Spanish)

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, how often were they along the tracks? How many miles between them, about?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: You mean-

SUSAN ROGERS: Between the section houses.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Oh, you mean the places they had to take care of the railroad?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Every five miles.

SUSAN ROGERS: So there's a little section house almost every five miles?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, did they have a school? Like when you lived in yours, did you go to school?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: It was quite a ways. I know they had a little schoolhouse in Riordan - that's the first one I attended. And it was quite a long ways, so I only went to school three days. My feet were blistered when I got home.

SUSAN ROGERS: You had to walk?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes. So my parents figured that it was too far for me to walk, and they would just have to wait 'til we moved to town, so I could attend school. I'll ask my husband about his. See, this is his second marriage. He had a first family. (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that they moved him from Howdy, Howree, whatever the name of the place is, down to <Cosnino>, because they had a little schoolhouse there, and there were a LOT of little ranches around where the children had to go to classes - had to come in to class. And so then his family could go to school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Does he - and you, too, do you - feel like the railroad treated you fair, as far as wages, like your families?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, as far as I am concerned, I think my dad always was treated real nice, and he always worked for the railroad whenever he had a chance, because they had all kinds of benefits and they protected their workers. They had a railroad pass which my dad always enjoyed using. In fact, he said he wanted to see the country, and so he did. We didn't get to travel very much after we got to be a lot ____. We had to stay put. That's when we stayed in <Williams>. Otherwise, he was traveling every six months because he wanted to see the country. (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said in the eleven years that he worked for them, they treated him real well, and he was real pleased with it.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: That's right.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what kind of social life did you get to have living in the section house? What did you do?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that, you know, whenever they had a party, they had a birthday, or a celebration of some kind, they always used to get together and had a meal, or they'd get together and play music. Of course they danced and what-have-you, you know. My husband used to play the accordion. He used to tell me at the time he lived in section house.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He said he used to play the guitar and the accordion, so they'd really get together like that, and the families celebrated together - anything like that. They considered themselves more like one family, when it comes to that, you know - they just pitch in and put on a big meal and celebrate together.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that the way it was when you lived in the section house, too?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, I do remember that, because my parents always used to get in together with 'em. In fact, even the BOSS would get up there and have a good time with 'em. So I thought it was kind of nice, you know, NOW. Of course, at the time, I was just a kid, and I didn't realize that it was nice.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there a church nearby that you could attend? Or what did you do about that?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that as far as attending church services or anything like that, it wasn't very often, because they didn't have a way of coming in, and sometimes the train was late, and they wouldn't get in here in time to get to church or anything like that. So it was just on occasion they could attend services.

SUSAN ROGERS: There wasn't like a traveling priest or anything?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: No, I don't think so.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don't remember that either?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) No, because it was just the monsignor that was here at the time. And I think they were holding services way up there on the other side of the tracks, at a small little place up there that they had a church. And that's the first church they had out here in <Flagstaff>. And Monsignor Albouy [phonetic spelling] built this one down here, first; then they built Guadalupe. They didn't have too much choice.

SUSAN ROGERS: This question takes us way back to his logging camp, but I just remembered. You know the big logging wheels that you see around town? Ask him if he used to use those at all.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Yes, they did.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell him to describe to me how he used them, how they put the logs.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that they used to put the logs on top of that long- What would you call that?

SUSAN ROGERS: The hole in the middle?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: The handle that it has in the center of the two wheels. And they pull the logs with a horse on top of THAT. Then they carry the logs on that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. They never did anything where they flipped it over or anything like that?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) They had chains that tied the logs.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. (Spanish conversation)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He said whenever they got to the place where they were going with it, why, they'd loosen the chain and just roll it off, knock it off. What a difference to what it is today!

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Okay, and then after he finished working on the railroad, you said he worked there eleven years, then what did he do after that?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that he went to work for Saginaw when he moved from <Williams>. That's when he left the railroad. And the reason he left was because, well, he wasn't making enough to support his family. You know, there'd gotten to be quite a few by then, and so he couldn't support them with what he was making, so he went to work for the sawmill.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, so then did he move his family into <Flagstaff>?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: And where did he live then?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) You know, on Dupont Street, where that ditch runs through? (

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh.) He lived in that section over there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, he never lived in Milton, at the mill?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish)

SUSAN ROGERS: Milton was that area over by-

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) No, he didn't live there. I did, but he didn't.

SUSAN ROGERS: YOU did, huh? Okay, I want to hear a little bit about that from you, but we'll ask him some more. When he moved there, can he describe the neighborhood to me? Like how many houses were around?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that there were quite a few families there at the time when he moved there, already. And he was renting at the time.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Then he built his home, you know, across on Verde Street _____________. His daughter is living there, but that's where he moved from where he used to live on Dupont.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. And when he lived over in that section, where did he do most of his shopping? - or the family, I guess.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Babbitts'. I guess they were the only ones that were here at the time.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (in Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: J.C. Penney for clothes. That's right, they did have J.C. Penney. That's all they had.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about grocery shopping? Did Babbitts' have a grocery store then?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes. They carried dry goods and ready-to-wear. I guess they had about everything.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, why don't you tell me a little bit about your life in Milton? When did your family move there?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I didn't move on Milton Road until my first husband was moved here with Saginaw. And I lived out on what they call now Riordan Road, and Milton, right on the corner there. Mr. Dolan had all those houses up there, and the employees rented them from him, and they lived there. And so, like my husband, there wasn't too much there at the time, except the house for the employees. In fact, I think the homes ran way up to where the El Rancho and Park Plaza are now. They had rows of little houses, you know, for the employees. But we did have sewage and we did have water, because we moved there in 1942, so that was a little later. We had board sidewalks and all of that. We didn't have no cement sidewalks at the time. And there wasn't any ways of transportation, unless you just walked from where you lived to do your shopping in town. You had to buy a certain amount before they even delivered it to where you lived, you know. So if you didn't buy the amount, you end up carrying it yourself. So for my part, I used to carry my boy in a little go-cart, and I put part of the stuff in his go-cart, and I'd do my shopping. Sometimes my husband would come in with me and we'd both carry stuff home. But there wasn't much in transportation, and we didn't have a car either.

SUSAN ROGERS: You did it at Babbitts', you walked to Babbitts'?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Oh, yeah, we walked to Babbitts', and like my husband said, J.C. Penney, because they did have a beautiful store - they still do. Considering the time when it was, I thought they had a real nice assortment. Whatever you wanted, you could buy almost anything you wanted there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let me turn this tape. I think it's just about gonna end.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

SUSAN ROGERS: About how many families would you say, or how many little homes were there in Milton?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I'll tell you, now, when we think about it, there again, there seemed to be more unity, more- I don’t know, of course nowadays it isn't that you intend to be unneighborly - you just don't have the time. You get caught up in so many other things. But we had about, oh, I'd say about ten homes in our area, and we had about twenty-five children. And they all got together and played right out on the street and had a grand time. And we never seemed to have any problems. They all seemed to get along quite well. Of course when they got so they had to attend school, well, the neighbors were real nice about it, whoever had the car, you'd take turns taking the children. I know my neighbors [were] real, real good to me too, because at the time, the old-timers, you know, Mr. and Mrs. Dolan (?), they were old-timers here and they lived here for years and years. And so they didn't have any [young] children, they just loved children. Their son used to take the children back and forth to school quite often. They had a gas delivery truck for Webber Brothers, which I don't know whether it's still in business or not. But he'd take children in his car in the morning, so they'd be here in school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did they go to school?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, mine came to what is called now Nativity. At the time, it was called St. Anthony.

SUSAN ROGERS: St. Anthony was a pretty massive building, wasn't it, really?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, considering the modern kind of building now, it would have been considered outdated, I guess. But the sisters did real well with it, they kept it real nice and clean and everything. And of course the attendance increased, and the father felt he needed a larger school, so they all pitched in together and decided we would have a new school. But the old one, well, the sisters didn't have too much room because they had too many children. However, they did have quite a few things going: they taught music, they had Christmas plays, they had CYO, and they had all kinds of activities for the children at the time. Now they have a much larger school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know what year that school was built?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: St. Anthony's?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I don't. Maybe my husband does. (asks Merced in Spanish and he answers in Spanish) He said when he came here it was already there. I really don't remember. I used to know, but I can't recall now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you describe what it was like? Was there a patio inside of it?

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: Yes. It was a HUGE building. It had upstairs rooms. And of course, in time, I think they stopped using them because they told them it wasn't safe to even use those classrooms. And they had to use the lower part, and the lower part was used for - SOME of it was used for the sisters' quarters. They didn't have a home then, they lived right there. And right inside, in the middle of the building, there was a big patio, and they had a statue of St. Anthony right in the center of it. They kept flowers and stuff. It was real nice in there, I remember, visiting it a few times when I went in to see the children. And like I said, the sisters kept it real neat and clean.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Did the Dolans ever hold any social events or occasions, or what kind of social things?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: You mean for the employees?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, if they did, they might have done it before we came here, but after- See my husband was working for Southwest, and Mr. Dolan had the mill prior to that. So I really wouldn't know.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I see, so Mr. Dolan wasn't your father's boss.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: No, because the mill moved from <Williams>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Well, then whoever was your boss at the time or anything, was there any organization among the employees that put on any kind of activities?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Not that I recall, outside of the union. But they used to have a Christmas party for the employees, or maybe Thanksgiving, whichever they decided to do first, you know. That's about all I can remember. They used to give the children candy for Christmas, stuff like that. Or they give it to the men so they could take it home __________.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did you attend church when you lived at Milton?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, when I lived at Milton, I went to Guadalupe. I attended there for years. And then when my children went to St. Anthony at the time - or Nativity - well, then I started coming in with them, because Father thought we should come as a family. And so I did, because I tried to encourage my children as much as I could.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. So maybe between the two of you, can you tell me a little bit about the development of Guadalupe, how it got started?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that Monsignor started - you know, there were quite a few Mexican families, and they all got together. So the Monsignor started collections, you know, to build up the new church, or build up the church, because they already had Nativity, and they wanted one on that side for them. So then they had a lot of donated labor also, you know, and so that's how it was built.

SUSAN ROGERS: What year was it built, about?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He says when he came here they had already started working on it, so he can't recall about when it was started, but it was consecrated in 1926 - consecrated means it was ready, you know.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. And it was built mainly for the Mexicans then, do you think? I mean, that's how it got started?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, mostly because they wanted a Mexican priest and Mexican services. Of course now we have both, which makes it nice, I think.

SUSAN ROGERS: So originally it was all in Spanish?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, can you tell me something about the different priests that have been there?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Father Olman [phonetic spelling] was one of the first ones. Father Figueroa [phonetic spelling], and Father Lindemeyer [phonetic spelling], he's a monsignor now, and Fitzpatrick, Father Tempe, and Father Richard Feltz, who cooks. Of course we've had missionary priests often you know, coming in and out and different ones. I guess _________ Guadalupe as far as that goes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let me backtrack again to when he worked at the lumber mill. What did he actually do?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that when he first went to work for them, he went to work in the upkeep of the railroad - you know, they had that train to bring the logs in from the logging camp. So he was employed there, to you know _____. Then after that, why, they moved him on to the fireman position, you know, where you keep the boilers going. I guess that's what you call that, isn't it? Fireman?

SUSAN ROGERS: Boilerman?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Boilerman, yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: How long did he work there? I want to know when he started becoming a bell ringer.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Father Lindemeyer. (Spanish conversation) Father Olman.

SUSAN ROGERS: About in the twenties, huh? (both talking at once) Tell me how he got that job, and what he actually does.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: The bell ringing?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He says that he tries to get the things ready for Father, if he can, before mass - like getting the host ready, not the host ready, but-

SUSAN ROGERS: Like the communion stuff?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: You know- what he needs on the altar, light the candles, or see that there are candles ready to light, and this and that. And get him clean linens, if he needs some or something like that, helping, whatever he can do. A lot of the times, the ladies will come up and pay him for the candles. He goes up and lights them for them, and turns the money over to Father. Of course, there's nothing to that, you know, but he just likes to do it. It's something he enjoys doing.

SUSAN ROGERS: How often does he ring the bells? Is it every morning, every mass?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, he likes to be there real early - he likes to ring for daily mass. And of course during the holidays, like last week we were there at- (Spanish conversation) We went at 5:30 so he could ring the bell for the special mass we had that day for Our Blessed Mother. Things like that. And then of course they have a holy hour once a month, and he likes to be there in the evening to ring the bell. Then during the month of October they have rosary to be there to ring the bell. And on Sunday, you know, he likes to ring the bell for the ten o'clock mass. We used to have two masses, he wanted to stay for them. But since he was so sick there for awhile, he just stays for one now. But he's feeling much better now, doing real well.

SUSAN ROGERS: Are there, or were there, any special Mexican American groups that you remember, maybe when you lived at Milton, or else when he was in <Flagstaff> in the early days?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: You mean connected with the church?

SUSAN ROGERS: Either with the church or otherwise.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) They had the CYO and St. Joseph's Society. And what was it? (Spanish conversation) Santo (Spanish) Jesus (Spanish). Society of the Holy Name of Jesus. That was a group for the men. And of course, the women, they had the Guadalupanas, and that takes care of the - more or less like an older society. They help Father with whatever they can do in the church. And they have activities to raise money for the church and stuff like that. And of course they have ALWAYS had catechism for the children - especially when we didn't have school, they used to have them in the afternoon, you know. So things like that. And then of course they also founded the mariachis, you know. You've probably heard the mariachis. (Spanish conversation) Father Lindameyer was the main one _____.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, tell me a little bit about 'em.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that Father Lindemeyer approached him and told him he would like to organize mariachis. And he knew that his son-in-law played guitar and different instruments. So he wanted to know if he thought he'd be interested in it. So that's how it got started. So he was willing to go ahead and try it out. I think they started off with string music at first - it was just nothing but string music when they started the mariachis. And so they kept on practicing and organizing it. And so that's where it originated. It was his son-in-law, Gilbert Montayo (?), that went into it, and they got it together.

SUSAN ROGERS: Who did they play for, what groups, or what kind of activities?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I guess- (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish). He was playing with the Rumderos [phonetic spelling]. You've probably heard about them.

SUSAN ROGERS: No, I haven't.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: It was a Mexican orchestra, and his son-in-law was playing with them, and so then when Father Lindemeyer approached my husband about talking to him, trying to organize this mariachi, why, he was willing to go right on ahead and see what he could do with it. And so _________.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me a little bit about this Mexican orchestra. What did it actually do? Played for the Mexican community, or the whole <Flagstaff> [area]?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Yeah, they used to play most anywhere.

SUSAN ROGERS: For different dances and things like that?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, different things. Just a band they had organized.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of any other Mexican organizations that aren't church-related, maybe that have developed?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, you mean now?

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, or like maybe when you guys were on Milton, was there any kind of organization? Nothing that hits you right away?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I guess as far as I am concerned, I was not very active at the time, and that's why I ______ most of the time that was going on as far as the women's organizations. But I know that they did have them, because I was approached a couple of times to join. One of them was a mother's group that they wanted to raise funds for the school, and get to work with Father. But I was working at the time, and I couldn't take part in anything like that. But they did have a mothers' group that worked with Father to raise funds for the school. That' when they were first starting, you know. They wanted to build a school. That's about all. I remember they used to have Jamaica’s [phonetic spelling], they used to have dances. (Spanish conversation) And celebrations, you know. _____ like you'd get a band again, and then dance. They'd sell food and stuff like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there any big traditional celebrations, like-

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said the Corpus Christi celebration.

SUSAN ROGERS: Sixteenth of September?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yeah. (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) Uh-huh, they used to have a queen, and they used to have a dance. And they used to have a Jamaica, you know. That's when they had the Jamaicas.

SUSAN ROGERS: What is that?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: A Jamaica is more or less (Merced coughs, obscuring comment) what you call a "bazaar". You know, the American way of doing things, except that they have more food stands and stuff like that, and games. Well, mostly what they have in the American-style, too, don't they? So they have a bazaar. Then of course they have dancing on the side, you know, and stuff like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were most of these activities held at the church? Or was there a hall in town?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: At the time that I remember, they used to be held out on the- You know, it used to be just a big patio there - they didn't have all those buildings yet. And they used to hold them there. Then, again, you know where the school is now? I think they used to rent it from Mr. Dolan, and they used to hold them there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, which school do you mean?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: The Guadalupe School.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, okay.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Oh, by that time a section. (Spanish conversation) Oh, the land belonged to the church by that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, by that time.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Mr. Dolan I think donated the land or something, so it was their ________. So they used to have the activities out there. Then for the dance, of course, they used to have the armory, what is the E-Z Mills now - used to be the armory at the time, that they could get it for dances and different things. I know Boy Scouts used to borrow it to have their Scoutarama and stuff like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. I think we're getting down to the end here, but let me just backtrack a little bit, and tell me how the Depression- Now, were you in <Flagstaff> during the Depression in the thirties?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I was in <Williams>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, maybe tell me a little bit about how it maybe affected your family there, and also what he thinks how it affected <Flagstaff>.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that's at the time that he left for <El Paso>, and he started working for the railroad, and he said he used to work three days a week. That wasn’t enough to support his family. As far as I am concerned, my parents had just died - that is, my mother died first, and then my dad died after a while, too. I guess we all pitched in, and we did whatever we could find to bring money in, to keep on going, because there wasn't much to be had, and we used to work for $1.00, $1.25 for a whole day, from sunup to sundown. It was rough going, but we made it. I don't think it hurt any of us. Just showed you to ____ firmer, you know.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, what about World War II then? Were you in <Flagstaff>?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you remember the rationing or anything?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, I do. You stood in line for HOURS trying to get what you needed with the points, and after you got up there, maybe you'd get it, maybe you didn't - it was already gone. But I do recall one instance where I know one of the stores was selling - they had a special on what they called cooking oil. Of course I was very happy to get it, so I just stood there in line, trying to get that oil to cook my food in. So I bought me a chicken, I was going to make fried chicken. So I did. And you know, when I got home, I put that thing on the stove - you know, that thing caught on fire! Smelled like car oil! So my husband said, "Take that thing and throw it out. You're going to burn the house down!" So I did. Well, there again, we just did without a lot of things that we didn't know we could do without, because sometimes you didn't have the points, you just didn't have anything if you couldn't get it. But we always found something else to substitute for what we had to have. Of course I know that during World War I, I know we even- Of course, among us Mexicans, we use the tortillas a lot, and we use a lot of corn, and we even used bran to make tortillas out of, 'cause you couldn't get white flour. And so with sugar, well, we had to be very scanty with that. We had to do without little things like that. But there again, I don't believe it hurt us any. ‘Cause we all survived it. (laughs)

SUSAN ROGERS: Right, right, exactly. Do you remember any big fires? Maybe Mr. Rodriguez does?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said in the woods, yes, so that's about what he recalls.

SUSAN ROGERS: I'd like to hear about the ones in the woods, if they fought them themselves, or just watched them?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) He said that just to get ahead of the fire and they clean off the brush. Then of course, you know, they dug those ditches to kind of curb the fire. And that's about what he remembers about it. Occupied part, I remember when we had that big fire up on this other side of town, and it cleaned practically all those homes back here, you know.

SUSAN ROGERS: Near South San Francisco, kind of?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, South San Francisco, up between Benton and Dupont and all those homes out there. A lot of them were burnt down. I think what they call the Murdock Center now used to be a school at the time, and a lot of those people there lost their homes. They had a big fire. I don't know how it started. If I used to know, I've forgotten. But I know quite a few people were left homeless.

SUSAN ROGERS: What happened to the people that were left homeless?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, you know, there's one thing about <Flagstaff>. There's a lot of unity among the people when something like that happens. And I think they can as a city, what _____________ 'cause the town wasn't very large, and they had contributions to help the families. And I believe that some of them were given aid of some kind to rebuild their homes, but I can't recall too well about it, but I did hear about their organizing help in building the homes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is this the fire that happened in the forties?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I think sometime around there.

SUSAN ROGERS: And just one more last question: Do you remember any big snows that affected you?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Boy! do we!

SUSAN ROGERS: Always big snows, but any particular one?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) In 1930, 1949, too. We didn't think it was ever gonna stop, because you couldn't even see up. You had to look up to see the sun. In those days, you didn't hear about dryers. And it was a problem to get the clothes dry or do any washing of any kind. Just about the time you dug yourself out, you start over again. Some of the roofs in the homes caved in and all that. It was kind of- Now, you can laugh about it, but at the time it wasn't a laughing matter, 'cause you worried about- you know, wondered if your home would be robbed and stuff like that. I know that you couldn't see outside the windows, with this covering snow, because it was so deep. That was in 1949. My husband remembered 1930.

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: (Spanish)

MARY RODRIGUEZ: The whole month of January was nothing but snow.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there any accidents because of the snow? Do you remember any serious things happening?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, not serious things outside of just- as far as I am concerned, maybe, you know, about homes caving in and stuff like that. But I don't remember hearing anybody getting killed or anything.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I think this is a pretty good interview. Can you think of anything else you want to add, or make a comment or anything?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) I sure wish we had an old-fashioned Fourth of July, like the ones we used to have.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me about the ones you used to have.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Oh, there was-

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. You were going to tell me about the old Fourth of Julys.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, the old Fourth of July, the Indians start coming in two and three weeks before it was time for them to be here, because they looked forward to that. We had all kinds of Indians coming in here - from <Oklahoma>, <Colorado>. They all had beautiful feather costumes, you know, and we had bands, Indian bands, and then we had all kinds of school bands. It was just something to see. And then the ceremonials, it isn't anything compared to what we have today, because they seemed to have more to it. They always drew the people then. I know when I first moved here, my husband said, "I'm going to take you down to see it." I hadn't seen one. We didn't see it once, we saw it THREE times, because we just LOVED it. And of course the Indians had their stands, you know, with all the jewelry and different things. And at that time, I guess nobody was money crazy, because everything was so much more reasonable. They had all kinds of varieties of jewelry, handmade. And rugs, blankets, you name it, they had everything there. Pottery, beautiful pottery. It really has made a difference, now that everything is changed, we don't have that, and we miss that, 'cause you looked forward to seeing that, you know. (Spanish conversation) Gene Autrey came TWICE to see that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, really?

MERCED RODRIGUEZ: Cowboy.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Probably came. Well, I guess we had quite a few celebrities come in to see those, you know - we'd hear about them. I thought it was real nice. My boys, when they were tiny little tots, they didn't mind the walk, because we didn't have a car. They looked forward to that. Then later on we had the homecoming from the college, and that was something to look forward to.

SUSAN ROGERS: The what?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: The homecoming from the college. It was really something to see, too.

SUSAN ROGERS: What were they like then?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, there again, the kids put a lot work into it. They had their bonfire, you know. We always went to see that. We always enjoyed it. My husband was a football fan, so he used to go to the football games and used to enjoy it a lot. Rodeo (?) and stuff like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there a big parade that you took the kids to?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Oh yes! Yes, they wouldn't miss that for anything. But you know I used to live on Riordan Road at the time, so it wasn't too far. And they used to start off from- I don't know what they call it now, because I know they changed it. They used to have the- What is it for the kindergarten class? That big building with the pillars on it as you go into the college.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, the administration. It's a housing building now.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I know they changed it. Well, we used to walk up there. They didn't have any fences then. You could just take across the field and be there in no time at all. We'd just sit there on the grass and be waiting for them to come on out. And we just watched the parade. It was real close.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did most of the whole town come out for the parade?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Oh, yes. They had a big turnout. And there again, they had all kinds of bands from the different schools, and it was really nice, really nice. I just hope we get that back. (laughs)

SUSAN ROGERS: That would be nice, it really would. Well, since we've moved onto another tape, let me just ask you one or two more questions. Do you remember any big crimes happening when you lived here? Anything that sticks out in your mind? Or maybe something that happened at the mill when your husband worked there?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I do remember one of the men- (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) About the only thing we can remember is when the Ibarra boy was killed there, when Southwest first moved down here. They were cutting up lumber, they claim, and the lumber fell on top of him and killed him on the job. They didn't have all these machines that they have now. They used to do it by hand, and I guess the lumber slid right up on top of him or something, and killed him.

SUSAN ROGERS: But overall did you feel that the mills were pretty safe? Not a lot of accidents all the time?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I guess accidents are bound to happen. They didn't have too many, but every now and then they did have an accident. And of course we had another one that smothered in the sawdust when they moved the mill up here. That was when Southwest took it over. He fell into the sawdust. He was smothered in it. And so like I say, accidents will happen. Of course my husband did electrical work, so he wasn't too much in THAT, but they did have accidents. (Spanish conversation) About five years ago, when Joe Gutierrez was killed __________. (Spanish conversation) He said they were repairing a chain, you know, the type of chain that takes care of the saws, and it killed Joe Gutierrez, but that was just about five years ago ________ time _______. (Spanish conversation) The gentleman who smothered in the sawdust was about eight years [ago].

SUSAN ROGERS: I forgot to ask, when you lived at Milton, what do you remember about that hospital there?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, I was there myself, with my second boy. While it wasn't what you call modern now, I think it was real nice, as far as the care that you were given. Dr. Kittredge and Dr. Sechrist were in charge of it at the time when I was there. And it was considered a company hospital, I guess, you know, because the men had insurance for that hospital, the Mercy Hospital. But as far as the service was concerned, in spite of the fact that it was not up to what you consider modern now, I think it was real nice. They took real good care of you. That's about the only chance that I had to use it. I had never been in a hospital before.

SUSAN ROGERS: So you had your children in that hospital 

MARY RODRIGUEZ: One of them. rather than at home?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Well, we were not allowed to stay home anymore. We had to go to the hospital.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, you did?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: I had wanted to stay home, but I wasn't allowed to stay home. And the other one was born at-

SUSAN ROGERS: Who was it that said you weren't allowed to? The company?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: No, the doctors wouldn't go to your home. You had to be- Well, I can see their point, because if anything goes wrong, you're right there where you can be taken care of. And they didn't want to take any risks, which I think was real good. Maybe at the time we didn't see it that way, but I think it is better.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember Dr. Sechrist personally?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: What was he like?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: He was my family doctor for many, many years, and he was one of the best when he was here. So was Doc Fronske. You know he was number one with children. And he was the one who took care of all my family. When anything was wrong with them, why, he was right there. And he made home visits, too! And if you thought you were very ill, he'd make more than one trip to make sure. I think as far as the doctors were concerned, they were real good. So was Dr. Kittredge. He was very concerned about you, and they took care of you. Of course that doesn't mean that- I mean to say that they're not concerned with you now.

SUSAN ROGERS: There's more people to take care of nowadays, too.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, a lot of people that’s right. And the town has grown. Of course we have more doctors now. At the time, we didn't have too many. I think it was just Dr. Sechrist and Fronske and Kittredge.

SUSAN ROGERS: And I forgot to ask you about the commissary store, the big company store ______________.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Let me see. (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish) They did at the logging camp.

SUSAN ROGERS: But they didn't have one when you were at Milton? I know there used to be one there - I don't know whether it was there at that time.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Not at the time when we moved down here - I don't believe we did. They might have had it, like he said, in the logging camp, because I did hear them speak about it. But I don't believe they had one here when we moved here.

SUSAN ROGERS: The one in the logging camp, what kind of stuff did it [carry]?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: (translates question to Spanish, Merced responds in Spanish)

SUSAN ROGERS: In other words, all your food staples?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes, staples.

SUSAN ROGERS: So that you wouldn't have to go into town.

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Yes. And you ________________. Probably had to keep something that would keep, 'cause they probably didn't have the facilities to keep things in those days.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Well, can you think of anything else you want to add?

MARY RODRIGUEZ: Golly, we talked so much already! I don't know. (Spanish conversation) That's about all we know. I hope we helped you - I don't know that it will.


