Allen Wilson

29 October 2007

Sound file:  "Allen Wilson 6.mp3" 62:49 min.

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



STEIGER:  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is Tape 6 of an interview with Allen Wilson.  Lew Steiger here.  Camera Original 6.  It’s October 29, 2007.  We’re in <Gold Beach Oregon>, Al’s kitchen.  Here we go.  So we left off with that story, the gal at <Lee's Ferry>.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And it’s in relationship to the Fort Lee boat getting stuck on <Bedrock>.  Later that summer, I was up at <Lee's Ferry>, and Fort Lee had the store there, and a little restaurant.  I was always in there, and I liked to pester all those people, and they liked to pester me back.  So one of the gals at the desk, she was an older lady--well, older, probably forty.

STEIGER:  Back then, yeah.

WILSON:  Probably forty.  She was critically teasing me about our flip in <Lava>, and I just said, "Well, gosh, I remember some kind of a story about <Bedrock>," and she just went, "You shut up!"

STEIGER:  The famous <Lava> flip.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Did we get in there that Henry Falany said he was gonna put ARTA on all his boats?

WILSON:  I think we might have.  Henry Falany, his classic comment was, "We’re gonna paint ARTA on the bottoms of all our boats."

STEIGER:  After that flip.

WILSON:  After that flip, yeah.  Henry used to work for ARTA, and then sheered off and went over to his own company.

STEIGER:  That’s interesting.  I had it in my mind that it was Western that Henry started in, but I’m sure you would know.  So he actually did....

WILSON:  I think he worked for ARTA right off the bat there.

STEIGER:  For Lou Elliott.

WILSON:  He may have done some stuff for Western, I don’t know.  And he may have worked for Western also sometime in there, because his frames came out lookin’ a heck of a lot more like a Western frame than an ARTA frame.  You know, Henry built these huge frames.

STEIGER:  Oh God.  Henry and Dick McCallum both--those guys were of the "more is better" school.

WILSON:  Yeah.  You know, on my first snout boat trip, where I rowed my very first time, learning to row and everything, I did what I thought was the perfect frame, and I got down and we ran <Badger> with my new boat, and got down to the bottom, and I look, and all of the wings on my boat are all up like this.  And I go, "Oh!"   ...my new snout boat, my first-ever time of rowing my snout boat or any boat through a rapid.  And I get to the bottom and I’m seein’ that we’ve got these bent wings.  They were just all bent up.

STEIGER:  Now, when you say "wings," I don’t know what the hell you’re talkin’ about.

WILSON:  Well, I had a box, and then welded onto the box was these wings that came out and sat on top of the tubes.  And I had two sets.  I had one frame like that in the front, and one frame in the back.

STEIGER:  So a box in the middle....

WILSON:  (aside to dog)  Just the basic outline was this.  (sketches)  Tube, tube, frame.

STEIGER:  Yeah, and the box was where?

WILSON:  Actually [unclear].

STEIGER:  So the wing is the part that’s up on top.

WILSON:  This is the wing, yeah.  So these things bent up like that.

STEIGER:  Oh dear!

WILSON:  We had to do something about that.  At the bottom of <Badger> in those days--probably still is--there was a huge driftwood pile down there on the right side.  So I worked the boat over to the right side, and we tied up and started lookin’ for logs to stick underneath the frames, to just support it.  (laughs)  So we looked around and just found enough pieces of wood to stick under there, and let the air out of the tubes and shoved 'em under and pumped 'em back up, and just kept on going.  It was at <Havasu> where I talked to the ARTA boatmen and they explained to me how to row out of eddies and not get stuck crossin’ the river into another eddy and all that crap.  Some of those boatmen that saw me there, that’s all they can talk about, is my driftwood supporting the boat, and the bent frame/wings stickin’ up.  (laughs)  So anyway....  I forget what brought me off onto that.  What were we talkin’ about?

STEIGER:  Oh, Henry Falany’s boat design.

WILSON:  Oh yeah.  And then I had built my frames too light.  That’s what made me think of it.  Yeah, I didn’t want to go real heavy.  I still am that same way.  As a matter of fact, the last frame I built for my boat that I use on the Rogue River is too light to even use on the Rogue River, so I gave up on that.  Pretty spongy frame.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Oh well, don’t want to be havin’ extra weight.

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  I don’t know if you ever saw the Wilderness World boats.

WILSON:  No, I didn’t.

STEIGER:  They first had these kind of fiberglass frames, and then Vladimir believed in light--light was right--and they had these super-light, there was almost nothin’ but rubber.  They were really light frames, but that was pretty cool.

WILSON:  I’ll be darned.

STEIGER:  They were a good boat, they were fun to row, too.

WILSON:  Vladimir, didn’t he have a hand in designing one of those Maravia boats?

STEIGER:  He designed boat after boat after boat.  He designed all kinds.  Maravia was Holcomb [phonetic].  There was this guy, Gordon Holcomb, and he made--first it was the Holcomb boat, and then those became Maravias.  Holcomb became Maravia, and Vladimir was in on those, and he designed the <Havasu>, and he designed all the Campways boats.  He would get mad with whoever he was workin’ with, and he’d go work with somebody else.  He did the good Avon Spirits.

WILSON:  Is that right?  Lou Elliott did the Avon Pro.

STEIGER:  Yeah.

WILSON:  How interesting.

STEIGER:  But anyway, what happened on the Niagara?  What we were talkin’ about was just you ending the river....  Actually, before we leave the canyon, maybe we should....  When you look back on the <Grand Canyon>, what do you get out of that now?  What do you get out of all that experience?  I’m fishin’ for some sort of cosmic inspirational....

WILSON:  (chuckles, then sighs)  Well, it was one of those things, one of those experiences, that I just really literally fell into and I couldn’t get away from it.  It’s a major part of my life today.  Not that I think about it every day, but it’s something that if I could relive it in a different fashion somehow--which in a way I sort of did, starting this little river company and doing that stuff on the Chetco River.  It was pretty cool.  It was not a money maker, and it actually cost us money to do that.  And Terry was never very happy about that part of it.  Fortunately she worked really hard with me to pull all that stuff off, including horse packing trips.  I mean, we did a lot of stuff on that.  It was that whole thing of trying to get back to that <Grand Canyon> experience, and really in a big way, with Terry’s help, was able to pull that off.  And in today’s world now, I’m just thinking, "Well, you know, I???ve had heart surgery, and I’ve got diabetes, if I could do one more <Grand Canyon> trip I’d be tickled just to take a few young friends of mine."  So there’s no cosmic thing that I can see--it’s just part of my life.  Like if you were a sailboat captain for thirty or forty years, that’s your experience.  It’s not the run of the mill, it’s not like you’re just sitting at a desk, or drove nails all year ’round--you had something more than that in your life that’s beneficial.  I don’t know, there’s a lot of things.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  But I mean here it’s been thirty years ago since you were workin’ on it.  That’s interesting, here we are....

WILSON:  Yeah.  And you saw me down there?

STEIGER:  I sure did!

WILSON:  And where was that?

STEIGER:  I remember you--I was just a little snot-nosed swamper for Arizona River Runners.  I went as a passenger in ’71, and then I was swampin’ in ’72, ’73, ’74.  I think I got my own boat in ’75, because I started when I was sixteen.  You couldn’t have a boat until you were eighteen, which was good, because....  But I remember seein’ you when it was low.  I mean, those guys knew you.  I don’t know if you remember any of those guys--Pete Resnick, Tom Moody, Ross Garrison--boatmen for <Arizona>.  I have this memory of we were down there and the water was really low, and we were all stopped at <Kwagunt>, and I remember....  And then you came up and you were kind of all pretty darned loose and pretty chipper, and pretty cheerful.  I don’t remember if you even stopped.  I think it might have been one of these things where we were all stopped and you drove on by [unclear].

WILSON:  Is that right?!  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Yeah, I think so.  I mean, I’m not sure, but just the way you were talkin’ about Hance and stuff, I kind of get the....

WILSON:  I might have done it, because I did a lot of trips.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you did a lot of trips, and it sounds like you had a lot of low-water experience and weren’t too worried about it, and knew how to do it without tearing your boat up or smashing a motor.

WILSON:  Most of the time I could make it work, yeah.

STEIGER:  I kinda remember that.

WILSON:  Too much!

STEIGER:  And all those guys called you Crazy Al.

WILSON:  Yeah.  Huh.

STEIGER:  So that was my recollection [unclear].  We didn’t say:  What Allen’s talkin’ about: the Chetco, we didn’t really get that on tape.  Basically you--let’s see if I got it right--for about four or five years, you had this little company and you ran five-day duckie trips on this river that’s just a little ways south of here.

WILSON:  Yeah.  Actually, they were mostly....  The five-day, we packed equipment in with horses.

STEIGER:  Into the wilderness area, a place where there’s no roads or anything.  Pack way up there and then come down this river that was runnin’ somewhere between fifty and a couple hundred, couple-three hundred cfs.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  So you had your own little outfit?

WILSON:  Yeah, did that.  Most of my trips, though, were two- and three-day trips--and one-day trips.  Yeah, that was fun.

STEIGER:  To me, that sounds great.  I like the idea of everybody participating--and especially when everybody got to paddle their own.  That’s perfect, that’s the way to go.

WILSON:  Yeah.  You know, I did a little research prior to.  I talked to Bill Gloeckler, and I talked to Rob Elliott, and a few other people that I know.  And in talking to Rob, Rob basically just said, "You know, that can’t work anymore, because it used to be people would really want to participate."  You know, on our ARTA trips, people would literally take the cooking and say, "You guys have got your night off.  We’re gonna do the meal for you."  That sort of stuff.  He said, "You know, that doesn’t happen much anymore.  The people want to be catered to.  They don’t want to have to work at it.  They are there to relax and to lay around."  And I’m just goin’, "God, how can it be so different now than then?!  Don’t people still want to have the excitement of producing and doing something themselves, like running the motor, or rowing the boat, or paddling the boat or something?  There’s a small market, I gotta say.

STEIGER:  Well, I have a theory on that.  I think one of the big differences is the money.  The cost is not relative to what it was then.  Like OARS and Dories, my God, they charge like 5,000 bucks for a sixteen-day trip, a head.  Maybe it’s not quite that much, but they do exchanges.  By the time....  I mean, it’s just so much more money, basically.  If they do exchanges, they get people comin’ and goin’ at <Phantom> and at <Whitmore>, and the exchange ones, the shorter increments, cost more.  Those people are payin’ $300-$400 a head, a day for that trip.

WILSON:  Wow!

STEIGER:  I think that’s part of it, I really do.  I think especially you get the head of a family of four or five, and it’s hard for 'em not to sit down there along about evening and go, "My God, this day, how much was it that this day cost me?"

WILSON:  Well, yeah!  God!  Well, if you stop to think about it....  That cost has gone up way out of proportion in relationship to inflation, it seems to me like.

STEIGER:  Well, I mean, when you’re talkin’ about the first ARTA trip was 280 bucks.

WILSON:  Right.

STEIGER:  I mean, there’s some, like Grand Canyon Expeditions, I think it’s $3,000 or $3,500 for a fourteen-day dory trip.  You pencil that out, the per-day....  And most of 'em, they’re all somewhere around in there, somewhere between $2,500 and $3,500, to go all the way, is the average.  So, number one, they’re payin’ a lot, and it probably doesn’t jump out at them that the crew or the "staff" needs a break, for that kind of money.

WILSON:  Yeah.  But you know part of it was, every night, there was five or six people would come into the kitchen, men and women, and want to help with the cooking.  And I always, on my motor trips and my oar trips, I was always turnin’ the motor over to a passenger, and they get to fightin’ over it!  "I wanna do it!"  And this sort of stuff.  And some of 'em got pretty good and were runnin’ small rapids and playing with the boat.  It was just cool to be able to do that.  But Bill says, "God, we don’t see any of that anymore."  But I don’t know, maybe that’s not totally true.  But it was really prevalent then in those days.

STEIGER:  I think there’s people--on most trips you could find a few people that would love to play with the boats.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  I don’t think that’s really changed.

WILSON:  Yeah, well, that probably hasn’t.  But what I wound up with on the Chetco--not to get off onto a long drawn-out thing about that--but I wound up taking a lot of small, young families who wanted their kids to have just a nice, simple, good outdoor experience, and be able to participate in it.  And that was what I was trying to sell.  And so we got that, but it wasn’t like people were banging my door down to go do a trip, and so that was pretty discouraging.

STEIGER:  And so you ended up, you’re not really doin’ it now ...

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  ... and it was ’cause you just were losin’ too much money.

WILSON:  Well, in 2002 we had this huge fire, a 500,000-acre fire, here.  It was called the Biscuit Fire.  And it burnt clear through the Curry, and Jefferson county.  It started over on the Rogue River drainage and burned all the way through the Kalmiopsis Wilderness, south, clear down almost to the <California> border.  Actually, because of another fire, the two fires came together and it burned into <California> also.  So it was a huge fire, and my river company was in the edge of that, and the entire forest was closed down, and I wouldn’t have wanted to go out there anyway.  I did sneak up on the Chetco one day, just to paddle up there and see what it was like, and there were just these big flakes of ash coming down.  The canyon was filled with suffocating smoke.  There was no way I could run commercial trips in that.  I couldn’t even drive in there, anyway, to do it.  So yeah, that put us out of business that summer, and then the next summer the water was too low.  So two summers in a row.  And it cost me about $8,000, pre-season, to get ready for these trips.  And I blew $8,000 two years in a row, and so that was it.

STEIGER:  Dang.  Well, maybe we ought to talk about the Niagara.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Tell me all about it.

WILSON:  Let me find the date first.  I don’t have that on the top of my head, but I’ve got the book.  Okay, our first trip as a test trip was May 23, 1972.  And we were using thirty-five-foot pontoons with two outrigger snouts, and I don’t remember what we were usin’ for motors, but they were probably twenty-horse Mercurys or somethin’ like that.  Lou Elliott had been communicating with George Grider, and George Grider was a guy who really wanted to run the Whirlpool Rapids on the Niagara River.  And for those of you who don’t know anything about the Niagara, which I’m in that same boat back in those days, was there’s the Maid of the Mist in the falls, so the falls are upstream, and on the Canadian side you can go down and do the Maid of the Mist trip, which is a boat ride out into the falls, and you come back.  And so there’s like a big pool there below the falls, and it’s a huge area.  And on the American side, they’ve built like half a bridge.  It’s a tower with an elevator in it, and this bridge thing comes out far enough so that you can stand out there on the end of it and look out and see the falls really well.  And that’s right next to the edge of the American falls, the lesser of the two falls.

So what we did was, Lou got in cahoots with George Grider and then Lou came to <Arizona> and got to talkin’ to the guys, wantin’ to find somebody who would go back there and do the trip.  Well, Mike Castelli and I volunteered for that, and then they got Dennis Prescott from his motor contracting company.

STEIGER:  That was RELCO?

WILSON:  RELCO, yeah--to go back there and do that.  And Mike and I took an old International pickup and loaded a boat into it, with some motors and all that stuff, and headed back to <Niagara Falls>.  So we drove from <Flagstaff> to <Niagara Falls>.  We also had this frame, and I forget who did it, but we had this motor frame that we had to be able to break it down into parts, because the only way down there was through this elevator through that half a bridge that I was talking about.  So the first trip, we carted everything up onto this thing and put it into the elevator and went down, and we started puttin’ it all together and slid it off into the river.  Eventually we got this boat put together, and we ran off and did this first run of this rapid.  I’ve been thinkin’ about it.  It was a fifty-two foot drop in a mile.  It’s a considerable drop and it’s a considerable distance.  And it’s got huge waves in it.  It’s a wide rapid, also.  It’s a wide rapid, and on both sides, basically, you’ve got calmer water, and the left side in particular there’s calmer water, but there’s more rocks over there.  And in the center are these huge, really, really big, plus-Hermit-size waves.  And the whole thing was a thrill ride rapid.  And it dumped down into this....

STEIGER:  The whole trip was you were gonna run this one rapid, and then that’s it?

WILSON:  And that was it.  You would motor through the rapid, and then there was a calm spot below the main rapid, and then the river constricted right there, and created a set of waves that ended in the whirlpool.  Above the whirlpool is a tramway that spans the whirlpool.

STEIGER:  There’s a whirlpool below this big rapid that you guys are gonna run? And it really was a real whirlpool?  Or it is?  It’s still there, I take it.

WILSON:  Oh yeah, it’s still there.  It’s huge.  The river comes straight down like this, goes through this constriction, and the big whirlpool goes out, and is lined up, and it goes way out and around.  And so you’ve got the whirlpool over here, the river’s comin’ down, and goes around like this.  And then it comes back out and there’s a 90-degree turn that goes straight on back down the river.  And there’s a constriction there, and then right over here is another constricted part, which is the rest of the river goin’ on out.

STEIGER:  More rapids after that?

WILSON:  Nah, just a little riffle right there.

STEIGER:  Just narrow and fast?

WILSON:  Well, it widens back out again.  Then you wind up goin’ by the bottom ends of all these power generating plants.  And it’s these power generating plants that are controlling the flow of the water above <Niagara Falls>.  They have these towers above the falls that are suction cups, just suck the water in, and then they run tubes underground, clear underneath the city, downstream to these power generating plants, which hold the water in tanks at night.  So what they do is, they cut the flow of the falls in half during the day, and at night they cut the flow in half again.  So you’re getting 25 percent at night; during the day you’re getting 50 percent.  And they stockpile that 25 percent so they can up their generating capacity during the day.  So they’re getting 75 percent of the river during the day, and the river’s getting 50 percent.  So they’ve got some falls for people to look at.  Otherwise, the falls wouldn’t be interesting.  And so we were running on--these numbers have escaped me--but it seems like 150,000 or 200,000 cfs, a pretty big flow.

And so we wound up makin’ the first trip, and it was a success.  Then we still had more testing we wanted to do.  And George figured it out, and it was an easy thing to figure out.  I forget how many million people visited <Niagara Falls> every year, but he quickly understood that if they could just get a small percentage, like half of a percent or something, that they’d just become rich over this thing.

STEIGER:  And you just charge 'em twenty or thirty bucks a head?

WILSON:  That was it.

STEIGER:  And do just one trip a day, or do a couple a day?

WILSON:  No, it was multiple trips.

STEIGER:  It was gonna be just go all day?

WILSON:  Just go all day, yeah.  And they were already building the trailers to haul the inflated boats on, and all this.

STEIGER:  So you weren’t gonna have to de-rig?

WILSON:  It was just like they do in the <Grand Canyon> now, where they take the side tubes off and the main pontoon goes up on the trailer.

STEIGER:  But how are you gonna get that down the elevator then?

WILSON:  Well, that was one of our big jobs, it turned out.  We weren’t just running the river, but we were also building--they bought a tower....  If you’re around logging operations, there’s what they call a donkey, and it’s a machine that’s got an engine on it, and drums of cable, and a tower that goes up.  You have one cable as a main line, which can actually be anchored in a secure spot, so you’ve got this way to move things up and down on a shiv.  So then you have a haul-back line that moves the shiv up and down, and then you hook your boat onto that shiv and you raise it up, and you blast it off the cliff, hangin’ on this cable, and it goes down and you drop it in the river, and you’ve got a crew down below to unhook it.

	And so what we wound up doin’, he had this contract with this welding company back there, well they built this big tubular frame that had these straps that came off, and we’d strap it around the tubes.  And we left the straps on the boat permanently--so all we had to do was just couple 'em into the hooks and we’d lift the boat up and lower it down.  Well, we spent two or three weeks building this, getting this thing set, and there was quite a crew that came from <Arizona> by then.  There were a couple guys from Hatch, and a variety of different people.

STEIGER:  I remember Breck O’Neill was in on that.

WILSON:  Breck was there, that’s right.  Oh, God!  Breck!  Now there’s a character!

STEIGER:  Yes, sir!

WILSON:  You know, I hate to deviate, but Breck was really somethin’.  In <New York> we found out right away that you could go into a bar and there’d be a bunch of sixteen-year-old girls in there!  The drinking age was eighteen, but like everywhere....

STEIGER:  You might fudge on that a little bit.

WILSON:  The bars apparently fudged quite a bit.  There were a lot of young girls in these bars.  And so we’d go into a bar, five or six of us, and Breck would be there, and he was a girl magnet.  It was incredible!  It was absolutely incredible.  And he got into more trouble, because we were living in a house that....  Oh, the morals!  The owners of the house were older folks who had high moral standards so there were no girls to be allowed on the front porch, let alone inside the house.  Breck got caught one morning with a girl in his room, and man, that night we were gonna be out on the sidewalk, but George Grider, of course, bein’ one of the richest men in the area, and our boss, placated that whole deal, and we got to stay there.  But he said, "Goddamn it, you guys, quit that shit!"

But anyway, we worked a long time on this tower, and got it so the boats instead of landing in the trees down below, would actually land in the river, and all that stuff.  Fortunately, at this particular location--which there was really only one location that was good--there was a big rock in the river, fairly near shore, that we just did a big loop around it and tied our main line off onto that.  And one of the Hatch boatmen turned out to be a really good operator of this donkey.  And it wasn’t easy, because it was a matter of clutches and levers.  You’d push the clutch in and the drum would release and let the cable down.  And you pull a lever to engage it, to get it to wind it back up.  You had to be pretty coordinated for that, and a lot of people were halfway decent at it, but he was the best, and he got to do most of that.

STEIGER:  Do you remember his name?

WILSON:  I wish I could.  I just can’t.  Those guys’ names have just sort of disappeared out of my mind.  I never had any written record of 'em.

STEIGER:  Well anyway....

WILSON:  Actually, I was supposed to be the manager of this operation, and I was answering to George.  The news media knew that, and everybody knew that.  And so the basic deal, what we had going was we lived in this house--George rented this house for all of us--we had a cafeteria near the falls that was an easy walk for us to go to every day to get our food--morning, lunch, and dinner.  And of course then at night we could go over to <Niagara Falls> in <Canada>.  That actually was a pretty cool place over there.  <Niagara Falls>, <New York>, was just sort of a slum area, but interesting nonetheless.  So where we were eating, it was run by a father and son, the old man stood behind where you walked through to get the stuff, and he’d slop the things on your plate.  And George was payin’ the bill for all this.  And they got so they loved us, because it was a lot of notoriety for them, we were in the news all the time.  TV companies were comin’ and talkin’ to us, and radio companies were talkin’ to us.

STEIGER:  How many trips--were you runnin’ trips every day?

WILSON:  No!  We were just gettin’ ready!

STEIGER:  So you’d run one trip?

WILSON:  We’d run one trip, yeah.

STEIGER:  Made it.  "Okay, we can do this."  So now we’re gettin’ ready.

WILSON:  Just an interesting thing:  at this cafeteria we got so we were really friends with 'em, and the son would take me over to <Niagara Falls> over in <Canada> all the time and show me the sights over there.  It was really, really neat, we had a lot of fun with these people.  One day I walk in at noon, and the owner comes over to me and he says, "I want you to meet these friends of mine."  Here was a whole bunch of guys in this kind of, sort of, lower-middle-class cafeteria, sittin’ over there in pinstripe suits and the hats and shined shoes and everything.  And he said, "Here’s a congressman from <New York>," and such and such.  "And here’s a senator...."  I mean, all these people.  I’m goin??, "Wow, this is too much!"  And so a few days later I went in, and I was teasing him across the counter where he’s sloppin’ the potatoes on, and I was just teasing him about the mafia, and there was nothing said, it was just quiet.  And that night, his son comes to me at dinner and he says, "You know, how about if we go over to <Niagara Falls> tonight?"  I said, "Sure."  So we’re walkin’ over there, and we were right on the bridge, and he goes, "You know, it’s not good to talk about the mafia around our place.  Don’t ever do that again."  And I said, "Okay.  I gotcha there."

	But what happened, after the first trip, then we got our act together and got the boats so we could lower 'em down into the river.  And then we started runnin’ test trips.  It was obvious we needed to do test trips, because where the constriction was at the bottom of the main rapid, was a huge wave, and it was a sharp one.  It wasn’t like an over-the-rock kind of wave, it was just down and up.  And then the up side was, my God, probably twenty feet or something.  It was really, really big.  It had a little curl on top, and it was pretty standard shape all the time.  We figured we could run around it.  Actually, you could run around it on both sides, but I believe we ran the left side to get around that wave.  Well, on the first or second or third trip after we got the frame put together, George Grider and his attorney and myself and Dick Overguard were on the boat.  And Dick was sitting across from me....

STEIGER:  Where do I know that name from?  Is he an ARTA guy?

WILSON:  He’s an ARTA guy.  And poor Dick, he had the notoriety from flippin’ a motor rig in <Badger Creek>.  He got stuck on a rock on the left side of <Badger Creek> and decided to take the side tube off to free it.  And when he took the side tube off, it flipped.  And it was a single-boat trip.  He had a hell of a time.  It was terrible.

	But anyway, Dick was back there.  And so we’re....  I wanted to find out if it was possible to ferry from one side of the river to the other, and I thought we could at the bottom of this rapid.  There was a lot of water and a lot of current there, and our motors were really pretty good, and it was an empty boat, except for just these three or four people on it.  And so when we came out of the rapid, I just pulled over to the right side of the river, then I turned back around and I ferried back across.  Well, all of a sudden I found out that I was not gonna make the ferry, and I’d better get lined up and get ready to run this last little rapid here.  So I turned the boat around, and the only thing I could do was just point it straight into the wave, rather than miss the thing.  And that boat just went straight over backwards like that, a total endo.  And it was so funny, because Dick and I are both sittin’ in the motor box in the back, and he goes, "Crazy, we’re gonna flip!"  (laughter)  We went over.  And that created immediate hysteria.  Every trip after that, there were helicopters.  I’m surprised they didn’t crash into each other.

STEIGER:  Wantin’ to shoot another boat flippin’.

WILSON:  Wantin’ to shoot another flip, yeah.  But anyway....  So then a little later, the next big trip... I just, after the flip, I really wanted to get the hell out of there, really.  And I had what was, in effect, a verbal contract to spend two months, which was nearing the end, and then I was gonna go, because I had <Grand Canyon> trips scheduled.  And so the sooner I could get out of there, the better.  I ran a couple more trips after that, and I just decided, "Why do I need to do this?"  I kind of lost my energy for it.  The flip sort of took a lot out of me.  The final trip I was involved in was the "Press Trip."  The Hatch boatman who ran the donkey ran the boat and I went along as an observer.  George got all of these TV people on board.  They had TV cameras, microphones, they were packed, facing out.  They were just packed in there.  And we hit the first big wave, and we figured out to avoid some of the major tragedies in the center of the main rapid, that we would do a cut out over to the left side and then swing back in again, and we’d bypass one big wave.  Well, in the process of doin’ that, one of the side snouts started to peel off the boat, and it just peeled.

STEIGER:  Was this the media boat?

WILSON:  The media boat.  I was the guy that was watchin’ the people, to make sure they all stayed on board.  And the Hatch guy was runnin’ the boat.  And so the rings that were the clasps where you snap 'em together, those rings all broke.  And so that snout just took off and went on down the river on its own, and only one person fell off, but he was right in the front of the boat.  So I ran up through all these people and I got up there, and I just jerked that guy out of the water!  You can really get a lot of adrenaline goin’ on something like that.  Anyway, that was filmed close up.  That was amazing.  And then after that, I was on the news every night.  I finally got so tired that on these test trips I’d run down, the news cameras would be at the take-out, and I would have the assistant motor the boat up to shore, and then I’d get off the boat before everybody else, and I headed down to a bunch of trees down the other side of the gravel bar, and let the assistant do the talkin’.  (laughs)  And it wasn’t long and I was outta there.

STEIGER:  Was it just like a slow news month or somethin’?  Why would these news guys be there more than once?  Why would they want to... keep wantin’ to...?

WILSON:  I learned something about the news media.

STEIGER:  What was up with that?

WILSON:  That was so unusual--you have to stop and think that they were still coming out of the 1800s there in <Niagara Falls>, <New York>.  The thinking processes are really....  I mean, it’s horse-and-buggy time, really, for a lot of these people.  There were people there who were still in the horse-and-buggy days, and they’re still where they’ve got streetcars and all that stuff.  And they’ve still got these power-generating plants that are all along the river.  And they’ve got industry goin’ on.  And the puritanical stuff there, the religious stuff is really something.  And here’s these weird characters from <California>, beards and cutoffs with pockets hangin’ out the bottom, and all this stuff, comin’ in there, chewin’ tobacco, and they’ve got a little bit of a thing goin’ with the women in our town.  And all this stuff.  And it’s big news.  And runnin’ the Niagara River was really big news, and the Canadian government just said, "Do not touch our soil."

STEIGER:  They weren’t havin’ any of it.

WILSON:  They didn’t want to have anything to do with it.  And so it was a big deal.  Just the whole thing was a really, really big deal.  The next year....

STEIGER:  So you got it together, and then did they start runnin’ passengers, did they make any money at it?

WILSON:  No.  I don’t remember exactly.  I left, and there was a core group of guys that stayed there.  And they did start taking people down the river, but that winter George went to some university and had 'em design a boat, rubber raft, that would be "unflippable."  And they built this big thing, and there was a picture in the newspaper.  I think I’ve got the picture in my scrapbook, wherever it is here, of that boat upside down.  And Dick Overguard was drivin’ it and flipped it, and from what I understand, they had seatbelts for the people, so that they wouldn???t get thrown off the boat, and somebody drowned in that episode.

STEIGER:  The boat wasn’t supposed to be goin’ over?  It was supposed to roll back upright or somethin’?

WILSON:  No, it was a big raft.  It was just not supposed to be able to get upside down.

STEIGER:  So somebody was seatbelted in when it got upside down.

WILSON:  Yeah, everybody was.  But that’s what happens.

STEIGER:  And so that ended the business?

WILSON:  That ended the business, and George Grider was in lawsuits for years over that.  That was too bad, ’cause he was a really neat guy:  submarine captain in World War II, wrote a book about it; vice-president of the Carborundum Corporation.  Oh, that was another thing.  I mean, he was a big man in town, and a really, really good guy.

STEIGER:  He just went down the <Grand Canyon> or somewhere with ARTA and thought, "This’d be a great thing...."

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  Never even went down the <Grand Canyon>?

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  Just thought it’d be so cool if he could just take people through this one little rapid?

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s right.  And I took him several runs down through the rapids, and he just loved it, he thought that was the coolest thing in the world.  Nothing seemed to faze him.  There was no end of nerve in this guy.  He had it.  What was pretty neat is the first time we had to see George about something, I forget how it happened, but he said, "Well come over to my office."  And we didn’t even know where it was, so he gave us directions to get over there.  Man, this is a big three-story or something building, with a beautiful glass front on it, and gardens and walkways and all that stuff.  And we go into this main door, double glass door.  And here’s this circular desk, and there’s actually--it appears that there may be people who are guarding the place, but you can’t see 'em.  And we walk up to the desk and there’s these two gals behind the desk, nicely dressed.  We were sayin’, "We’re supposed to come and see George Grider," and they’re goin’, "What?!  You mean Mister Grider?"  "Well, yeah, Mr. Grider.  We were hopin’ we could come and see him."  And they’re goin’, "Well, you’re not gonna be able to see him."  So finally I said, "Would you mind giving him a call, and see if we could get up there to see him?"  So she calls, and she says, "Mr. Grider, there’s some fellows here."  And she said to us, "What’s your name?"  I said, "Allen Wilson," and he said, "Oh, send 'em right up!"  And she just hung the phone up and she said, (incredulously) "You know, he said to go right on up."  (laughter)  And so she told us where to go, and we went up the flight of stairs and over into his office.  I don’t remember why we were there, but it was somethin’.  It was pretty interesting.  That was a really, really different thing, but I couldn’t wait to get back to the <Grand Canyon>.  (laughter)

	So sort of in a nutshell, that was what happened:  Castelli and I started it in the spring, went back and got that thing rolling, and then I went back later and worked a little bit more there.

STEIGER:  You did go back later?  Ran a few commercial trips....

WILSON:  No.  As it worked out, after the tube peeled off I only had a week or two left, and I basically just helped finish up the stuff to get ready for the commercial stuff, and we went on from there.  I left and headed back.  Pretty interesting.

STEIGER:  Somebody told me a story that it was pretty wild, that it was just huge, huge, huge.  A hundred and fifty thousand cfs, I mean, my God.  Did you say 150,000 or 200,000?

WILSON:  Well, I can’t remember, but it was either 150,000 or 200,000, yeah.  There were a lot of stories associated with that.  That’s the basic stuff that happened.  George took care of us.  One thing that was interesting....

STEIGER:  Breck didn’t get shot--that’s good.

WILSON:  No, he didn’t get shot.  (laughs)  That lady at that boarding house, though, she did not like him.  (laughter)  God.  Right offhand I can’t think of too much.  I could look in this book and see if there’s any other things in there that ring a bell with me.  Oh, here’s a story about myself and Castelli and Dennis Prescott--the first article that was written about us in the paper.

STEIGER:  "Trio awaiting test of river raft ride," "Trio ready to test Niagara white waters."  Oh yeah.  Let’s see, there they name you and everything:  "Allen Wilson, Mike Castelli, Dennis Prescott."  Yeah.  Interesting.

WILSON:  You know, it was a big deal for them.  This wasn??t the last newspaper....  Pretty amazing.

STEIGER:  "I’m not a daredevil."  I guess that’s George Grider.  "He’s interested in providing a thrilling trip without putting anyone in danger."  Or was that you?  Whose quote was that?

WILSON:  Where is it?

STEIGER:  Down there on the second little piece.  Down there on the bottom.

WILSON:  Yeah, I’m tryin’ to see up here on the....  Well, actually that is me.  Oh shit!

STEIGER:  "I just don’t want to kill anybody!"

WILSON:  Well, luckily I got out of there before that happened!  I think I’ve pretty well, in a quick little thumbnail, covered that <Niagara Falls> incident.

STEIGER:  Okay.  Well, shall we stop it and think about what else we’ve gotta do?

WILSON:  Yeah.  (recording paused)

STEIGER:  Where were we?  Oh yeah.

WILSON:  Don Briggs at <Deer Creek>.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that’s it.

WILSON:  Don came on the second of my very first private trips with my snout boat.  We carried our food and sleeping bags and stuff, or whatever we were sleeping in, up to the patio up there at Upper <Deer Creek>, and set up camp there.  The forest service had a ruling, no camping on the beach at <Deer Creek>, and so we interpreted that to mean that we could camp up above, which it turns out that was true.  But I was pretty paranoid about it.  Don and I just walked out, late in the evening, looking for picture opportunities, and found that the park service J-rig was parked across the river.  We went, "Oh shit!  We’re trapped up here!"

STEIGER:  Well, your boat was on shore?

WILSON:  On shore, yeah.  And so it was obvious that there were people somewhere in the vicinity.  Anyway, on the way back, Don and I are walkin’ back, and he said, "Go ahead, I’ll catch up to you."  So I went on, I got up to where we were, up there in the main opening.  And God, Don didn’t show up, and didn’t show up.  "Shit, what in the hell happened to him?"  So I turned around and started walkin’ back and here he comes on the other side of the creek.  And he’s stumblin’ along over there, and the talus is pretty dangerous over on that side.  And he jumped it!

STEIGER:  He jumped across?

WILSON:  He jumped it, yeah.  He said, "I got over there, and all of a sudden I realized when I jumped across, I jumped down to a ledge, and to jump back, I couldn’t, because I had to jump up.  And so he had to figure out how to get back down the creek.

	The other thing Don wanted to do, and I had these really funky little cheap life jackets for that, and Don wanted to jump into whirlpools and see what would happen.  And I said, "Don!  God!  Quit that!"

STEIGER:  Test out your little cheapo life jackets?

WILSON:  Well, see, Don had just hardly been on the river at all.  And he had just showed up on the scene.  And you know, he never did a private trip ever again after that.  I think it took too much out of him.

STEIGER:  I can’t remember how he got started workin’.

WILSON:  Briggs.

STEIGER:  Anyway, that’s a whole ’nother....  I did a big oral history with him.  He said how he did it, but he talked about training with you.  I remember he said you in particular were so energetic and did everything at such a high rate of speed he had a hard time keepin’ up with you.

WILSON:  Oh, poor Don!  It was interesting with Don--speaking of Briggs--the classic scene that I have in my little brain about Don is that he had his Canon 35 mm camera, and everywhere he went, he had that.  And he had gotten this blue bag that had a drawstring on it, and he carried his camera and extra lenses and film in there, wherever he went.  And so everybody was on the boat at Matkatamiba one day, and the water’s creeping up and creeping up, and Don finally shows up--we’re sitting there waiting for him--and he’s walking along, dragging that little blue bag in the water, with the camera, and I’m just thinkin’, "Jesus, Don!  Pay attention to what you’re doing!"  But that’s a classic.  I should say this, but it sort of was the classic picture I have of Don in my mind for how he would go.  He was really methodical about making sure that his pictures were picture perfect, and he’d spend an hour or two taking one picture.  He used to tell me, "Well, I got three pictures today."

STEIGER:  That was a good day.

WILSON:  That was a good day, yeah.

STEIGER:  Well, you know, there’s a lot of characters--I know that’s about half the fun, it seems like--that you’ve worked with.  I think about just the ones you’ve named here, who I just know the littlest bit about--those AZRA guys--Jerry Jordan, all those guys early on.  I know Lou Elliott, too, was somethin’.

WILSON:  He was a character.

STEIGER:  Just that whole bunch.  Louise [Teal].

WILSON:  Yeah, Louise was a good character.  You know, on that trip where we had the three boats, and Louise and David and I were the boatmen, and we camped at 122 Mile.  There was a guy on the trip and Louise and him were kinda checkin’ each other out.  David comes to me and says, "Hey, Louise and this guy went up the canyon.  Why don’t we go up there and roll a bunch of rocks down?"  (laughs)  So we climbed up fairly high, and then we were creepin’ along.  And finally we got upstream of where they were, and we started rollin’ these boulders.  We were watchin’ 'em, and the guy gets excited and he’s lookin’ around, and Louise yells, "Crazy, you quit that!"  (laughter)

STEIGER:  She knew!

WILSON:  Louise, me, and probably David.

STEIGER:  That was Dave....

WILSON:  Lowry.

STEIGER:  She knew, exactly, huh?

WILSON:  Yeah.  But she’d trapped me with a rattlesnake earlier.

STEIGER:  We didn’t tell that story on tape.

WILSON:  Oh, we didn’t?  Louise and I were hiking up Matkatamiba, and we went up a long ways--it’s where the canyon gets full of the great big rocks.  We were jumpin’ up over these rocks, and climbin’ around up through 'em.  And she was just a little bit ahead of me, and she jumped up on this rock and immediately turned right.  And it’s a little tiny platform up there, and I jumped up there, and there’s a coiled rattlesnake right there.  I just went, "Louise, goddamn it!"  And she said, "I just wanted to see what you’d do."  (laughs)  So there were characters.  Everybody was testing each other periodically.

STEIGER:  For me that’s sure been half the fun.  And boy, there’s been a lot of 'em too.

WILSON:  Yeah, I’ll bet.  You’ve been there a long time now.

STEIGER:  Uh-huh.  Well, I’ve retired about six or eight times.

WILSON:  Have you?

STEIGER:  I’ve given up on that.  Now my new story is I’m just gonna stay as long as I possibly can, 'til they won’t let me go anymore.

WILSON:  And that could be clear up to eighty.

STEIGER:  No tellin’.  Actually, literally, it got to where I decided I wanted to keep doin’ it, and therefore I had to do it enough to....  I realized I was gettin’ too old to....

WILSON:  You had to keep up?

STEIGER:  I wouldn’t be much longer if I only did a trip a year, because you just get too rusty.

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s right.  (recording paused)  I have to say that Mike Castelli named Nixon Rock.  What mile is that, do you remember?

STEIGER:  No.

WILSON:  Have to look it up.

STEIGER:  Yeah, we’d have to look it up.

WILSON:  It’s below 110, isn’t it?

STEIGER:  No, it’s right below <Crystal>, so it’s like....

WILSON:  Oh that’s right, it is!

STEIGER:  It’s like 90....

WILSON:  It’s around 100.

STEIGER:  Yeah, something like that.

WILSON:  Well, anyway, it doesn’t matter too much.

STEIGER:  Hand [that map] over here, and I’ll find it.

WILSON:  Back during the days when we were runnin’ the river, we were runnin’ these motor trips, Nixon Rock you had to....

STEIGER:  It’s right at 100.

WILSON:  Is it?  Okay.

STEIGER:  Well, 99.7.

WILSON:  Okay, yeah.  You had to go around a big boulder, and then there was another little boulder just beyond it, and that rock was just a little bit right of center--the whole works there--and it was troubling to get around it.  And Castelli called it President Nixon Rock, because it was just a little right of center, and he didn’t like Nixon, and so it was a sarcastic thing that he did, and now it’s actually in the guide book.

STEIGER:  Oh, yeah, everybody knows that.

WILSON:  That’s funny.  And when I told Mike that the first time, he went, "Oh no!  That wasn’t the idea, to make Nixon famous!"  Now I understand it’s being called <Tuna Rock> or something.

STEIGER:  Oh, I think there’s people that call it Rancid Tuna, too.

WILSON:  Do they?  Because it originally started out as Rancid Tuna.  And that wasn’t Michael that did it, but....

STEIGER:  That’s the little rock below Nixon?  I don’t even know.  Is it a rock, Rancid Tuna?

WILSON:  I’d have to look at the map again.

STEIGER:  There’s a little teeny rock right below President Nixon.

WILSON:  It’s a big chunk of <Bedrock>, actually, and you have to go around it....  (pause)  Okay.  It’s between 113 and 114.

STEIGER:  Oh!  Okay, I know that one.  Yeah, I know exactly.

WILSON:  You go around on the right side, and then you swing in and then go down around a little bend there.  Yeah.  Well, back at some point in time, the water was pretty low, and that rock was so much out of the water that you could park a boat there and eat lunch on it with the people.  And so Richard Nielson [phonetic], who is a mutual friend of Mike’s and I, but originally was a very good friend of Mike’s, they ate lunch there one trip, and a couple of weeks later they came back, and the rock was still out, so they ate lunch there again, and when they got there, they found this rancid tuna fish sandwich layin’ there on the rock.

STEIGER:  From the time before?

WILSON:  From the time before, yeah.  Thus the name.  So that’s all there was to that one.  For short term, I don’t think I have too much more.

STEIGER:  That’s good, because we’re about out of tape, we have zero minutes left.

WILSON:  That means we’re done!

STEIGER:  That means we’re done on this one.  Maybe I’ll shut this off and we’ll see.  We got four more in the box.

