EMMA JEAN BADER INTERVIEW Cline Library Northern Arizona University United Indian Traders Association Project

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University, Cline Library. We're here with Emma Jean Bader. It is Monday, November 18, [2002], about 9:15 in the morning. [Also present: Brad Cole of NAU, narrator's daughters, Clare Jane Nelson West, and Mary Phyllis Nelson Simpson.]

Underhill: We're here to talk about your life in <Flagstaff> and also the trading business that you were involved with for a few years. Could we begin with where and when you were bom?

Bader: Well, I was bom in 1919 in <Mesa>, because Mother didn't really have faith in the <Flagstaff> doctors in 1919. She went down there rather hastily. I was bom there, came right back, about a week, (laughs) So I'm not a native <Flagstaff>, if you want to get real technical.

Underhill: What month and day was that?

Bader: March 11, 1919.

Underhill: Who were your parents?

Bader: Joe Babbitt and Viola Passey Babbitt.

Underhill: And how did they come to be in  <Flagstaff>?

Bader: Well, Daddy was born in <Flagstaff>. Mother was teaching school and came to <Flagstaff> in the summers to go to summer school at the Normal School, not the university then. As I understand it, when the train would come from <Mesa>, a lot of the young men in <Flagstaff> would go down and watch them get off. They didn't introduce themselves or anything-they had to wait and go up to the Normal School, to the building where the girls stayed, and the housemother would introduce them, which is what they were counting on. And this is how they met.

Underhill: And what year were your parents married?

Bader: In 1918, before World War I, when Daddy went off to war. There he is, my dad. Look at that. 

Bader: World War I uniform, yes. He never went overseas, but.... Oh, okay. The story in our house was, when the Kaiser heard he had enlisted, the war ended, (laughter)

Daughter: Okay, this is Joe Babbitt.

Bader: His father was David Babbitt, who started the trading company and so forth. You probably have a lot of that.

Underhill: So when he came out to <Flagstaff>--or he never actually left?

Bader: He never left. He was bom here. This was Emma Verkamp Babbitt, his mother. She had six children, and died right after that. She died in about 1899, 1898, along in there. Daddy was eight years old. David brought them all up. He never remarried. Sent the boys off to boarding school.

Underhill: Your father, then, was involved in the trading business in the late 'teens or early twenties, or other activities for the Babbitt family?

Bader: Well, we had quite a few trading posts in my earliest memory, and he was always going out. He wasn't running the trading as such, but he was always going out there, taking orders and coming back, because they were supplied from the Babbitts' in <Flagstaff>. And he spoke a little Navajo. He liked it, he liked the reservation, and the trading posts. I think he would have run one if he could.

But if anybody remembers how the Babbitts' downtown store was, there were two stories, and upstairs was the furniture department. And up the stairs, halfway up was a little platform. That was my dad's desk, and he could see out over the whole store up there. So we used to pile up there and bother him, (laughter)

I'll give you a good one: He had a bald spot right here, and we would give him a kiss there, and make sure that we left lipstick, (laughter)

Underhill: Did you go out to any of the trading posts while you were a young girl?

Bader: Often, sure. We often did.

Underhill: And what were they like?

Bader: Honey, we thought it was just routine. They were just like the one that I was involved in later. The Navajos didn't use much money: they brought in stuff to trade. And what you did, "How much credit can you get for this rug?" says the lady. "All right, I will buy this." So we figure what it is, subtract it from the

amount, and the new figure comes. She doesn't add them up. We subtract after each item that's bought. And that would be the method.

Underhill: Did your mother also go out to the trading posts?

Bader: She did not. She mainly kept busy at home, as you can imagine. She was interested, but just in an academic sort of way. She had us all reading before kindergarten. That kind of mother. She made every stitch of our clothes for at least the first three of us, and she dressed the three of us alike. Betty Jo, Mary Eleanor, and me. Very soon, Mary was taller than either of us, so we were triplets of a funny kind.

Underhill: And you were the oldest?

Bader: I was the oldest.

Underhill: Did you have other siblings besides your two sisters?

Bader: Oh yes, Rayma, and my sister in <California>, Tess [Teresa], and my brother Joe, who died last year. He was not Joe Babbitt, Jr., but they insisted on calling him that anyway, so he got resigned to it, but he wasn't really.

Undethill: So when you went out to the trading posts, how long would you stay with your dad out there? Was it just a day trip, or did you stay overnight?

Bader: Oh, it was a day trip always. I don't remember ever staying overnight, or any reason to. Sometimes we would go to several posts. And I cannot come up with names. If you give me a map and named them, I might recognize them.

Underhill: How many were there?

Bader: Nine or ten, I guess. I really don't know.

Underhill: Did you learn any Navajo when you were young?

Bader: Not much, no. Then my daughter Mary Phyllis and I took Navajo up at the college. We decided we needed it, and it stuck with her, because she uses it. Didn't stay with me, but I've got all my notes.

Underhill: Was that Irvey Gosen?

Bader: Yes! it sure was. I'd forgotten that. It's been a long time.

Underhill: So while you were growing up, where did you go to school in <Flagstaff>?

Bader: At St. Anthony's. Then I went two years to Flagstaff High School, and then two years in <Hollywood> to Immaculate Heart. They had a boarding school in those days, so I finished and graduated there, and then went to <Tucson>, the university.

Underhill: And what did you study at the University of Arizona?

Bader: Well, first I didn't make up my mind. Then somehow I took a cooking class, and they made us take chemistry, I discovered chemistry, majored in it, so it took me five years to get out. Betty Jo and I graduated together, and I immediately went into laboratory work in the hospital. That was fine. I worked at Los Angeles County, training in their labs, and then worked there. That was good fun.

Underhill: L.A.[<Los Angeles>] was a very different place then, I'll bet.

Bader: Oh, well, the war hit right then--this is World War II, now--right then. So I had been in L.A.[<Los Angeles>] about a year, and World War II, what do you do? You get married, quick, before he leaves for the South Pacific. Johnny Nelson, whose dad ran the Babbitt Stores in <Winslow>. His mother and mine were school friends, and had known each other. Her name was Elsie Stevenson and Mother always called her "Steve."

Underhill: So had you met him while you were living in <Flagstaff>, then, growing up?

Bader: That's funny--no, not there in <Winslow>. I met him at the University of <Arizona>. But it turned out later that, sure enough, our parents knew each other, but we never had met (laughs).

Underhill: And was he over in <Los Angeles> for military training then, while you were there?

Bader: He was already commissioned. He was in the Marines, second lieutenant, (to daughters) Hey, you guys on the dresser in that room where the computer is, one of them is Johnny Nelson getting married. Just keep going, you'll see it, it's labeled. I couldn't get it out, because you guys surprised me.

Underhill: Were you married in <Flagstaff>?



Bader: Yes, right here in my Grandmother Emma Verkamp's gown, which Mother found and took to <Los Angeles>, got mended, and I wore it. So we had a proper wedding, although over a weekend. There were no invitations sent out, no time. She did the whole thing on the telephone.

Underhill: Oh, my goodness! What year was this?

Bader: Wait a minute. Where are we? Forty-two [1942]. First part of February.

I think it's February ninth. Isn't that funny? It sounds right.

Underhill: Did he then go off to more military service?

Bader: Yes, he went to the South Pacific, and was on several of those islands there, scout company, (to daughters) Are you having luck?

Daughter: Is it "Nelson Wedding" you want?

Bader: Yes.

Underhill: And we can actually hold it up here.

Bader: Oh, I see what they are. Name these guys for me.

Daughter: Mother, I don't know. You told me before, but I don't know them. It'll come to you. When it does, just blurt it out--it'll come through your head.

Underhill: It looks like Timothy Riordan.

Bader: Tim Riordan. This is Tim Riordan and his wife. And Carolyn. They all wore their wedding dresses because they were the same vintage, of course, as the gown I was wearing.

Daughter: Were those their wedding dresses?

Bader: Yes! You didn't know that?

Daughter: No, I didn't know that.

Bader: Okay, I'm glad you know now.

Underhill: We'll hold it here.

Cole: That'd be great.

Underhill: And let him zoom in on it.

Bader: Okay.

Underhill: So here we have Carolyn Riordan and Timothy Riordan, and this is your mother?

Bader: No, this is Carrie and .... (several talking at same time, none disceernable) Well, but I know, and it should be on the back of it, but it isn't*.

Daughter: Let me look on the back of this one.

Underhill: Emma Jean, and Johnny Nelson.

Bader: Yes, that's right, (discussion about videotaping photograph)

Daughter: That's okay, it'll come to you, Mom.

Bader: Well, a lot of people know that one. That's an easy one.

Underhill: Look at that. And Carolyn can still get in her dress?

Bader: Yes. She did!

Underhill: And that's a beautiful dress you have.

Daughter: Tell her about your dress, Mother.

Bader: I did, it's Emma Verkamp's.

Underhill: That's great. And so he was away through the end of the war?

Bader: Clear to the end of the war. Jeannie was walking and talking when he came back--my first daughter. We have a little joke about that. His brother was also in the military, in the army, Frank Nelson, and came into <Winslow>. I was working in the lab and I wasn't there, but Jeannie was home with her grandparents. [He] came up the walk, and [she] looked up and said, "Hello, Uncle Frank." (laughter)

Underhill: And she was bom in 1943, then, your first daughter?

Bader: Yes, '43, but he didn't get back 'til she was growing good--walking and

talking, (to daughter) Jennie, what have you got? Oh, the brides. This is Rayma's wedding. We wore our own wedding gowns.

Underhill: We'll hold this here for Brad, if you don't mind.

Underhill: So those are your sisters.

Bader: Yes.

Underhill: And Rayma is in the center?

Bader: Yes, it's her wedding. And Mother dreamed that up, of course, that we should all wear our bridal gowns to be the bridesmaids. So we had little hats.

Daughter: This is Emma Jean, and Tess, and Mary, and Betty Jo.

Underhill: And that was in <Flagstaff> as well?

Bader: Oh, yes.

Underhill: Neat. So when your husband came back from World War II, did he immediately go to work for the Babbitt Company?

Bader: Yes, he had been working for them before that--in fact, he was working for them as he grew up, because his dad was. But--oh, golly, I can't think of years very well. He had a chance to buy the trading post at <Chinle> from Cozy McSperon, and so we went ahead and did it, and we left Babbitts' and went out there, and took our kids. Thought we'd be there the rest of our lives. That's what you think. He was a good trader, because he had lots of practice.

Underhill: When was your second daughter bom?

Bader: Phyllie? In '46. And Clare, this one, in '52. They were all bom in <Winslow>, however--all three born in <Winslow>.

Underhill: Were you living in, <Winslow> at the time?

Bader: Oh, yes. It was very handy. His two aunts were nurses, and our house was right back-to-back with the little bitty hospital in <Winslow>, (laughs)

Underhill: You just walked over?

Bader: I just walked over, I sure did. It was a good thing.





Underhill: What were the facilities like that you purchased at <Chinle>? Was there a hotel there then?

Bader: The trading post is not in the town of <Chinle>-it is up near the canyon. We took a very few guests in those days. There were a couple of little cottages and a room or two in the lodge. We would have family-style dinner in the evening, and all the people who were renting would come to dinner. And a Chinaman cook.

He was a funny guy. (laughs) The Navajo girls served dinner, and it wasn't exactly expert, (laughter) I remember one night one of the gals put a plate in front of the guest, and let it drop, straight down like that. She didn't think anything of it, but they got fed. He would find out early in the day how many of them--the old Chinaman turned out food real fine.

Underhill: Were you getting your supplies from Babbitts' in <Flagstaff> then?

Bader: Yes, we always got them from Babbitts'.

Underhill: How often were you restocked?

Bader: Oh, I don't know. I really don't, because we could also steal from the trading post if we needed cans of things. There was no trouble (unclear, laughing). We really had a little retail store right there, (to daughters) Are you guys--listen, there are some pictures that show a little bit of <Chinle>.

Daughter: Where do you think they might be?

Bader: Well, I have some that I put out that I could show.

Bader: I'm talking about little slides, and to show the slides. But we'd have to go in there and put them on the screen.

Daughter: We'll do that later. Mother found slides for you to look at.

Cole: Great.

Bader: I needed time to hunt, and I hadn't thought about them from that day to this. Besides which, they didn't tell me. I think maybe when we go in there and see them, then I'll name them, then I'll show them. I did get a few, not all, of the pictures--remember the guys came out and climbed Spider Rock?

Daughter: Yes.

Bader: All right. When I found them, they aren't all there, so I've got to do some more hunting.

Daughter: But you did find them? I just saw an article recently where somebody was claiming to be the first climbers, and I thought, "Oh, no, you're not!"

Bader: Oh, no, they're not! The pictures were given to us by the guys that climbed it.

Underhill: And this was a group from <Arizona>, or from elsewhere that came to climb?

Bader: Hm, where were they from?

Daughter: I don't remember anything about them.

Bader: <California>? You know what is on it? their mere names, and that's it. There must be something in news somewhere about it, for that year.

Daughter: Maybe.

Bader: Well, what they did, there on the side of it you can't see from the canyon wall is quite a shelf. They climbed up to that shelf and spent the night, and went on up the following morning, (laughs) That's more courage than I have.

Underhill: Did they have an audience of people come to watch?

Bader: Yes, but not very many of us.

Daughter: There were six or eight of us.

Bader: Yes, we were hanging over the edge, holding our breath, (laughs)

Underhill: Did you provide education then for your children? Or was there a school there?

Bader: There was a school, and my children learned what it was to be a minority, and to get pushed around by the majority. I don't know how much they minded.

Daughter: Everyone was very nice to us. I actually never felt pushed around.

Bader: Well, I heard about it a time or two, when they got in line to go in, somebody got their elbow in your ribs. But then Jeannie went off to Immaculate Heart, where I went, and was back there at school when Johnny died. So she

came back. Claire, what year were you, if any?

Daughter: She was preschool.

Bader: You were preschool there. You were even preschool when we went later up there, back to the reservation. Too short and I did all right.

Underhill: Who were your customers? They were Navajo folks who lived in the region?

Bader: A hundred percent. Of course the tourists who came. There weren't very many. We ran these canyon cars up the canyon every day, two or three of them, loads of tourists. But a few of them stayed there overnight, and the rest just came by the day. I know that the last part of the road to <Chinle> was not paved, and it was pretty bad.

Underhill: So determined tourists.

Bader: Determined tourists, yes. But they rode the canyon cars. The Navajos who drove the canyon cars did very well showing them stuff and explaining it, and that kind of thing. That was a big income thing, along with the rooms themselves, was the canyon car rides. I think they still do them.

Daughter: Yes, they do.

Underhill: Was there much rug activity in the area at the time?

Bader: Yes. I would say yes, by the numbers that the ladies brought in to sell.

We had big piles of them, and we had nice rugs. Any I have around here are from there. That one's an old one. I mean, it was already old then.

Underhill: Were you selling the rugs to tourists?

Bader: Oh, yes--to anybody that wanted to buy them, sure.

Underhill: Did you also wholesale rugs and send them elsewhere? Or you kept them there at <Chinle>?

Bader: (to daughter) Do you know?

Daughter; I don't know. Mary told me. I think you did, and I think you wholesaled them into Babbitts'.

Bader: I think we did. And you're right, very likely we wholesaled them into Babbitts'. There were lots of days when I paid very little attention to the trading post as such.

Bader: I don't know that accurately at all. We must have. We couldn't retail enough out of there, thinking of going back there and looking at the piles of them.

Daughter: There were a lot of rugs.

Bader: There were a lot of rugs. However, a lot of them were pawned. In other words, the guys were earning back, paying on their debt until they ransomed their rug again that they'd put in. That's one way to buy a bunch of groceries, too. I know that for sure. But I didn't pay that much attention to that--for a good reason.

Daughter: You did your gardens.

Bader: Oh yes, we did.

Underhill: Tell us about your gardens.

Bader: Well, we just kept it nice,, is all.

Underhill: Were you growing vegetables?

Bader: No, we grew flowers. I don't think we tried to.... No. We had animals. I remember our dog, whom I loved, Clitchi [phonetic].

Daughter: Clitchi was a corruption of Chochoin [phonetic].

Bader: (to daughter) Go in the hallway, as you come in, on your right, and there is a picture you will recognize, and you may bring it. I'll bet you know who it is.

Underhill: And what does that name mean?

Bader: It means "dog." (laughter)

Underhill: It sounds wonderful.

Bader: Yes, I know!

Daughter: Is this what you're thinking about?

Bader: Yes. 

Bader: That is Phyllie. I guess it's her daddy's jacket.

Underhill: We should probably hold it here again, so Brad can film it.

Daughter: That's Clitchi.

Underhill: Did he just appear, or did you get him in <Flagstaff>?

Bader: <Winslow>--Johnny bought him.

Daughter: We had his sister, Nakial [phonetic], and she died like a month old, and then we got Clitchi.

Underhill: What was Clitchi's whole name, Mother, do you remember?

Bader: Ragmop.

Daughter: Ragmop Thunderbird Nelson, we used to call him. Big long name. Bader: Big long name. You can see the resemblance.

Daughter: Sweet dog.

Bader: Yes, he was. There you go.

Underhill: So did you have a well for your water?

Bader: No, we've got the canyon.

Daughter: The water table was about six feet down.

Bader: Yes, in fact, there was a well.

Daughter: That's how these cottonwoods got so big.

Bader: Yes, in fact, there was a well, but the water was right there. It was never any problem. What I was remembering was the pipes from the well getting stopped up or something. The Navajos who helped in the yard, doing this water witching thing across the yard, they would say, "Here's where the break in the pipe is," and dig there. 

Underhill: Amazing.

Bader: It was to me, too. But they did that water witching just like Lou does. Underhill: Were you also handling livestock in the lamb and wool season?

Bader: Yes. No, we didn't take sheep--just wool. We didn't get live sheep. Daughter: You bought lambs in the spring.

Bader: Did we? Thank you.

Daughter: Because Clare turned her dog, that dog, loose on them.

Bader: No, I didn't know that. Mostly wool, already clipped off and rolled up in big rolls. You weigh the wool, then you open it up, and you take out the rocks. You know that one. But it's true, it sure is.

Underhill: Were the animals sheared someplace else, and they brought you the bags?

Bader: Someplace else, yes. We didn't shear them right there. I guess I watched them once. I don't remember that.

Underhill: Did you send the wool to Babbitts' in <Flagstaff>, or someone else came? Bader: (to daughter) Hey, where did the wool go?

Underhill: They can't hear you.

Bader: I would assume that--I do not know. I didn't pay attention to that.

Underhill: Who were your friends out there? What kind of social life did you have?

Bader: Well, it was mostly each other, and the tourists, which were by definition charming, because they'd come so long over such a road. We said the road sorted our guests for us, and sent us the interesting ones. It really is true, because by the time they got there, it was something. And we really didn't.... We were good friends with several Navajo families. We didn't have schoolteacher friends or anything. Yes. The days were jammed from one end to the other, full up. Mostly it would be just the tourists. I'm trying to think of something now, and I won't be

able to, so I waste your time. A lady who is a writer gave me a book and signed it. Daughter: I think I know.

Bader: All right, honey. She's a flier, airplane pilot.

Daughter: Oh, was that Beth Wright wrote a book?

Bader: No.

Daughter: A different pilot.

Underhill: It wasn't Virginia Hyatt?

Daughter: Oh, was Este Lauder a pilot?

Bader: No. Honey, if I'd-had warning on this, I could find those. They fooled me. But there is a Canyon de Chelly book in there, which she bought and gave me and signed it. It's in that back bedroom.

Daughter: Maybe you can find it later.

Bader: I don't know. You guys waited too many years.

Underhill: Well, how often did you go to town?

Bader: I took Clare to <Phoenix> to get her little leg treated. You don't mind?

Clare: No, I don't mind.

Bader: Tex Wright would pick us up at Canyon de Chelly and fly us to <Phoenix>, and then fly us home again. Tex and Beth Wright were stationed in <Flagstaff>.

And do they know of them? Sure they do. Yes. One way of going to town.

When we did go to town, it was often not to <Albuquerque>, but closer.

Daughter: <Gallup>.

Bader: <Gallup> was town, rather than <Flagstaff>.

Underhill: And when you went to <Gallup>, did you go by automobile then?

Bader: I remember one morning we set out for <Gallup>. We had a flat and changed it. By the time we had had five flats and mended them--you mended the inner tube--turned around and went home, didn't go. (laughter)

Underhill: Did you ever have the road washed out.due to flooding?

Bader: Oh, yes, clear out. Clear out, yes, sure did. Were glad to see the rain.

You remember that, coming to a washed-out road, and not being able to go on.

Daughter: Yes.

Bader: The reservation had very little--I don't think it had any paved road. Underhill: Did you have a telephone?

Bader: Yes, ma'am! Sure did. That's how we got our reservations.

Daughter: Phone number <Chinle> 9-1, is that right?

Bader: Something like that--big long number.

Underhill: Did you have a party line and an operator, and all of that?

Bader: No. I think later we did. But we did have our own phone, yes. It was pretty essential to the whole business in many ways, not just tourists, but all our groceries in and out and all that.

Daughter: Thank you for telling me the other day, after Daddy died, the people coming in. This was in the days before women could have credit. And they came to take out the phone.

Bader: Oh, yes! they did! They came up from <Gallup> and were taking it out. Didn't even mention it or ask me or anything. Scared the pudding out of me. If I hadn't seen them doing it, I would have had to go through the whole thing of starting back with the company again. I hope not line strung, I don't know.

Wasn't that something?

Daughter: Yes.

Underhill: And did the business change at all during the time you were there?

Bader: Since I was there? No, it didn't. It was fine, everybody was loyal and kept working. My brother came out for a little while, and my dad came out and stayed.

Daughter: Ralph Bilby came.

Bader: Ralph came, he sure did--just on the business end, because I didn't know anything firsthand about that. When I came to- town, the best thing to do was to sell it, and I sold it to Ida Mae Borum. Do you know who she is? Maybe you'd better start over. She's gone, and so is Tinky.

Daughter: Yes, they're both gone.

Bader: They're both dead, yes.

Daughter: I think you sold to LaFonts.

Bader: First. She ended up with it. Some people named LaFont?

Daughter: Uh-huh.

Bader: Okay, thank you. I was pretty much this way for those days. Came into town, and I knew I needed a job. I went back to school, NAU--which wasn't named that--and took teaching credits, and started teaching sixth grade. Where were we?

Daughter: <Tuba City>.

Bader: Tuba. And you were there, and Tooey [phonetic] was there. And I just hated it. Not the teaching. I loved the kids, and that was fine. Teachers that were competitive and not even in a nice way with each other. That sounds’funny, but it's really what turned me off. So I finally went to the principal and said, "When you can get somebody, do it." And he did. And that was it with the teaching.

Then I went to <Chicago>, took my lab work, which I had graduated with-- but you have to catch up, that stuff changes year by year. So I took a whole year, lived in <Milwaukee>. I had a good time. And came back and Went to <Flagstaff> Hospital, put in twenty years in the laboratory. It was a good thing, it was nice, it was fun. I liked it.

Daughter: You got remarried in there somewhere.

Bader: Oh, yes, about 1965. My mother introduced me to Mr. Bader, whom she had met because he was interested in her doings at the Art Bam. That's how that came about. That was in about February, and in September we got married.

Underhill: And what was Mr. Bader's first name?

Bader: Lou--Louis, L-O-U-I-S. His folks had lived in <Flagstaff> when he was real little, and then moved to <California>.



Daughter: That would be the nineteen -- teens.

	

Bader: Yes, he was bom in 1912, he's ninety. But he remembered plenty, especially

prairie dogs and stuff like that, because he was a little kid, playing. He had his own horse, which he rode with no saddle all the time. Their house was.... Okay, I've got a word I need and can't think of. You go in and you put up a house....

Daughter: Foundation?

Daughter: Are you talking about homesteading?

Bader: Homesteading. His dad homesteaded this right here.

Underhill: Baderville?



Bader: Baderville, yes, about 1918 or '19. It was after the war, I guess it would be '20. But Lou was bom in the same place all the Babbitts were--<Cincinnati>.

Underhill: That's interesting!

Bader: Yes.

Underhill: What were they doing at their homestead? Were they running cattle?

Bader: Yes, they made one little house, which I think has tumbled so far down it can't be found anymore--about two miles this way--and homesteaded it and took title to it, and been here ever since. He has sold off quite a bit of it, because he had no other use for it, really. And look at the houses in this valley!

Underhill: A lot of change.

Bader: Yes, I'll say.

Underhill: Was your husband running cattle still when you met him? Or he was in a different line of work then?

Bader: No, he was a builder, and he did mostly remodeling. But he built several houses, including this one. Gosh, I guess there's nine or ten along "the valley here that I can say, "He built this one." And as a matter of fact, he'd move in and live in it and build another while he was livin' there, then shift on down. So there's quite a few here that he built. So I got in on the building of this one a little bit.

Daughter: He's quite the artist.



Bader: Oh, he is that! He does sculptures, and you may have seen them around town, I don't know.

Daughter: Bronze.

Bader: Bronzes, uh-huh.

Underhill: Oh, neat.

Bader: Over at the public library there's one. Is it south of the library?

Daughter: Which one do you mean?

Bader: I'm thinking of the little doe (unclear).

Daughter: That's almost on the highway, isn't it?

Bader: Is it? I don't know.

Daughter: Yes, it is south.

Bader: And then there's one up at the hospital. I can't think....

Daughter: Is that an eagle?

Bader: Yes, I believe so. Well, there's an eagle that came back here, and is sitting outside.

Daughter: Oh, the one in front of the Catholic Church.

Bader: Oh, yes. Do you know that one, which is St. Joseph and the child Jesus? Underhill: Yes.

Bader: He did that one.

Underhill: Oh, beautiful.

Bader: And made his little house and put it there.



Underhill: Beautiful, (pause) What was the hospital like when you started?



Bader: It was across the street. As soon as I try to get to a name, it runs away from me. Bill Liebe who died very recently. His wife called me up--Virginia.

Bill was running it sort of by himself. I asked if he'd be interested. "Well," he said, "we've no openings." So I said, "Okay, let me just work here for free." So they did put me on some kind of a something, but I worked for no wages, and at the end of the month, I went on full-time. It took a month.

Underhill: Wow. You were indispensable by then.

Bader: I just worked in, and it was nice. Who is the big tall.... Bill Liebe and.... Daughter: Oh, they lived on Grimm Drive.

Bader: The other tech, another man, they did all the X-ray and all the lab work for some years, because the whole thing was so .small, and I was strictly in the lab, and we all took turns with night calls, so I was only on one night in three.

Underhill: For twenty years?

Bader: Well, it improved. I mean, it grew. I don't know if it improved, because this was fun. We did have a good time. We'd come in, in the morning and start insulting each other, and generally laughing hard. It was a real good job, I liked it.

Daughter: Your methods were relatively primitive to what you have now. I mean, it was all done by hand.

Bader: Oh, you did. The first thing you did when you hit the hospital was go out and collect specimens, which mostly meant taking blood samples. You had a whole pile of orders, and you went in to the patient, took blood samples, and brought those back. Then, yes, you set up a test, and you had two or three knowns--a low one, a medium one, and a high one-and you ran those. A lot of them were just color comparison in those days. But you knew that your test was set up right, because the knowns would read their correct number, and then you read the patients off and wrote them down and sent them up. And now, all you do is poke it in, and the machine prints out the answer. You don't have to know the chemistry, apparently. And we also did things like blood counts and identifying parasites and all that. In fact, parasitology was a separate lab. And much later, when we had quite a few people, I did nothing but parasitology. There's quite a few of them for this high, cool country, surprisingly enough. So that kept me out of other mischief.

Underhill: How has <Flagstaff> changed over the years for you?

Bader: Not very much. They took down our old school and built St. Mary's. We, in those days, that far back, when we went out on Sunday, we'd bring back rocks and piled them in the yard, and they went into the present Catholic church, so we felt we were helping build it.

Underhill: How neat.

Bader: Very definitely. And so that is homey, and the same as it was. Now I'm teaching catechism over at St. Mary's this afternoon. I've gotta get myself together again. So it's, for me, very like it was. I mean, things came along naturally. My children stayed near, thank goodness--didn't go off to live in <New York> or <St. Petersburg>, or where people go. Of course it's bigger. It couldn't stop, because everybody that comes here seems to want to stay. And that pushes the rents up and the wages down. They stay anyway.

Daughter: And they kept finding water.

Bader: True.

Daughter: They said we couldn't grow because....

Bader: We were always short of water, always paid attention--big time paid attention. One summer, there was no water in the taps. That's all. You turned it on and nothing happened. And we had some big containers, you took them down to the railroad station, and for a quarter they filled it up. I think they were bringing it from <New Mexico>, improbable as that sounds. But anyway, that was the only water, something to drink--and you did without everything else. Yes, they have found other sources and piped it from farther and farther, but it is still a lid on Flagstaff s size, of course. Can't do much about it. And this kind of a year tells them. Sure does.

Daughter: You're lucky right here.

Bader: We have a very elegant well, by sheer grace of God, in the back yard. It is full up right now.

Underhill: Good.

Daughter: Do I remember that this is kind of the beginning of the Rio de Flag in here?

Bader: Oh, yes, this valley goes on down, and is the source of the Rio de Flag.

So probably our snow comes from Wing Mountain more than from the Peaks--I don't know. But it's still okay now.

Underhill: And the year that you had no water in the taps, was it as dry as it has been, or is this the worst drought?

Bader: I don't know, honey. I was not that big. I don't know about the overall dryness. On paper, they say this is the worst one we've ever had. So of course we weren't hooked up to so much. We hadn't even found lots of it. The water man, Mr. Widener, lived right across the street from us. And isn't there a Widener Tank up on the Peaks?

Bader: Yes. But on the Peaks is a spring, and that was where we were getting it, mainly from that one spring, from <Flagstaff>, such as it was in those days. Something not very romantic sounding, but just the one, I guess. You don't pay any attention to it, you take it for granted.

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Underhill: 'Til it's not there.

Bader: Yes. No, I mean, what the system is, and how the town.... I see they're digging up streets a few places, where the water pipes go back that far. They finally gave in.

Daughter: What do you remember of your grandfather?

Bader: Oh, lots. He was darling. Rayma has a cute picture, and I should have it, of him sitting on the Ray Babbitt porch, draped in us, my sisters. I think it's all the way down to Joe, with Grandfather. You ask Rayma for it. I didn't know it existed, until the little part he's holding Ray, who's really little, and her kids took just that much of the picture and had the piece blown up, and she has it over in her porch there.

Daughter: I think he died before Joe was bom.

Bader: I don't know that. Oh, yes, he died a long time before that. He died in the 1920s.

Daughter: Twenty-nine.

Bader: Is that it? Thank you, very much. I knew I wasn't in high school yet, likely.



Underhill: Did all the kids go to the store? Was that kind of a favorite thing to do when you were small?

Bader: We weren't supposed to roam around too much, (laughing obscures comment) I told her about coming down to where Daddy's little desk was.

Daughter: I remember that.

Bader: What did we call it?

Daughter: I don't know. I pestered him too, same place.

Bader: It's like on a ship.

Daughter: Oh, okay, I know.

Daughter: I don't know what you call that thing on a ship, but I know what you mean, [crow's nest? (Tr.)]

Bader: All right.

Daughter: I'm thinking about you children were dancers and musicians.

Bader: Oh, thanks to Mother, we did. We took piano lessons, we took violin lessons, we had to take dancing lessons--we sure did. We had--what's the name of the building out at the college?

Underhill: Ashurst?

Bader: No, no. Our violin teacher, he was brand new, was the first teacher. What's the matter with me?! Not Ardrey.

Underhill: Yes, it was Ardrey.

Bader: Yes. He was not Dr. Ardrey then, and he was unmarried. It was his first stint, or very close to it, and all three of us took "fiddle" lessons from Eldon Ardrey, yes. Yes.

Underhill: And did you do performances there at the college?

Bader: We had to. (laughs) We were pretty bad. We got pretty good. Mary Eleanor, my sister and I, played some in the college orchestra. We played second

violin, so we got that good. And we all had to play piano. Mary was the only one that got good. Mother could play anything. She made it a point, and she used it when she taught school, she liked it. I never kept it up afterwards--nor the fiddle either. But you do watch people doing it with a different expression, if you've tried it. I think it was worth it for that reason. You enjoy it more.

Underhill: And certainly your mother's background as a teacher came into play when you were young. You mentioned that you could read before [kindergarten].

Bader: Yes. It was so obvious to us, we didn't know when we started. I remember my brother--we were all little--he was wanting to take everybody on, playing chess. And he was good. He had found something and read it and worked it out, and could play, (laughs) He was awful little. She just piled it on, for fear we weren't kept busy at school. So that was why dancing lessons and violin lessons and piano.

We also learned to cook. That is the best way in the world, by the way, if your kids won't eat their meals. You don't coax them, you don't reward them, you don't stand over them--you let them help cook it, and they eat it! (laughter)

Underhill: But it's all peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, right?

Bader: That's right. But if they help--especially if you teach them a new thing-- then they've got to have everybody try it, and they eat it themselves, and the whole thing just goes forward.

Underhill: What other chores did you have? You helped your mother cook, I'm sure.

Bader: Oh, we cleaned house. Saturday, after school week, on Saturday, we all had to really, really help, big time, and get the place sort of pushed around for Sunday. So Saturday was cleaning day, and we all did everything that was needed upstairs and down. Do you know our house? We lived at 519 North Leroux.

Underhill: I think so, yes. Beautiful house.

Bader: The other day I went by there, and over my front door it said, "Arise!" I wonder who.... (laughs) I don't know what's in it anymore. But it held us all.

Underhill: Did you have your family, relatives, over for Sunday dinners?

Bader: You know, we didn't very much. And she wouldn't give birthday parties to each of so many kids. We had a big birthday the end of the summer, a big party for all of us. I wish I knew where that picture was. I know where a copy of it is.

Betty Babbitt--Teddy's Betty--has one, and it's up in her house on the wall. But it was all of us, in costumes of course. Always had costumes. A great, great big group, and we could name off everybody who later was anybody, (laughter) But the photographer, what in the world was his name?

Underhill: Bob Fronske?

Bader: No, before Bob, in that office, though, in that same place where Bob Fronske is. Mister....

Daughter: Carson.

Bader: Carson! Thank you. Mr. Carson was so poky, getting the thing set, and he let our smiles dry up four or five times. The picture that has got everybody in it, I am (whispers, inaudible) the worst fashion in the world. I was so sick of him! (unclear, laughing) perpetrated. It's bad. (laughter) But he did, he recorded it. I think he even did Lou's daughter. Isn't that Carson?

Daughter: I don't know, (aside about microphone cord) It say's Fronske.

Daughter, that's right, that's Fronske. The picture of Daddy in there, however....

Daughter: Fronske also.

Bader: Oh, is it?! I wonder where Joe's is. I bet we don't have any of Mr. Carson's.

Daughter: (inaudible)

Bader: What? Oh, all right. Anyway, he was a slowpoke.

Underhill: We're down to the last couple of moments, but we should, if you don't mind, [please] put your head in the camera for a moment, so we know who's talking in the background.

Cole: So our transcriptionist will know.

Daughter: Our heads around the comer here.

Underhill: So if you don't mind just saying your names. I think we've got your birthdates on here.

Bader: Wherever you will.

Underhill: Go ahead, Clare.

West: I'm Clare Jane Nelson West, and I am Emma Jean's youngest daughter. Simpson: And I'm Mary Phyllis Nelson Simpson, and I'm the middle daughter.

Underhill: How did you come to be in the trading business? I'm wondering, as you spoke about Cameron.

Simpson: Oh, it was my father-in-law, got a lease at Cameron for a trading post, and he ran just a service station for several years, and then in '75,1 think, we turned one little building into a grocery store. They told me to do the ordering, and that was my life for the next twenty-five years, (laughter) I became a grocer just by default.

Underhill: Are you also involved?

Bader: Janet has trading stuff out there now, though. Your daughter is a trader.

Simpson: Oh yes, my daughter is a trader, and she has a store in downtown <Flagstaff>, Painted Desert Trading Company.

Underhill: Oh, neat, very neat. So it's in the family.

Simpson: It goes back a ways, yes.

Underhill: Brad, did you have any other questions while you were going through?

Cole: Just quickly, one. I came across the name A. B. Nelson. Would that have been John?

Bader: Johnny's father.

Simpson: Axel Balsby. Balsby is where he was born. They made him take a middle name.

Bader: Yes, from <Sweden>, and sounded like it all his life.

Simpson: Oh, he did.

Bader: Oh, a picture of.... Can you find it?

West: Of what?

Bader: Oh, I don't know. Grandpa Nelson, Jeannie, and baby. Do you know that one?

West: I have a copy of it. Do you have a copy of it here?

Bader: Yes, but I'd have to go hunt. It is cute, though. Wait a minute. Honey, no. In the room where the computer is, up on top of the files, at the back, on the left, I'll bet it's there.

West: All right, I'll go find it.

Bader: I gave one to John Hansen.

Underhill: We'd better pause if we're going to film it. (tape turned off and on) So you can tell us who's in this photo.

Bader: Okay, A. B. Nelson, my daughter Jeanie Hansen, and Barbara Hansen.

Underhill: How did A. B. come to be associated with the Babbitts?

Bader: He met David Babbitt in <Los Angeles>, what approximate year?

Simpson: Had to be nineteen-teens.

Bader: Yes, it would be maybe even 1912, along in there.

West: That story is recounted in Platt Cline.

Bader: Okay, good. I'm glad you know that.

Cole: We're just about out of time.

Underhill: Okay, well, maybe if you're willing, we could look at a few photos on your computer screen.

Bader: Okay.



