William "Buzz" Belknap III- Part 1

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli

Camera by Sam Jansen

March 28, 2009



QUARTAROLI:  This is Saturday, March 28, 2009, at Marble Canyon Lodge, interviewing Buzz Belknap-William Belknap III.

BELKNAP:  That’s right.

QUARTAROLI:  I’m Richard Quartaroli from the Cline Library.  This is part of the Grand Canyon River Guides Project.  Sam Jansen is doing the recording, and we’re going to get started with Buzz, part of the River Runners Project.  Maybe just a little background, Buzz.  We were talking a little bit in the car on the way over here:  family stuff, where you were born and when, family connections and that type of thing, before we get into the river running.

BELKNAP:  Okay.  I was born in <Washington DC> on February 18, 1944.  My father was a Navy photographer assigned to the White House.  But he’d spent a lot of time in the West.  His mother, [Laura] Jane Belknap, moved to <Boulder City>.  They moved in 1937, I believe.  She had a part ownership in the Hoover Dam Tours-Hoover Dam, <Grand Canyon>, I don’t know the exact name of it [Grand Canyon-Boulder Dam Tours].  So my father, at an early age, he did, I guess, some publicity, photography for her and a company.  I guess he met a lot of the early river runners through the tour company and doing photography in the lower end of the <Grand Canyon> and on Lake Mead.  But one of the (chuckles) people, of course, was Dock Marston, that he met.  From there my father-I think it was 1950 when they had the Chris-Craft that they brought down.

QUARTAROLI:  How did he meet Dock?  Dock just came through <Boulder City>?  Or did a tour?

BELKNAP:  Dock, I guess he did Nevills trips and 1949 I believe he did the Esmeralda trip.  So I’m sure my father had gone up to meet some of those early river trips, and that’s where he met Dock, and they hit it off.  I just remember Dock sort of headquartered at our house for a lot of his trips.  So my father made that 1950 trip with Dock, and that was his first trip.  I guess, according to your records, my father was, I think the 114th person to go down the river, which is pretty amazing [Dock’s records indicate number 112].

QUARTAROLI:  That is pretty amazing.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  So I guess the next trip my dad did was in 1954 with Dock.  They had the Smith Crafts.  I think they were eighteen-foot Smith Crafts with two Evinrudes on 'em.  It was a low-water trip, and I was invited to join 'em at <Whitmore>.  So we went out to <Whitmore>.  Went down with the Bundys.  We waited down there for three days, I think.  We didn’t know it at the time, but they’d had a lot of problems with the low water, and they were patching boats and that.  I was ten years old at that time, and we were down there.  The Bundys kept us entertained.  We went fishing with the "Dupont spinners" and so we’d dynamite the river.  (laughter)

QUARTAROLI:  Probably quite a few Bundy kids there [unclear] with you.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, there were.  But finally they showed up, Dock’s trip with my dad and everything.  So we joined 'em.  That was just a few days on down to Lake Mead from there.

QUARTAROLI:  Did some of the Bundys go with you too?

BELKNAP:  No, I don’t think so.  I think one of Jimmy Jordan’s nephews-he was a little older than me-I think it was just the two of us who joined.

QUARTAROLI:  And the Jordans were living in <Boulder City> at that time?

BELKNAP:  Yes, that’s correct.  Jimmy Jordan made an early, early outboard trip down, with Rod Sanderson.

QUARTAROLI:  Right.

BELKNAP:  So I guess the next trip was 1956, and Dock invited me to go along on his trip just to be a helper, do whatever I could.  My father didn’t go on that trip.  I did.  I really don’t remember too much about the trip.  I think fairly high water.

QUARTAROLI:  Were you in the Smith Craft once again?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, we were, right.  The Cactus, the Rattlesnake, and the Boo II, Dock’s boats, that he kept in <Boulder City> on the off season.  I helped do a lot of painting, repairs on the boats, that type of thing, there in <Boulder City>.

QUARTAROLI:  Did that trip go pretty smoothly?  They had a little higher water, you said?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, it was uneventful, from what I can remember.  I just have a few pictures, kind of interesting.  This is a fun picture of Dock and myself running just the Paria Riffle there.  I was probably ten years old there.

QUARTAROLI:  On an air mattress?

BELKNAP:  On an air mattress, no life preservers.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, pre-dam, nice warm water probably.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, exactly.  This is an early shot in the lower end of the canyon there.  That’s me driving the boat, just an outboard, [and] little Jimmy Jordan Junior, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  That’s fun.  Is this down on Lake Mead then?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, probably down below Spencer somewhere in the lower end of the canyon.  We’d just gone up in the canyon from Lake Mead.

QUARTAROLI:  Had you been boating with your dad?  You went from <Whitmore> down when you were ten, but it’s obvious that you had been on Lake Mead, on the reservoir area, floatin’ around, growin’ up there.

BELKNAP:  Oh yeah, growing up in <Boulder City>, just always out on Lake Mead constantly in the summertime, boating, water skiing.  My dad loved just going up in the lower end of the canyon from Lake Mead, so we did that quite a bit.  He was good friends with Jimmy Jordan, and Jimmy had a large cabin cruiser, probably a thirty-two-foot boat with a couple of diesel engines in it.  He’d go up in the lower end of the canyon, we’d all go along.  But I remember one year he was able to drive the boat under Emery Falls there.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, you can’t get there now.

BELKNAP:  No, definitely not.

QUARTAROLI:  It’s all silted-in and overgrown with vegetation.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, exactly.

QUARTAROLI:  What’s this?

BELKNAP:  Just a little note [from Dock] in 1956, it says, "Canyoneer Buzz, just thought you might like to have the print as evidence."  He let me drive at a very early age there.

QUARTAROLI:  What was the date on that?

JANSEN:  August 7, 1956.

QUARTAROLI:  1956, you were drivin’ one of those Smith Crafts.  Looks like twin outboards.  And where were you, at 217 Mile maybe?

BELKNAP:  Probably.  It kind of has that look.  Those were self-bailing boats, they had holes cut in the side, and had that center piece that you sat on, and steering wheel in the center of the boat.  It was a very good stable boat.

QUARTAROLI:  How many boats on that trip?

BELKNAP:  Three.

QUARTAROLI:  That’s right, you gave the names of 'em already.  So were Sanderson and Jordan driving the other two?

BELKNAP:  No.  I think Garth Marston was on one of the boats.  Dock was driving one.  I was looking for the crew list on that particular trip, and I couldn’t find it, so I’m not sure who the other one was.  The next trip after the ’56 trip was 1958.  That was the high-water trip.  (chuckles)  Probably 110-115 [thousand] second feet.  You saw the extreme high water too.

QUARTAROLI:  Right.  Not that high, but....

BELKNAP:  No.  (chuckles)  But so many of the rapids just totally disappeared, just the size of the turbulence and the boils and the whirlpools was pretty amazing.  And tons of driftwood in the river, always sheering pins.  But that was a trip that was so different from the ’56 trip, to see that, and then the ’58 trip.  But once again, we just had those three boats, the Boo II, Cactus, and Rattlesnake, those Smith Crafts.

QUARTAROLI:  There was another one that your dad wasn’t on.

BELKNAP:  No, he wasn’t on that one either.  I think back on it, it’s kind of amazing that he’s pushing me off on all these trips.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, you’re twelve, fourteen, and you’re doin’ this.

BELKNAP:  Exactly.

QUARTAROLI:  So by that point, you’ve got as much, or more, river mileage as your dad does.

BELKNAP:  Oh yeah, definitely.

QUARTAROLI:  So really no problems, other than a lot of drift that’s shearin’ pins, so you’re always dealin’ with that, but no repairing boats or any of that.

BELKNAP:  No.

QUARTAROLI:  But probably pretty fast-moving trip.

BELKNAP:  Oh, very fast, yeah.  Dock liked to, of course, stop along the way to spend time at different places, <Tapeats Creek> and different-just so people could do some hiking and look around, stuff like that.  There weren’t a lot of beaches, too, at that level.

QUARTAROLI:  Was he doing the historical research on these trips you were on, stop and take photographs?

BELKNAP:  Oh, he always had projects going on.  He had a lot of stuff planned out that he was gonna check out or look for, whatever.  But those were really small trips, because I mean, three boats, three pilots, and usually two people per boat, so maybe six passengers total-pretty small.

And then 1959 was the Disney trip when they asked Dock to organize the boating, doing all the location work in the <Grand Canyon> and re-enact the filming-the re-enactment of Major Powell’s first trip down.  I was in a private school in <St. Louis> for a year and a half, so Dock had written me and asked me if I’d like to go on that trip.  So I said sure!  He sent and asked me for my measurements, because I was going to be doubling as mainly Andy Hall, but doubled as several other people on the Powell trip.

QUARTAROLI:  What time of year was that?  Were you out of school then?  That was summertime?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, right, summertime.  Probably June, late June I would think.  I’d have to really look at the logs carefully to see the dates.  But they had Powell boat replicas built, and they had two Evinrudes disguised in the back under a hatch.  Then one of the life rings disguised the steering wheel.

QUARTAROLI:  So it wasn’t a tiller.  It’s been a while since I’ve seen that movie, so it wasn’t a tiller, you were actually steering with....

BELKNAP:  Well, we were rowing, but there was some....  I mean, we were sitting in the seats, rowing, but one person would steer it into position, then we’d appear to be doing it all through rowing.  (chuckles)

QUARTAROLI:  So as a double, what were you doing?  Were you doing some of the rowing and then some of the other little stunt work or something?

BELKNAP:  Pretty much just all boat action shots in the rapids and that type of thing, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  So you were Andy Hall, and you mentioned a couple of others?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, I don’t remember, seemed like they were always dressing us up with different outfits.  (referring to photo)  This is us being made up.  There’s one character there.  Down in God’s Pocket, at the end of the trip.  Ballard Atherton.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh, and this is gonna answer my question:  here’s a....  No, that’s the major’s boat with a chair on it.  Who is doing the....



