JACK, EVELYN and SNICK LEE INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.25

United Indian Traders Association


This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're in <Holbrook Arizona>. It's August 18, 1998. We're with the Lee family: Evelyn (Sammie) Lee, who we're going to interview in a minute, and also present in the room is Jack Lee and their son Snick Lee. Lew Steiger is running the camera. 

Cole: Evelyn, if you could start out and tell us when and where you were born. 

Evelyn: I was born in <Princeton Arkansas>, March 16, 1918. 

Cole: Who were your parents? 

Evelyn: Sam and Nancy Turner. 

Cole: Did you grow up in <Arkansas> then? 

Evelyn: Uh-huh, I grew up and went to college in <Arkansas>. And I taught in <Arkansas> until World War II, and I enlisted in the WAVES [Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service in the Navy]. Jack and I married right after the war was over. 

Jack: We met in <Hawaii>. 

Evelyn: We met in <Hawaii>. We went to <Winslow> because he had been on the Santa Fe Railroad. We were there a year and came back to the reservation. We were in <Ganado> for a short time, and then we went to <Keams Canyon>. We were at McGee's store in <Keams Canyon> for seven months before we got L and A Trading Post. And then we were at L and A thirty years. 

Cole: So when you were growing up, did you ever imagine you'd end up in the Southwest? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. I intended to get into teaching with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, so I had considered that before I went in the service. 

Cole: Was that your college degree then, or was education? You said you went to school in [<Arkansas>]. 

Evelyn: I don't have a degree, but I went to a Baptist college in <Arkansas>. But at that time you didn't have to have a degree to teach. 

Cole: After you met Jack, then you mentioned the trading post you were at for thirty years. Where was that at? 

Evelyn: At <Keams Canyon>. 

Snick: You said two stores: McGee's. The older brother of McGee, Bill McGee, had one. That was L. Tom King's store. And then the folks had the other one. 

Cole: So about what year did you take up at <Keams Canyon>? 

Evelyn: We went to <Keams Canyon> in 1948. We started running L and A Trading Post in 1949. 

Cole: What did the L and A stand for? 

Jack: Lester and Ann. 

Evelyn: See, Jack's brother owned it first. His name was Lester and her name was Ann. 

Jack: They hadn't come up with a title, so.... 

Evelyn: A name that was, you know, not like some of the others. 

Cole: And were they still there when you purchased it from them? 

Evelyn: Yeah, we were partners for several years, and then we first purchased half. And then as they got older, we bought all of it. 

Cole: What was Keams Canyon Store like when you first moved there? 

Evelyn: A lady had had it, and she was an alcoholic, and she drank the money up instead of getting merchandise. And when we went into the store, the Hopi clerk had gotten shoe boxes from everywhere he could, and he had the shelves filled with empty shoe boxes. 

Jack: Made it look like they had a lot of merchandise. Ha! An open box in there, being just boxes. 

Snick: And that same Hopi clerk that did that, stayed with the folks all the years they ran the store. 

Evelyn: Yeah. 

Cole: And what was that person's name? 

Evelyn: Dennis Nahoodyce. 

Cole: And I won't try to pronounce that! 

Snick: He had incredible loyalty. He stayed with--Carmen Stiles was there. 

Evelyn: Yeah, he was with the lady before us, and tried to keep her business going. 

Snick: Loyal to her, and then loyal to the folks to the last. 

Evelyn: I'm very good at Hopi names if you want me to spell it. 

Cole: That'd be great, actually. 

Evelyn: N-A-H-O-O-D-Y-C-E. 

Jack: Ooo-dot-cee. 

Evelyn: First name Dennis. 

Cole: So was Jack's brother a partner with Carmen, too, then, or not? 

Evelyn: No, he just bought it from her. And there's nobody left for all of his trading posts for you to interview. 

Snick: Lester Lee. 

Evelyn: Lester Lee. 

Snick: He was involved in several trading posts. 

Evelyn: Yeah, he had Two-story Trading Post and Steamboat Trading Post. 

Cole: So at L and A, were your main customers Hopi, Navajo, or both? 

Evelyn: Both. We had an arrangement. Jack wasn't too fond of Hopis, so the Hopis were my customers, the Navajos were his. He was reared on the <Navajo Reservation>, he spoke Navajo before he did English. 

Snick: I don't know what the split would have been, but pretty close to fifty-fifty with the Hopi-Navajo customers. 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. 

Jack: She took care of the Hopis, and I took care of the Navajos. And the reason for that was that I never learned to speak Hopi, because all Hopis spoke Navajo, and I could just converse with 'em in Navajo and didn't have to learn Hopi. 

Evelyn: But I had great rapport with the Hopis--I still do. 

Cole: Do you speak Hopi? 

Evelyn: No, but he does. 

Snick: Well, not much anymore. 

Evelyn: He went there when he was eighteen months old. 

Snick: You know, when you're a child, you just learn. 

Evelyn: You know, that's an accomplishment, too-- Hopi's a difficult language. 

Cole: How would you describe some of the differences between the Hopi and Navajo? 

Evelyn: Well, you're going to cut some of this, it said... 

Snick: Day and night, though--you can't compare. 

Evelyn: There's no comparison. 

Snick: Complete different culture, religious beliefs. Hopi's a very sophisticated language. 

Evelyn: And culture. 

Snick: They're balanced to prevent intermarrying and all of that--very sophisticated. And the Navajos, being very nomadic, were very basic. Total different beliefs and total different directions, so you really can't compare 'em at all. 

Cole: Did the Navajo and Hopi get along pretty well, at least in your store? 

Evelyn: At that time, before this joint use thing came up. Oh, they got along beautifully, because the Navajos went to the Hopi ceremonies, and they traded food. 

Snick: What encouraged that trade area with Navajos was that <Keams Canyon> was a government agency. 

Evelyn: For the Hopi. 

Snick: For the Hopi. But when they installed health care facilities and schools, they were for Hopi and Navajo. So naturally the Navajos moved in closer to where they could go and take care of health problems and their kids would be in boarding schools. Plus the Hopis hired a lot of Navajos to tend their stock. 

Cole: I didn't know that. 

Snick: Uh-huh. 

Jack: Oh yeah. My gosh, my mega argument with the government, when they started (

Evelyn: This joint use stuff.) was that you're fightin' in between. You're cuttin' down the middle, because there's just as many relations, people, you're cuttin' relations in half ____________. 

Evelyn: There was a lot of intermarriage. 

Jack: There was a lot of intermarriage in there, and you're killin' one branch and raisin' another one. 

Snick: You know, there was a normal amount of strife and incidents, but pretty much they got along. I remember when we would go to kachina dances when I was a kid, there'd be as many Navajos at the kachina dance as there was anybody else. 

Evelyn: That's right. And they were invited into the Hopi houses to eat. 

Snick: The Navajos used the Hopi medicine men, which their medicine was much more sophisticated than the Navajo medicine men. I think the responsibility lay with the government for encouraging the Navajos to move on Hopi land. (tape turned off and on) 

Snick: I gave it some thought last night, and if you could characterize the traders, there were a lot of traders that came to the reservation strictly to exploit money--a good many of 'em. And then there were others that grew up in trading families and, you know, you do what you do. 

Jack: Raised with the kids, and were kind of relatives. 

Evelyn: There was great rapport. 

Snick: And then there was a fringe of traders, like the Lippincotts at <Wide Ruins>, that I think came for the novelty of it all. They were wealthy and it was an adventure. There were a handful of traders of their generation that were there for the adventure and the newness of it all, and it was a complete change of lifestyle for 'em. But the exploitation was a big percent of the traders. 

Evelyn: It was. And some were downright disreputable. 

Snick: You wanted an opinionated view... 

Cole: And we'll get back to that, but I might just back up now, while Jack's here, and ask Jack when and where were you born? 

Jack: I was born in <Breen Colorado>, in 1917. And there's no post office there anymore. It was south of <Durango>, approximately fourteen to eighteen miles south of <Durango Colorado>. It was a little farming community. 

Cole: And who were your parents? 

Jack: Ernest Lee, my dad. And Annie Hunt Smootz was [phonetic spelling] my mother. I'm relatives to most all of the old traders on the reservation. 

Evelyn: At that time, all the traders were kin: in- laws, out-laws, by marriage--the early traders were. 

Jack: See, there's one that you're talkin' about, the Wheeler [family]. Clarence Wheeler and all of those were mixed in with my family. And the McGees was mixed into my family. 

Evelyn: The McGees are his first cousins. Their mothers were sisters. 

Jack: Their mother and my mother were sisters, and such. So we're all kind of joined together. 

Evelyn: Not now. 

Jack: Not now, but at the beginning. 

Cole: Did your parents own a trading post when you were born? 

Jack: My great-grandfather had the first trading post at <Tuba City>. 

Cole: And what was his name? 

Jack: John D. Lee. 

Jack: And his son and family lived at <Tuba City>. My father and my Uncle Joe Lee left <Tuba City> in 1904, and went to the <San Juan River>. That was when the government bought and made a reservation from all those farmers and Mormons that was at <Tuba City>. My dad was the last one, they locked him in. They locked his fence and they said, "You either get out, or we're gonna lock the fence." So he danged near starved to death, and finally he left over there in, I think it was 1906. 

Evelyn: But Jack's father and Joe Lee, his father's brother, did start several trading posts in that area. 

Jack: You probably have the record of Joe Lee at <The Gap> Trading Post. 

Cole: No, we really haven't heard much about that. 

Evelyn: Well, he built the first trading post there. 

Jack: At <The Gap>. 

Snick: And he built <Shonto>. 

Evelyn: And he built <Tonalea>, <Red Lake>, that Babbitts have now. 

Jack: And Cow Springs at Babbitts, and Uncle Joe's was across the highway. 

Snick: When the government bought out the farms in the <Tuba City> area, that was the third drawing, re- drawing, of the <Navajo Reservation>. See, they redid it three times. The Navajos just kept movin'. The first drawing was about at the <Lukachukai Mountains>. And the second took in <Ganado> and toward <Keams Canyon>. And the third drawing was when they removed the farmers at <Tuba City> and made that more of the <Navajo Reservation>. 

Evelyn: But his great-grandfather started Lee's Ferry. And from prison he still ordered his grown and married sons to do what he wanted them to do, and he told Jack's grandfather, Joseph Hyrum, "Go run the ferry." So he did, until it was sold. And then he started a home in <Tuba City>. 

Cole: So were there many family stories about John D. Lee? 

Jack: Oh, yeah. He was one of the guides that went down the river with, what was that expedition? 

Evelyn: He supplied the Powell expedition, he furnished their food. 

Jack: And the federal government chased him for forty years before they caught him, 'cause he killed all those people, they claimed, at Mountain Meadow Massacre. 

Evelyn: But he started a trading post at <Moenave>, which is near <Tuba City>. 

Snick: And built the first crossing of the Colorado River at <Lees Ferry>, and constructed the road down into the canyon with Hopi and Paiute workers. See, that's a little known turmoil, when they redrew that <Navajo Reservation> in that area. Most of those springs and where there was water, with the exception of Moenkopi, were Paiute. And the Paiutes were completely displaced and have never been compensated. 

Jack: Was decided here recently. And now ______ the Paiutes a bunch of money because they were around <Tuba City> and <The Gap>, and returned back to Troy Washburn’s trading post. 

Snick: A lot of the trading that _________. 

Jack: We were talking one day, and he said, "You know, there's some Navajos up there in those springs. They're funny people, they don't speak Navajo and they don't speak--I don't know what they're speakin', but they're funny. They're Indians, they're not Navajos, but they look like Navajos. 

Evelyn: But it was Paiutes. 

Jack: Paiutes. They'd lived up there for years and years and years, I guess, and nobody knew what the hell was goin' on until here recently. They got.... 

Evelyn: Money for the land. 

Jack: Money for their land. When they divided it, they divided their part like the Navajos did. Supposedly they thought they were Navajos--I guess the government. And they got quite a bit of money here just recently. But like Troy said, "Funny people. I don't know their language." (laughter) But he said, "They trade with me and they speak a little bit of Navajo and some other kind of language." I never paid a lot of attention. They live back under where there's those hangovers where there's springs, like <Moenave> and different places over there where there's big springs under that rim. That's where they lived. 

Evelyn: Jack's father was a linguist. He spoke Navajo, Paiute, Hopi, Zuni, and Apache. 

Cole: Wow. 

Jack: Good. 

Evelyn: Fluently. 

Jack: Fluently. 

Cole: What did he do then? You said he didn't own a trading post. Did he get into trading? 

Jack: No, he was just kind of a renegade. (laughter) 

Evelyn: He hunted gold. 

Jack: He was a prospector first. He had a copper mine--what they called a copper mine out of <Tuba City> there. He had a copper mine and he sold it for $1,600. From that day on, he was a prospector, he was gonna get rich. 

Snick: Well, now, he ran <Tonalea>. 

Evelyn: Yeah, he ran <Tonalea>. 

Snick: That Uncle Joe and he built. 

Evelyn: Uh-huh, but his older brother ran <Tonalea>, and was bitten by a rabid skunk. He went back to <Tuba City> to his family. Jack's grandmother wanted to take him to <St. Louis>, which was the nearest rabies shot, and the old man, Joseph Hyrum, said, "He'll be okay." So he died of rabies. 

Jack: They had him chained to trees and stuff. He went mad from rabies. 

Evelyn: His name was Tommy Lee. 

Cole: And where exactly was <Tonalea> at? 

Evelyn: It's a Babbitt store called <Red Lake>. 

Snick: It's northeast of <Tuba City> about fifty miles. 

Evelyn: The Babbitts will tell you about that. 

Jack: They just recently rebuilt that <Tonalea> place. It's pretty nice-lookin'. 

Cole: So did your dad then continue to prospect the rest of his life? 

Jack: He was a genius--a sort of a genius. He done all this work for the sawmills, building roads years ago--building sawmill roads so they could haul the logs out by train from (

Evelyn: <Happy Jack>.) <Happy Jack> and <Long Valley> and <Mormon Lake> and Lake Mary and down in that area. 

Evelyn: He built the first road up on the <San Francisco Peaks>. He was an uneducated engineer, a natural. 

Jack: Later on, when I was a kid and working my way through school, I went to a Catholic school in <Durango Colorado>, and I was taking algebra. You know in those days they had special problems in the back of the book. 

Evelyn: They had the answers in the back of the book. 

Jack: Yeah. And this lady (chuckles) teacher gave me the answer ________ the answer to this thing, and said, "You work this problem out, and you're supposed to get this answer, this is the correct answer." And I went to my dad and I told him all the theorems and the numbers and all whatever it was, and he just ducked his head for about five minutes, and gave me an answer, and I wrote it down. I looked in the back of the book, that was the answer. He done it in his head! He never worked the problem out, you know, like you do in geometry and algebra and stuff. He never worked that out on paper, he done it in his head. 

Snick: When Granddad was at <Tonalea> is when he stood in the wagon and talked to the two Navajo clans that were feuding? 

Jack: Yeah, to keep from gettin' killed--talked all night. 

Evelyn: Yeah, they were gonna take over the store. It was because of intermarriage, two cousins (

Jack: Two clans married together.) had married, and the families were irate. And he said he never spoke such good Navajo in his life as he did that night. 

Jack: Sittin' on that wagon with a .33. 

Evelyn: Calmin' those Navajos down so they wouldn't kill him and everybody else. 

Jack: My dad was a good old man, a good provider, but he was a renegade. He was away from home 90 percent of the time, and my mother raised the family. But he'd come back with a bunch of money and give it to her, and then he'd be off again. He was a good provider, but he just wasn't a home man. 

Cole: Would you ever go with him on any of his trips? 

Jack: No. He'd take off with one of the older boys, or somebody else. 

Snick: Big family. 

Jack: When my brother.... 

Evelyn: One brother's missing from that picture. 

Jack: When my brother Larry and I were just little renegade kids, after my mother died we were just kind of orphans. We was with my dad and he was with this prospector, and they went into <Nevada> to find turquoise. It was way out in that darned old desert. It was just desert, and Larry and I was foolin' around, they was diggin' in some holes. We was foolin' around gettin' into mischief and stuff, and we found a little knoll that somebody had dug, and there was a lot of marble rocks--looked like marbles, and we were good marble shooters. We dug out a bunch of those darned things and were shootin' marbles. And they were pure turquoise. My dad, when he died, had half a one. He had it cut and made a ring out of it--the most beautiful thing you ever seen. But they never could find enough of 'em to do any good. But they were round like a marble. 

Evelyn: Your next question? 

Jack: (laughs) Now ask some more--I got carried away! 

Cole: That's fine. When did you start trading yourself? 

Jack: Well, I just was back and forth, clerkin' here and there--mostly just clerkin'. 

Evelyn: He mainly was reared by his brother, Lester, on the reservation. 

Jack: Whoever'd take care of me! (laughs) 

Evelyn: And then he had Steamboat Trading Post. 

Cole: So where were some of the places you clerked? Steamboat and.... 

Jack: I was at <Steamboat>, I was at <Two Grey Hills>, and Iron Springs, <Salina>.... 

Evelyn: <Ganado>, Lower Sunrise. 

Jack: Where the Old Man Wheeler--maybe you interviewed him.... 

Evelyn: They're gone. 

Jack: They're gone. 

Evelyn: And so is Sunrise Trading Post. 

Jack: Sunrise Trading Post. Navajo name for Sunrise was <Shonto>--everybody called it. South of <Ganado>, down towards Cornfields, where the farm agency is. 

Evelyn: That's about all the places you were. 

Jack: Yeah. 

Snick: You've probably seen in putting this together that a lot of the traders were trained by an older brother, or got started in a store by an older relative. It just was a progression like that. 

Jack: When my mother died, my brother Al was runnin' <Salina>, and he took me with his boy and the family, to <Salina>. So I stayed at <Salina> for three or four years with him. It was just like that. Then I'd go to another brother's and have him feed me (chuckles) a while. Then other places. I was at <Steamboat> for years, off and on. 

Cole: How old were you when you first.... 

Jack: Eight years old when my mother died. But I went to the reservation when I was six. 

Cole: And you speak Navajo? 

Jack: Oh, yeah, I learned to speak Navajo before I did English, because in those days there wasn't no whites around in the trading posts--there was all Navajo kids to play with--so I learned how to speak Navajo before I did English. 

Evelyn: The whole family are linguists. 

Cole: And when you said you had Navajo playmates, what kinds of things would you do? 

Jack: Just get in damned mischief! (laughter) We caught a bear one time. 

Evelyn: Roped a bear. 

Jack: Roped a bear, this kid and I. We was out horseback ridin' at Black Mountain. We had a big idea, big shot, you know. At that time there was a lot of wild cows up on Black Mountain, where <Piñon> is now, back on that mountain. A lot of wild cattle up there. And this kid and I, we was ridin' around up there, lookin' for those. I told him, "If we caught some of those, we could take 'em to the railroad and sell 'em and get money!" (chuckles) We talked about it and after a bit I went down to my brother Lester and I said, "If we brought some wild cows off the mountain up there, would you take 'em? Would you help us and sell 'em for us?" "Yeah, yeah." He passed it off like we were a bunch of dummies. Well, anyway, we went up there and caught twenty-five head of those and brought 'em down there and took 'em to Chambers down here on the railroad, and we sold 'em, Lester sold 'em. 

Evelyn: In that same deal of roping the cows, they roped a bear. 

Jack: Yeah, and this old Tapaha Nez, this kid's daddy, he come out there just as we were tryin' to get rid of that damned bear. (laughs) We couldn't get loose of him! We had three ropes on him and we couldn't get the damned ropes loose. Our horses were wild and crazy. We were in a hell of a fix. Finally the old man Tapaha Nez, he got a rope on one leg of the bear and one of the rest of us got a rope around his neck and we stretched him out and got rid of the ropes. The old man Tapaha Nez just beat the snot out of all of us for catchin' that bear, 'cause that's against--very taboo, you know. 

Evelyn: Bears are sacred to Navajos. 

Jack: Whew! Singin' and everything. We just got the hell kicked out of us for catchin' that damned bear, and why we done it, I don't know. We were just gettin' into mischief, I guess. (laughs) 

Snick: It's surprising that kid stuff is pretty much universal. Had nothing to do with cultural barriers or anything. 

Jack: (laughs) No. We just caught a bear. We were good ropers. We could catch calves pretty good, so we decided, hell, we'd catch that damned bear. 

Steiger: I'm surprised he let you catch him. Aren't those guys pretty fast? bears? 

Jack: They're mean and they'll chase you, too. You get a rope on 'em, and.... 

Steiger: When you'd got the first loop on him, was he runnin' from you or to you? 

Jack: He ran from us, and then we tightened up on those ropes and this other boy, he got another rope on him, and we was tryin' to stretch him out. And then when he went mad, he would jump up in the air, and he'd chase me, and then he'd chase him, and then he'd chase.... Gollee! And then we got scared. The tradition got the best of us. I went to those damned things, too, just like the other boys when they had their sings and stuff. I knew that that was bad, we were gonna die or somethin', if we didn't get rid of that damned bear and not tell anybody. We were gonna get rid of the bear and not say anything, but the old man came in and saw us, and knew we was in trouble. So he helps us (chuckles) get rid of the bear, and we had singin' and everything. 

Evelyn: (aside about cooler) 

Jack: We got into it. When we caught those-- rounded those cows up, there was about a half-grown man that went with us. He got bucked off and broke his leg and we had to carry him off the mountain, take him down there. His folks got mad at us. We thought we was gonna hafta go to jail at first, for a while, 'cause we sold those cows and paid off and got out of mischief, payin' off. That was the last roundup we had, the last go-around. No more wild cows! 

Cole: When you're sayin' "paying off," what do you mean by that? 

Jack: Well, you have to pay off to get out from under the traditions. 

Evelyn: You mean catchin' the bear--you had to pay the medicine man. 

Jack: Yeah, we had to pay for the ceremonies. 

Cole: Did you have a ceremony? 

Jack: A ceremony to get the ch’©©dii out of us. 

Evelyn: A sing is one Navajo ceremony. 

Cole: What kind of ceremony did they perform for that? 

Jack: Oh, they burned cedar smoke and they sang and drank some old crazy stuff that was nasty. 

Snick: For purification. 

Jack: Then they [string?] their damned feathers at you. You sit there. 

Snick: It's serious. 

Jack: Uh-huh, scary. "What they gonna do to us next time?!" (laughs) 

Cole: So I imagine when you were a boy at the trading posts, they put you to work, too, didn't they? 

Jack: Oh, yeah, I had to help clerk and help clean, clean the place up, chop the wood--if they could catch me. Everybody burned wood. ___________. This one place, <Steamboat>, one Christmas, somebody, a friend that had another trading post, raised some turkeys, gave Lester and Ann a turkey, and they didn't want to eat it, so they kept it. Well, evidently, it was a male turkey and a female turkey, because after a while, we had turkeys all over the damned place! And them damned turkeys would hide their nests, and the first thing you know, here come a damned old hen turkey with eighteen or twenty little turkeys, bringin' 'em in. We had turkeys everyplace. You couldn't give 'em away! 

Evelyn: The Navajos wouldn't eat fowl at that time. 

Jack: They wouldn't eat fowl at those times--they wouldn't eat chicken or turkey. That was taboo. You know, they would buy, when they got real sick, they would buy a can of sardines that had oil in it. 

Evelyn: Medicine men used it. 

Jack: The medicine man. And they'd take that for medicine, eat that fish. 

Evelyn: Other than that, they didn't eat fish. 

Jack: They didn't eat fish, but they'd eat that sardines, I guess 'cause it was physic _____. It's real oily, and there's somethin'.... (laughs) But for years and years and years they wouldn't eat chicken or turkey or pork or nothin'. 

Evelyn: Well, they'd eat pork, but they wouldn't eat fish. 

Snick: Now, did the Hopis eat fish and fowl? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. 

Snick: They didn't either? 

Evelyn: I used to serve shrimp when I had Hopi housekeepers, and they wouldn't even stay in the kitchen! Still don't eat it. 

Jack: She had a Navajo lady who brought prairie dogs in and cooked 'em. God! they're stinkin' things! Whew! 

Evelyn: Well, they don't take the innards out first. They roast 'em with the insides. And I went in the house from the store and I couldn't stay in my own house. Hopi woman cookin' prairie dogs. 

Cole: Was that pretty common? 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. 

Jack: The Navajos really liked 'em, and I guess prairie dogs was good to the Hopi lady too. 

Evelyn: It was their stand-by when food was scarce. 

Jack: But like this old Hopi man said, "Don't kill those prairie dogs, just shoot at 'em if you're hopin' to kill 'em, 'cause we eat 'em when we're poor." (laughter) 

Snick: I don't think America realizes the extent of the poverty. 

Jack: You know, my brother Lester was a whiz at talkin' to these people, his customers, to help themselves. He spent lots and lots of money on blooded sheep. He would give 'em to the sheepherders--I mean, the ones that had sheep herds, he'd give those bucks to 'em, one or two, and say, "Now, when your sheep have lambs from these bucks, you have to give me eight lambs for this buck. But wait 'til your sheep has...." He wouldn't take cash. "You pay me back in lambs." 

Evelyn: That was your brother Lester at <Steamboat>. 

Jack: Yes. And he had a bunch of those black-faced sheep that come out of <Texas>. 

Evelyn: He really built up the sheep herds. 

Jack: He built the hell out of their herds, and then turned around--and talkin' about cheaters--the old man________, was the type of man that, like she says, they come out to exploit the Indians and get a bunch of money and then take off. 

Evelyn: So he bought the blooded sheep and even the ewes. 

Jack: And Lester was there to stay. He built their herds up so that every year he'd get a good reputation of the buyers would come out and [say], "Oh, those are good-lookin' lambs, we'll buy 'em." 

Snick: Try to get the lamb prices higher. 

Evelyn: But see, it was all credit. And some of the traders would take their last sheep to clear their accounts in the fall, [even] if it wiped 'em out. 

Cole: What were the economic and living conditions for the Navajo? 

Jack: It was just dog-eat-dog. 

Evelyn: Just terrible. 

Jack: Just terrible. They had their sheep, and that was about it. And they had wool. 

Evelyn: They had wool in the spring and lambs in the fall. And in between there was no welfare, no money. You really had a hard time. They'd come in with a single saddle blanket, and at that time they were from three to four dollars, and it was just hard to get flour, coffee, shortening, and potatoes, for four dollars. 

Jack: One old lady would come in about every two weeks and she'd have a saddle blanket. She couldn't weave for sour apples, and I'd just take the damned thing and throw it over. Go on and get some bakin' powder, some salt, and some potatoes, some coffee, put it on the counter (

Evelyn: Well, you knew she was gonna buy anyway.) put it on the counter and "thank you," and she just (claps hands), (in Navajo) "Háshinee’..." She would say, "My little boy" and just pat me around. I kept her alive. And then we'd just [pale] the damned rugs and take any kind of damned thing to get some money to pay the wholesaler for some more merchandise. 

Evelyn: Tryin' to get rid of the rugs. 

Jack: But I never said a word to her. I just took the rug and gave her a sack of flour and some coffee and baking powder and stuff and kept her alive. 

Evelyn: Before the days of some help, you can't imagine the poverty that the Navajos were in. It was unbelievable. 

Jack: One winter it was a real bad winter at <Steamboat>, and my brother Lester got a bunch of the leaders together and said, "Now, you guys get out there and cut some logs and get your horses up here. I'm gonna put a great big pot of beans on the fire, and we're gonna have something to eat. But in the first place, what you're gonna do is, you're gonna take those logs and you're gonna go all along that ridge over there." It was about five miles long, that ridge. "You're gonna go with those horses and drag those logs up and down that thing and get that damned snow knocked off." 

Evelyn: So the sheep could graze. 

Jack: "Then when you get through over there, you come over here and we're gonna give you a big feast: pinto beans and stuff." He had a great big pot, one of those old wash pots, a great big old steel wash pot. It was full of beans. And those poor guys, they just ate and ate and brought their kids in, their little ones, and just hogged up. But the snow melted off and they had some grass for the sheep! (laughter) He got 'em to do that for somethin' to eat. He helped 'em that way. 

Evelyn: But in that day and time, they tried to help themselves. 

Jack: They were enthused about it, but they never thought of anything like that. 

Evelyn: And the terrible winter of 1967. I saw 'em up on the hillside at Keams, trompin' the snow--the family would go around all the bushes and tromp the snow down so the sheep could graze. 

Snick: And then the sheep would come along in their tracks and eat the brush. 

Jack: But they worked. What all made me mad and disgusted was that the Bureau of Indian Affairs petted 'em, give 'em stuff. 

Evelyn: Well, they didn't try to teach 'em to be self-sufficient. But they knew how to be before there was a Bureau of Indian Affairs. 

Jack: They got to where they got so bad that when they come out with the surplus commodities and stuff to give 'em stuff, they'd just sit there, "Well, bring it in, bring it in." They wouldn't even go out and get it! 

Evelyn: But that's beside the point. Another question. 

Cole: What kinds of things would the Hopi bring in to trade then? 

Evelyn: Oh, kachina dolls, baskets. 

Jack: And pottery. 

Evelyn: Baskets, pottery. They had an arrangement so the market wasn't flooded. All the mesas made kachina dolls, but there weren't many in that day and time because it was a taboo to make the kachinas. And then First Mesa made pottery, and Second and Third Mesas made baskets, but a different type of basket. But Hopis are self-sufficient. We bought corn from them, but you never bought this year's or last year's corn. They kept three years of corn, because they've been through famines, and they weren't about to run out, because some years you didn't grow any corn. 

Snick: And they needed the seed. 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. 

Cole: What were their living conditions like? 

Jack: They were farmers, and they raised some stock. 

Evelyn: They had the rock houses up on top of the mesas. I think their conditions were better than the Navajos. 

Snick: Well, havin' just an older culture, and more established, they farmed and they knew how to dry vegetables and preserve it for winters. 

Evelyn: And they knew how to gather. 

Snick: And living in a community-type setting versus Navajos being just total nomadic, it was easier to administer health care to the Hopis. In a community, they would help each other more. 

Cole: Did the trading system.... Like, you know, there's this way the Navajo traded for the credit, the wool, the lamb season. Did the Hopi.... 

Evelyn: We credited very few Hopis. They didn't ask for it. They either brought in something, or they brought money. 

Jack: We bought their dolls and their pottery and stuff. 

Evelyn: And usually that was in trade, 'cause we could offer a higher price in trade. 

Snick: With the Navajos about almost 100 percent credit. With the Hopi, it was probably less than 10 percent. 

Evelyn: Yeah. 

Cole: What about pawn? 

Evelyn: Well, Hopis don't pawn. 

Cole: Not at all? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. We had a couple of customers that did some pawn with us. One old lady had a beautiful basket, museum quality. She pawned it when she needed cash. And then when she got very old, she sent me a Christmas present, and it was that basket. I put it in the museum in <California>. 

Cole: What museum? 

Evelyn: At Hayward. 

Snick: Cal State Hayward. 

Evelyn: Cal State Hayward. That's where all of our stuff is. (pause) Next question? 

Steiger: I have a question, and maybe it's inappropriate. It sounds like the Hopis were pretty good customers, but Sammie said that you didn't like 'em, that you preferred the Navajos? I don't understand. 

Jack: Well, because the reason. The reasons for that, I suppose, is that I was more familiar with the Navajo (

Evelyn: I think so.) because I grew up with some of 'em. 

Evelyn: It's a totally different culture and everything else. He was comfortable and he spoke Navajo. 

Snick: I think that's probably not the right terminology. He didn't dislike 'em, he was just much more comfortable.... 

Jack: I was more comfortable.... 

Evelyn: No, he didn't dislike them. 

Jack: I liked the Hopis, but I wasn't comfortable around 'em, because I was more comfortable around the Navajos, because I was more Navajo than I was Hopi, you might say. 

Steiger: Yeah. I just didn't understand. (whole roomful of people talking at once) 

Snick: There wasn't any animosity or anything like that. 

Jack: No, there was no animosity or anything. 

Cole: Did you have a Navajo nickname? 

Evelyn: Uh-huh, but we hate to tell it to you. (laughter) They called him "Mr. Goddamned." 

Cole: (laughs) And why is that? 

Evelyn: 'Cause he swore all the time. 

Jack: I took up that from my brother, and every other word was "God damn" with him, and I just started usin' it. 

Snick: Well, let me give you a little lead-in. Dealing with the Navajos, this oftentimes.... With Navajo lifestyle--and not so much today, but back then-- it was constant strife. It was always an emergency or some happening--lots of accidents. It would frustrate you, 'cause it was just this on-going thing. Chei used to do most of the business out in the hay barn, and they would go out there to him, or go into the office or the vault at the door.... 

Jack: ... tell me their troubles, and I'd say, "Well, I'll be goddamned!" or "I'll be darned!" 

Snick: And he'd say, "Well, goddamned it!" and then go ahead and work out whatever deal needed to be worked out to get 'em out of that bind. So when I was learnin' from the folks in the store, the Navajo elders would come in and ask me in Navajo, "Where's God Damn?" They wanted to talk to him. 

Evelyn: Now, you cut that out of this transcript! (tape turned off and on) 

Jack: I have to think about it. ________ "Well, I'll be goddamned!" 

Evelyn: It can't be cut out, huh? (all talking at once) 

Jack: There's a doctor in <Memphis Tennessee>. He come out there to Keams. Had a brother that was a pharmacist for Public Health, and he'd come out there and teach these young doctors how to set bones and stuff. This doctor from ________. 

Evelyn: He wrote the textbooks on orthopedic surgeries. 

Jack: He stayed with us, he and his brothers would stay with us at the store. When he left to go back to his practice, he had the Campbell Clinic in <Tennessee>-- <Memphis Tennessee>. And he said, "If you come to <Tennessee>, you come to the clinic, and when you get to the office, you just say, 'I'm Mr. Goddamn,' and I'll be right down from upstairs." (laughter) "You just tell that gal at the office that you're Mr. Goddamned, and I'll be down in a minute." 

Evelyn: We used to have open house at the trading post at Keams. We had a guest house. 

Cole: How often would you have guests? (Evelyn laughs) 

Jack: Every day. (laughter) 

Snick: Every day. Always, when growin' up, I thought you always had somebody doin' a book or an anthropologist or a doctor or somebody. I thought everybody grew up like that, 'cause we always had people (

Evelyn: Always.) that were stayin' there in the guest house. 

Evelyn: We had a couple of men that stayed for a year, were doing a book on infant behavior from the University of Chicago, and they were our guests for a year. 

Cole: Do you remember who they were? 

Evelyn: Dan Friedman and Pat Callahan. 

Snick: They were doin' a genetic study, world-wide, on newborn infants to establish gene pool quality. And the last of their study was doing Navajo and Hopi newborns. They thought they'd be up here like three weeks, and they ended up bein' better than a year. 

Jack: We let 'em have one of our apartments--they lived in it. Callahan is in <Santa Fe> now. He's head of what? (

Evelyn: I don't know.) for the State of New Mexico. 

Evelyn: Something in the state. 

Snick: Just an interesting lifestyle, that you had these folks. 

Cole: Who were some of the other memorable folks? 

Evelyn: Oh, a lot of anthropologists: Tom Bahti out of <Tucson>, Clay Lockett from <Flagstaff>. You've heard his name. (

Cole: Yeah.) 

Evelyn: I just can't remember. 

Jack: That big ol' guy that leaned in the damned window and helped us one day. What the hell was his name? 

Evelyn: D. W. Griffiths' nephew. 

Snick: He's a professor at the U of A now. 

Evelyn: Yeah, on folklore. 

Cole: Was that James Griffith, maybe? 

Evelyn: Jim. Yeah, James Griffith. 

Cole: Great big fellow? 

Evelyn: Yeah. 

Jack: About nineteen feet tall. 

Evelyn: He was a guest often. In fact, when we left the reservation, I just missed the anthropologists terribly. 

Cole: When the Navajo traded with you, did the women do most of the trading or the men, or was there a mix? 

Jack: Women mostly. Men, all they wanted was a new hat or a new pair of shoes. "Oh, gimme this, gimme this, gimme this." The woman, "Get on back there! Shut up." 

Evelyn: But, you know, it's a matriarchal society, and the woman owned the house and she owned the sheep herd. The men were at their mercy. And the women did the trading. 

Jack: You got the okay from the women, if they come in for credit. I'd say, "Well, how many lambs can you bring in this fall to pay your bill?" And she'd tell me. "No! I don't want you to tell [him that], I don't want you to bring in that many. I want to get somethin' else!" She'd say, "Shut up! I'm the one who has the say, they're my sheep!" So I'd make a deal, and I could figure an average about how much a head one lamb would be, so I'd let him have that much credit. And then in the fall they'd bring that many lambs in to pay. 

Evelyn: You know, when we were going through the stuff that we had left from the trading post the other day, we roughly figured, and in thirty years we lost $6,000. That's unbelievable that we didn't lose more than that. 

Snick: In bad accounts. 

Cole: Wow. That's amazing, actually. What about Hopi? Did men or women equally do the trading? 

Evelyn: Yeah, the man brought what he made in and sold it. The women would... (

Jack: 

Evelyn:... bring pottery.) The men made the kachinas. And once in a great while we'd buy some Hopi weaving, and you know the men make all of that in the kivas--not rugs, but the Hopi robes, wedding robes, and the sashes that the kachinas wear, and that sort of thing. 

Snick: See, the Navajos learned to weave from the Hopis. 

Cole: I didn't know that. 

Jack: The Hopis had sort of a.... I guess it was wild cotton. 

Evelyn: They grew it. 

Jack: They grew it themselves, and they made those robes. 

Evelyn: They wove with cotton where the Navajos wove with wool. But the Navajos had sheep for the wool. 

Steiger: I have a question. On the weaving, did people weave before the white man came? 

Snick: Uh-huh, the Hopis. 

Evelyn: The Hopis did. The Spaniards brought the wool to the Navajos, but they learned to weave from the Hopis. 

Snick: See, the Pueblo ancestry wove at Mesa Verde, with cotton. See the lineage there is a lot deeper than Navajo lineage. The Navajos learned all of their crafts from other tribes. See, they learned baskets-- not all Navajos make baskets, but the Navajo medicine baskets they learned to do from the Paiutes on the <San Juan River> up in <Monument Valley> and Navajo Mountain area. And they learned to make pottery from the Hopis, they learned to weave from the Hopis. 

Jack: They learned to weave from the Spaniard wool.... 

Evelyn: Well, the Spaniards furnished the first wool, but the Hopis taught 'em to weave. But the beyeta rugs, of which there are very few--there's one at Hubbell's--were the Spanish cloaks that they unraveled and wove into a rug. And they're either dark blue or dark red. Had you heard of the beyeta before? 

Cole: I've read about it. 

Evelyn: Well, there's one at the museum at Hubbell's. It's the only one I ever saw. It's a dark blue one. 

Steiger: And that's a Spanish influence? 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. 

Snick: The beyeta was a Spanish cape, the soldiers cape. And they would unravel that and.... 

Jack: They were all handmade. 

Evelyn: Those cloaks were hand knitted, and they unraveled easily. And that was what they made the first rugs from. 



Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with the Lees in their home in <Holbrook Arizona>. It's August 18, 1998, and this is Tape 2.

Jack, I was going to actually ask you, as a little boy, if you remember the sheep reduction, John Collier's sheep reduction. 

Jack: Oh, yeah, I remember that. 

Cole: And if you could describe that for us. 

Jack: He just come out there and he just shot 'em. 

Evelyn: Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 

Jack: And then the government, to offset the furor of the people--they were up in arms, they were ready to go to war--they would say, "Buy my goat skin." The government told the traders, "Buy those goat skins, give 'em a dime apiece, and we'll pay for it." 

Evelyn: Or sheep skins. 

Jack: Or sheep skins. A dime apiece. The Navajos today, if you mention John Collier, they're up in arms, even today. 

Evelyn: It was a terrible thing. 

Jack: It was a terrible thing. 

Snick: What brought it about? 

Jack: Overgrazing, I think, to start with. 

Evelyn: Yeah, I think it was overgrazing, and they did the same thing in my country, down in <Arkansas>. We had no stock laws, and they killed the cows and everything else. 

Steiger: At the same time? 

Evelyn: At the same time, during Roosevelt's administration. 

Cole: So it was sort of a Depression-era policy almost. 

Evelyn: During the big Depression. 

Jack: And then there was a lot of crooked (chuckles) damned traders--there's always crooks in a bunch--they'd take those damned things and count 'em twice and get twenty cents apiece, instead of ten! We'd have sometimes two of those.... At that time a ton truck was a big truck, and they'd have flat beds on 'em, and sides. And then sometimes it'd be two or three of those things stacked--we'd bale 'em--with sheep hides and goat hides. And John Collier and his group would come out there and if this guy had 250 head of sheep and a permit for 50, right then and there, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing, they were all dead. Right there in front of the people! 

Evelyn: It was a terrible thing. 

Jack: It was terrible! "What are we gonna do with the meat?!" "I don't give a damn what you do with it, let it rot!" 

Evelyn: But the Navajos are bad for overgrazing, and aerial pictures of the Navajos surrounding the Hopi Reservation, you can't imagine the difference. The Hopi Reservation is green, and they strictly have no overgrazing. And it's nothing but sand and sagebrush on the Navajo. The last winter that we bought lambs for our own use--we'd always put ten in our freezer--we got it from the Navajos, and we couldn't eat it, 'cause it tasted like sage. That's all they had to eat. 

Jack: Sagebrush. That's all the danged lambs would eat, was the sagebrush. You couldn't eat it, we had to throw most of it away. 

Evelyn: (aside about microphone) 

Snick: That overgraze situation--jumpin' up fifty years--that was one of the reasons the Navajos moved onto the Hopi land, 'cause they had overgrazed theirs so bad. And the government did nothing to stop it, until it was such a problem that the Hopis took the Navajos to court. 

Evelyn: This is after John Collier. 

Snick: Right. Like history repeating itself. 

Cole: That would have been like the forties when the Navajo started moving onto the Hopi.... 

Evelyn: Yeah, or before that, too. 

Jack: You know, really, this is off the record, but I have been, most of my life, very belligerent towards the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and I still am. They ought to do away with that completely. 

Evelyn: Jack, let's not do that on the tape. 

Cole: If you don't mind, what kind of problems have they created? Do you mind talking about that? 

Jack: They haven't created anything but a bunch of damned crap! They're out here for the money. (

Evelyn: They try.) 

Jack:The Bureau of Indian Affairs seem like they're out here for the money and that's it. 

Evelyn: They try. 

Jack: They try, but they don't know [how] to help. Like the old saying is, to get the head of the bureau in and [fair?] as they find where a bunch of kids made the snowman and it's half-way melted, and they took it and made the head the bureau, what was left. 

Snick: I think they were genuine in wanting to help the Indians. 

Evelyn: Oh, they were, they were. 

Snick: But it's like I think in modern days, like the Department of Education--they're setting a standard for all kids in the United States out of Washington. They hired specialists in the field and set up programs for the Navajos, who most of these folks in Washington knew nothing about. 

Jack: Never seen a Navajo. 

Snick: And it looked good on paper and in theory, but they were unworkable. I mean, they classified all Indians as "Indians," not different tribes and so forth, and just assumed the Navajos were farmers and just jump right on these programs, and they just threw money at the programs, and that eased the guilt conscience in Washington a great deal, and it really did nothing but take away the self-determination of the people in these programs _________ abandoned. 

Evelyn: (aside about microphone) 

Snick: But I think my opinion is that probably BIA is the biggest detriment the Indians had. 

Evelyn: That's going to be cut out of the tape, too, can't it? 

Snick: Well, it doesn't make any difference. 

Evelyn: (chuckles) No. 

Snick: I think everybody's realizing that now. 

Steiger: Yeah, I don't think that's news to anybody. 

Cole: No. 

Jack: But when you sit on the reservation as long as we did, and watch the deterioration of a tribe of Indians, I don't know what word you would use, but they depended on the Bureau of Indian Affairs. They sit there. "Do you think I ought to go to the bathroom?" "Well, yeah, go on." "Okay, I'll go to the bathroom." That's the attitude that the Bureau of Indian Affairs gives to the Indians. 

Evelyn: Well, it was paternalistic. 

Jack: Yeah. 

Steiger: When did that start? 

Jack: Hell, I don't know. 

Evelyn: I don't know when the Bureau of Indian Affairs started. 

Snick: (same time as Jack) __________________ early 1900s. 

Jack: They started when we first started, because I had to get a danged Bureau of Indian Affairs license to operate. 

Evelyn: He said in the early.... 

Snick: Late 1800s. It wasn't called the Bureau of Indian Affairs then. I think it was under an Indian Agent. 

Cole: Uh-huh, Department of Interior. 

Snick: I may be incorrect, but I think one of the Babbitt in-laws was the first Indian agent. 

Evelyn: Yeah, later became Senator Ashurst. 

Cole: Could have been. Yeah, I think they did have Indian agents throughout the area. 

Snick: As things go in Washington, it grew into this big bureaucracy. 

Evelyn: You know, that agent business went way back, because John D. Lee was Indian agent for the Paiutes in <Utah>. 

Jack: That was way back in the 1840s. 

Evelyn: Eighteen thirties. 

Snick: But the tribes that didn't allow themselves to totally succumb to that, did better. And the smaller tribes, like the Hopi and some of the Pima and other smaller tribes that didn't bite that carrot, didn't take the whole carrot, they did better. So their whole cultural structure wasn't undermined. 

Cole: Was there an Indian agent at Keams while you were there? 

Evelyn: For the Hopi, yeah. 

Cole: Do you remember who? 

Jack: (inaudible, several talking at once) 

Evelyn: There were several superintendents. The first one, when we went there, was James Crawford. And then there were probably eight in our years there. 

Cole: And what kind of changes did you see during your years at <Keams Canyon>, in trading? 

Jack: Well, you take a person that's on dole, eventually they resent it. 

Evelyn: Well, they deteriorate. 

Jack: They deteriorate. And that's what the Bureau of Indian Affairs put them in a class as they were under a dole system, for the government to come in and give you so much, give you so much, give you so much. 

Snick: Well, the change, though, that I think changed from a total barter system, early on, and just the people bein' self-sufficient with their sheep or their rugs or whatever, with a total barter system--to a total welfare-based trade system. 

Jack: That's what it ended up being. 

Snick: In my lifetime, at the store, in thirty years it went from a total barter system to a total welfare system. 

Jack: And they just sat there, and like I always said, here comes the BIA with their trucks loaded with free goods, and the Navajos wouldn't even get up and go out and get it. "Well, if you want me to have it, bring it in." And they'd not get up. 

Evelyn: But I'm gonna give the government credit where credit's due. They had some programs that were great, and one of 'em was when that WIC Program--Women, Infants, Children--I never saw children look better, saw 'em progress as much as they did, when they were getting that nutrition. And the lambs got very big and fat, because the Indians can't tolerate fresh milk. 

Jack: So they fed it to the lambs. 

Evelyn: So they gave that to the lambs. 

Jack: And the traders sure did like that, because instead of a fifty-pound average lamb, we got some seventy-pound average lambs! (laughs) 

Evelyn: You know, I've never known an Indian that can tolerate milk. It gives 'em instant diarrhea. 

Cole: I didn't know that. 

Jack: That was my thoughts with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. I wasn't very fond of 'em. 

Evelyn: But they did some good things. 

Jack: They done some good things, but they done a lot of bad things too. The overall picture was bad. 

Evelyn: The BIA health system was the first doctors, and they surely needed them--other than Dr. Salisbury [phonetic spelling] at <Ganado>. 

Snick: It's hard to imagine that there was this huge body of people that had no health care. 

Steiger: Who was Dr. Salisbury at <Ganado>? 

Evelyn: Well, he started the Ganado Mission and that big hospital. He had clinics: had one at <Salina Springs>, various places. And that was their first health care, before BIA had hospitals. 

Snick: He was funded through the Presbyterian churches. 

Jack: He was a doctor missionary. 

Evelyn: And he was in <China> first, and then came to the <Navajo Reservation> and spent his life there. 

Jack: And he always told us old heathens, "When you want to get some people to join your church and listen to you, feed 'em first, and get 'em full." 

Evelyn: Doctor 'em first, and then feed 'em. 

Jack: Doctor 'em, get 'em well, and feed 'em good. Then they'll listen to some religion. (laughter) 

Cole: Were there a lot of other missionaries out on the reservation? 

Evelyn: In later years. 

Jack: In later years, lots of 'em. 

Evelyn: Did lots of harm, too. 

Steiger: What kind of harm did they do? 

Jack: Got 'em all so confused.... 

Evelyn: Got 'em confused about their religion, and forty-eleven other religions. 

Jack: You can only absorb maybe one or two. And then when you got 500 of 'em crammed down your throat, it gets kinda crazy. 

Snick: It caused intra-family and intra-clan turmoil, because they might get two or three members of the clan to join a religion, and then the family would feel like they needed to put them out, and it caused a lot of intra-family fighting. 

Evelyn: But the Hopis didn't go for missionaries. And you know Catholic missionaries still are taboo on Hopi, because of the ruins out there where the Catholics killed the Indians and the Indians killed the priests. 

Cole: This is from the Spanish time period? 

Evelyn: From the Spanish. 

Steiger: <Awatovi>. 

Evelyn: <Awatovi> and Kowyaki. Have you been to <Awatovi>? 

?: Uh-huh. 

Evelyn: You have to get a permit to go out there now, don't you? 

Steiger: Maybe we did. I should shut up. 

Evelyn: No, go ahead! 

Steiger: Well, okay, and then I'll shut up. We've heard a lot of talk about that relocation, but you guys are the first ones that ever said that it was grazing. And this is the first time I've ever heard that the Hopis were taking care of their land and that the Navajos weren't. 

Evelyn: Well, if you go up in an airplane and look.... 

Snick: Let me tell about Bob DeMent. We have a friend in <Colorado> that's a very [well-]known, international range management expert. He did projects in <Russia> and <Africa>--all over the world since World War II. He was hired by the Joint Use Commission to study the feasibility of the partition land. He was just totally amazed at the lack of vegetation and the native plants that had been so overgrazed that they ceased to exist on Navajo. And right across on the.... This is after they partitioned. On the Hopi side, where they rotate their graze, it was like being in a different country. I don't know why people don't think, never mention that, because when all of this came about, that was just common sense. That's why the Navajos kept movin', so they'd have better graze for their animals. 

Steiger: Well, this is the twenty-fourth interview we've done, and this is the first time we've heard a word about any of that. I guess it's 'cause most of those people weren't involved in the joint areas. 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. 

Snick: And another thing that really brought about a lot of violence, was the rustling. And that brought about the Hopis hiring extra police. The Navajos were just rustling to a big amount, in the Hard Rocks north of <Second Mesa>. And that brought about a real problem with law enforcement. It just finally had gotten to where the Hopi tribal chairman, Abbott Sekquaptewa [phonetic spelling] asked BIA, and asked and asked and asked for them to honor the Hopi Reservation boundary, and make the Navajos move back. (Jack inaudible, both talking at once) You know, about the ancestry of the Navajos being in that Hard Rock area, that's baloney. 

Steiger: You mean the Navajo ancestors weren't there? 

Snick: No. 

Cole: About what time was that, that they had all the cattle rustling and stuff? 

Snick: That was in the late fifties and all through the sixties, up until the seventies when this went to the Supreme Court. 

Cole: How did this escalation of violence affect the store? Did you see.... 

Evelyn: No. It had nothing to do with us. 

Jack: We just were involved.... We heard it every day. 

Evelyn: Both sides. 

Jack: The Navajos would come in and be at you about, "Well, they trespassed us and [they're] gonna hafta pay a fine. And they trespassed us over here, and they trespassed us over [there]." And you heard about that every day in the trading post. That's the reason we were involved in it, because we heard it every day. And we knew that Old John Joe over here was married to one of the Hopis and they had half-breed Hopi and Navajo families. 

Evelyn: Fighting. 

Jack: And they was fightin' against each other. 

Snick: You have really complex issues. But, see, it was perpetuated by the government, with their inability to act. It could have been stopped early-on, but it was just their inability to enforce the law. 

Cole: What would have been the best way to stop.... 

Snick: I think if it had been any other ethnic group, in a boundary situation like that, they would have brought out federal marshals and enforced the reservation boundaries. I mean, that's their own sovereign land. The Navajos are sovereign, the Hopis are sovereign. Had that been Hispanics or blacks or anybody else, I'm sure the federal government would have enforced the law. But in that issue, at that particular time, the Navajos' impact in Washington was very great. You know, they're a huge tribe and they had great lobbyists. I think the Senate Committee on Insular Affairs was very intimidated and they didn't enforce the law, they didn't see that it was enforced. And so it turned into a multi-million-dollar fiasco for the taxpayer, and it's still not resolved. 

Evelyn: You know, I think the reason you haven't heard any of this before is because you haven't interviewed anybody that was on the Hopi and Navajo both. Yeah. 

Steiger: I think so. 

Jack: We were about the only ones that was involved, because we.... 

Snick: And once again, Washington tried to throw ________. 

Jack: ___________, you might say. 

Snick: It's just like, "hell-oh!" 

Cole: What about your social life at <Keams Canyon>? 

Evelyn: We had none. 

Jack: We had none. 

Evelyn: We entertained ourselves. 

Snick: Do you mean as far as, like, town things? Movies and stuff like that? 

Cole: I'm thinking like what you did, as far as to entertain yourselves. 

Evelyn: Stayed at home and listened to music and read. 

Jack: And we sight-seed a lot. We would put the kids and picnic lunches, and we'd go over here, and we'd go over [there], and find out new roads and things. 

Evelyn: There was no rapport between us and BIA. 

Jack: No, none. 

Evelyn: Don't get me wrong--we had some BIA friends, but we didn't attend their social affairs. 

Snick: We spent a lot of time at Hopi things. 

Evelyn: Oh, yeah. 

Jack: Lots of 'em. 

Evelyn: We were very involved in the Hopi culture and their society. 

Cole: What are some of your favorite memories of those events? 

Evelyn: The Hopi Wahpaha. That's when they gather the corn, when the corn's fresh. A Hopi man will hold up something and say "wahpaha," and then the women fight to take whatever it is away from him. 

Snick: It's like fifty, sixty, seventy people. All these families. They roast the corn, and everybody brings.... It's kind of like a Hopi potluck, but the high point is that all the men will bring these trinkets or little knick-knack stuff. And after everybody eats, then you get one out of your bag and start yellin', "wahpaha!" and just runnin' through the crowd. And the women just grab ahold of ya', tryin' to get whatever piece of jewelry or whatever you have. 

Cole: Would either of you do that? 

Snick: Oh, yeah! 

Evelyn: Oh, of course, and we took boxes of stuff from the store. 

Jack: The kids would have the biggest time, and we'd take boxes of toilet paper. 

Snick: It could be anything--simply a box of Cracker Jacks or something expensive, a blouse, or whatever you wanted to take. 

Evelyn: And once in a while a Hopi man would get a piece of beautiful pottery and wahpaha it and he'd say, "For bahanas [phonetic spelling] only!" That's "white man." 

Snick: So only white ladies could chase him. 

Evelyn: So only white ladies could chase. 

Jack: She took a piece of pottery away from this great big old guy. He's still a good friend. He's dead now. ______________. I thought to myself, "How can he hold that big old piece of pottery up there just like an eggshell and not break it?" She was just a- grabbin' for it and wrastlin' him and havin' the biggest time. They were just a-screamin' and hollerin'! He finally gave it to her, you know, and let her take it. 

Evelyn: We fully participated in Hopi society. 

Cole: Was there any particular mesa that you went to? 

Evelyn: We were nearer to <First Mesa>, but we were very close to quite a few people at <Hotevilla>. And that was a difficult mesa, you know. That had the "traditionals," they called 'em. But we had lots of friends out there, and we went to <Hotevilla> a lot. 

Cole: Did you know the Kaboties at all, Fred Kabotie, the artist? 

Evelyn: We knew him, but barely. When we first went to Keams, Fred had just started being an artist. And we didn't have the money to buy his paintings--to our sorrow. But we knew him slightly. We were better acquainted on First Mesa. 

Cole: What about other artists that you might remember from Hopi? 

Evelyn: On Hopi? Ray Naha. We had lots of his paintings. We bought his when he was a young boy. 

Jack: All these are.... 

Evelyn: No, they're all over the house, the Naha paintings. 

Snick: You know, then, they weren't recognized as artists, and so you didn't look at 'em in the eyes like that. It was a survival for them and survival for the trader. I mean, you dealt with hundreds of potters that are now known as famous artists. Back then they made all the pottery they could make, and you bought all that you could buy so that you both could make a living. 

Evelyn: We used to sell Nampayo pottery for forty cents a bowl, and Frog Woman too. 

Jack: Yeah, a dealer would come in and I'd say, "I've got a thousand pieces of pottery in here, and I'll let you have 'em for twenty cents apiece, or fifteen cents apiece, if you'll take 'em all." He’d wrangle around for half a day or so and say, "Well, maybe I could give you eight cents," or somethin' like that. (chuckles) I'd sell maybe 4,000 or 5,000 pieces at eight cents. 

Evelyn: Never less than twenty cents. 

Snick: It wasn't until up in the, oh, seventies that there started to be outside recognition that these people were really artists, and then they started developing real good names and reputations around the country and could command more money. But in the fifties and sixties, it was survival. These carvers and potters didn't know they had an art form--they just knew they could do something to make some money to buy some groceries. 

Evelyn: This is my favorite Naha painting, the small one. That's a koshare, a Tewa, clown. And he danced up a storm and had to get the hell out of there, he's comin' out of the picture. 

Steiger: [Maybe I ought to get a shot of the painting.] And what was that called again? 

Evelyn: That's a Tewa koshare. Don't ask me how to spell it. It's the equivalent of the Hopi mudhead clown. 

Jack: The Valley National Bank, when it was such a hot shot in <Phoenix>, offered us $5,000 for that, and I wouldn't take it. 

Snick: I'm gonna follow you guys back to Flag and see how many times you shake your head while you're goin' up the road! (laughter) 

Evelyn: I hope they tape what they say when they leave here. What else do you want to know? 

Cole: (laughs) Do you remember who some of the wholesalers were that came and bought those pots? 

Snick: In the stuff that they're givin' ya' there's a bunch of business cards of dealers that they sold to. 

Cole: Okay, great. 

Jack: There was one big dealer in <Oak Creek Canyon> we sold dolls to. 

Evelyn: Don Hoel. 

Jack: Yeah. 

Snick: Well, and for several years, supplied that interior decorator in <New York City>. 

Evelyn: Yeah, Notah Brahms decorating firm. 

Snick: And we had a hell of a time packin' that pottery. 

Jack: I had to build boxes with lumber, and pack 'em and pad 'em. Gollee, she done a big deal. 

Evelyn: For a few years we supplied Disneyland, but they bought the small, cheaper pieces of pottery. Oh, we had pottery and kachina doll customers from all over the country. 

Snick: But that was a commodity, and we never--and the Hopis didn't either. I mean, they didn't look on it as, "Well, this is just a wonderful art form bowl here." It was just like, "This is a sack of groceries." 

Cole: While you were at the trading post, did you see that change, then? 

Jack: Yeah, well, we would take dolls and stuff at Little Mouse, that you took to the ceremonial one time, and they didn't give it back to you. 

Evelyn: Oh, God! 

Jack: Things like that.... 

Evelyn: We exhibited at the Gallup Ceremonial. 

Snick: Just like rug stores, like Burnham or.... We spent a lot of time encouraging the carvers. The better job they could do, the more money we could pay 'em, and the better we did at the store. The trader's role was to market their product. They sure as hell couldn't go out and save up twenty kachinas and go market them. 

Evelyn: A lot of the carvers would come because I had the ethnological report with drawings of the kachinas, and they would come to look when they wanted to make a different kachina. But the Hopis are very subject to Bell's palsy--you know, when the eye draws and the face draws, if you don't get medical help quick. And whenever a Hopi carver had that, he never carved another doll. They blamed carving kachinas. They blamed the Bell's palsy on carving kachinas. 

Snick: This one Hopi, Sandy Coochayama, made snake dancer kachinas, and he got it. He never made another doll. To this day he hasn't. It wasn't an easy transition for the Hopi men to go from making the kachinas to give to the children as an educational tool of their culture--it wasn't easy for them to make that transition to just do 'em commercially. It was a turmoil with 'em. 

Evelyn: Oh, inward turmoil. 

Snick: They realized they could make good money carvin' 'em, but it was a real situation with 'em. And it's just been the younger generation since, oh, the eighties, probably late seventies, that it's very easy for them to do it strictly commercially. 

Steiger: Why was it a turmoil for the older ones? 

Snick: They say the kachinas--there's three forms of the kachina. There's the mystical kachina spirit; and then the kachina doll, the carving, which was done to educate the children of the religion and what the kachina did, the role it played in the overall Hopi well-being; and then the kachina dancer, which is the man that takes on that form and does the prayer ceremonies in the plaza. So it's an integral part of their religion. 

Jack: They still have their ceremonies, like the goin' home dance, ________________. 

Snick: And when they became collectible.... 

Jack: ... goin' back to the <San Francisco Peaks>. 

Snick: When the American public wanted to start collecting 'em, early-on there were a few Hopis that would venture out, and oftentimes it was very secret. They'd bring 'em in wrapped up. They didn't want the other Hopi.... 

Evelyn: I know it. They'd want to go in our house for Jack to buy 'em. 

Snick: They didn't want the other Hopis to see that they were selling these things. 

Evelyn: Or they'd say, "Now, don't set this up on the shelf." 

Jack: That one kid, he was real bad about that. He didn't want anybody of the public, until I sold it off the reservation, to see it, because it conflicted his religion. 

Evelyn: (aside about microphone) 

Snick: You know, visiting with Hopis that I grew up with, now, I can look back--and they can too--and there's a better understanding of the unravelling of the Hopi culture, because of this commercialism. See, when they really started carvin' the dolls to sell, strictly for that purpose, it took them completely away from the kachina world that they were born into, which was the basis for their survival. And it just caused the generations to completely pull away from that belief. It's meaningless now, except for dollars. 

Cole: Would that have been the same for any of their other arts and crafts, like their baskets, their jewelry? 

Snick: No. You see, the pottery and the baskets were utilitarian. As they became better at it, then the potteries became collectible. But it had no religious significance. But the kachinas did, it was an integral part of their holding the people together, through prayer and that basic existence. And I think that had a great deal to do with the unravelling of the young Hopis not believing. 

Steiger: Because by the religion, they're not supposed to be selling it. 

Snick: That's right. It's supposed to be carved to be given to the children. 

Jack: I was gonna say ____________. 

Snick: And see, it wasn't the anatomy and the exact proportions. We see these kachinas that are done nowadays--the early kachinas were just a form--but it was the clan markings and the symbols that identified that particular god, that played a very important role in whether they had a corn crop or had rain, or whether the plants did well. 

Evelyn: There's a ritual of kachina dances for every phase of their life. And it's a prayer, you know. 

Jack: I think roads and the public had a lot to do with it, because of the public comin' in to see the kachina dances. Then they would want to go down, and they'd see some place sellin' 'em. "Well, I'd like to have this. I saw this ceremony out here last weekend. I would like to have a doll to remember that with." So that's the way it worked up. 

Evelyn: Yeah, gradually. 

Jack: Gradually. Was from the public. 

Snick: Well, then, human nature. When these carvers were exposed to more outside society and the kachina ceremonies had more and more visitors, then there was a time period in there that they tried to do better kachina dances, and have better costumes, and do it bigger, because more whites were observing it. And that, too, pulled away from the basic thing, the prayers. 

Jack: And the idea that this little gal, she'd say, "I live in <New York City>, and I'd like to have a doll from one of those ceremonies that I just got through seein'." Well, some kid would come along and say, "Gollee, maybe she'll give me ten dollars and I'll make one and sell it to her, and she could remember it." And that way it just worked up and up and up, to where you looked on the bottom of it and said, "Who made this one?" before you bought it! (chuckles) 

Snick: I've often told people in galleries--and I make my living selling this stuff--but instead of the kachina being an art form and being in a gallery-- Gallery Ten or whatever--it probably should be in a religious store where they sold religious things. ‘Cause it is a branch of their religion. 

Jack: It all is. 

Evelyn: It's all the foundation of their religion. 

Jack: Now it has to be John Joe's name on the bottom of it. "That's the one I want, because I saw him dancin' one time." 

Evelyn: Or, "He's a famous one." 

Cole: What about Navajo arts and crafts? Did you get a lot of rugs at <Keams Canyon>? 

Jack: <Keams Canyon> area was the sorriest on the whole <Navajo Reservation> of weavers. 

Evelyn: We bought rugs. 

Jack: We bought rugs, lots of rugs. But Dinnebito and in that area, was where the good rugs come from. And old Bruce got all those good customers over at New Lands. 

Evelyn: He's great at developing his rugs. 

Jack: He's the world's best at developing beautiful rugs. And he got all of that experience at Dinnebito. 

Snick: For the story where the weaving is excellent, it had to be anchored early on by a trader that committed his whole life to developing that weaving. So that's why not all stores were good rug stores. 

Steiger: Which ones are the really good ones? 

Snick: Well, you know, Hubbell had a great influence. 

Jack: Well, that was that Ganado red. 

Snick: Well, but he had nine stores, so his influence in different areas carried over to newer traders, because he set the foundation and encouraged those weavers. They just developed into better weavers. 

Evelyn: And Troy Washburn developed two or three different rugs at stores he had. 

Snick: But the trader had to take what ability he saw in that area and go with it. And if there weren't weavers in a particular area, maybe they developed baskets. You know, they worked with what the folks were doin'. 

Evelyn: Bill Lippincott developed the Wide Ruins rugs and the vegetable dyes. 

Cole: Did you know them at all, Bill and Sally? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. Didn't know 'em at all. 

Jack: I barely did, when I was a kid. 

Evelyn: Well, you were a grown man when Bill.... That was after World War II. 

Jack: Yeah. But I used to go by <Wide Ruins> when I was haulin' hay out from <St. Johns> and <Springerville> up to on the reservation when I was a kid. I'd go by <Wide Ruins> and get me a lunch out of the store. 

Evelyn: That was before Lippincotts started. 

Jack: Yeah, that was before they came. 

Cole: Well, what about Navajo ceremonies? Were you invited to those or participate in those also? 

Jack: Oh, yeah. The only ones that we never could squeeze into was the mountain chants. Most of your younger medicine men couldn't learn the songs and the prayers of the mountain chant. And it was so expensive that most of your ordinary Navajo people couldn't afford the mountain chant. 

Evelyn: They'd stop when.... They'd gone through the series to the fire dance, and by that time the sheep were all gone, they'd eaten 'em all. We've seen all the ceremonies up to the fire dance, and we've seen the fire dance. 

Steiger: Well, when you say "expensive," you mean they had to pay.... 

Evelyn: They had to feed the crowd. 

Jack: They had to feed the crowd and pay the medicine men. 

Snick: See, Navajo healing ceremonies, there's a succession of 'em. It starts with the squaw dance, isn't that right? 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. Yeah, it does. 

Jack: It starts with your four-day singin' at night, and then the squaw dance, and then the yé’ii bicheii, and then the fire dance, and then to the mountain chant, and that's it. By that time, you're broke. 

Snick: Oftentimes, even for a fire dance, you'd have eight or nine medicine men. And they're just like positions in the outside world. 

Evelyn: Boy, they are! 

Snick: I'm tellin' ya', they don't do that for free, and it can really bankrupt a Navajo family to have those real high-power healing ceremonies. 

Jack: I've seen Navajo people that have butchered at least twenty-five to thirty head of sheep for one ceremony. Well, that takes your herd down fast, when you butcher that many. And all the flour and stuff they gotta buy to feed the people. They feed everybody that comes there--plus payin' the medicine man. 

Snick: Plus they would have to go out and buy the baskets, because not all Navajos made medicine baskets. So they might need whatever the medicine man told 'em to get. 

Jack: Maybe seven or eight, ten baskets. At that time, those baskets even way back there was all the way from $15 to $35 apiece. Now, they're $100, $200, and $300 apiece. 

Cole: Were you ever asked to contribute from the store? 

Jack: Oh yeah, I've done lots of it. Then come the damned yé’iis in for yé’ii bicheiis, with their sacks. Some of 'em you'd have to run off. "Money, I want money." But you give 'em flour and stuff to feed the people. They'd sometimes have a pickup-load of damned flour that the traders gave 'em to feed the people. 

Evelyn: We contributed all the time. 

Jack: They'd come all dressed up in their masks and stuff. 

Snick: Well, the families, the grandmas would come in, and it would be a real problem. And they would ask, and they were your customers. So you'd just.... It was a lot of charity. 

Evelyn: Oh, yeah. 

Jack: More charity than you was makin'. 

Evelyn: Lots of donations. 

Cole: And were the traders technically restricted from participating in ceremonies, do you know? 

Snick: What do you mean by participating? 

Cole: As far as with your trading licenses. Were there any restrictions on what kinds of involvement you could have? 

Several: No. 

Jack: You'd better not drink or anything like that. The Bureau of Indian Affairs issued those licenses. 

Evelyn: There weren't many restrictions on our license. 

Cole: And you've had licenses then.... How did your licenses work? 

Snick: You had to be licensed by the Navajo Tribe. 

Evelyn: And by the Hopi. 

Snick: And by BIA. 

Cole: When you first went out there, though, was it still both tribes, or just the BIA? 

Evelyn: Well, when we first went out there, Hopi was under Navajo, and their agency was at Window Rock, along with the Navajo Agency. And our license came from the Navajo.... Well, there wasn't any tribal council then. Our license came from BIA. 

Jack: Wherever the agency was. 

Cole: Did you ever have any problems getting licenses? 

Evelyn: No. 

Jack: You were allowed five acres to operate on your license. 

Evelyn: But then shortly after that, well, the Hopis pulled away from the Navajo and they got their own agency at Keams. And so we had to get our license there from the Hopi. 

Cole: And how often would you have to get a license? 

Jack: Once a year. 

Cole: Did you ever get longer licenses later? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. 

Jack: Hopi issued them once a year. I had a bunch of 'em. What did we do with them? 

Evelyn: Oh, we're not gonna dig those out. 

Cole: Because I've heard that in more recent times it's more difficult to get a license. 

Evelyn: Oh, yes. 

Jack: You've got a lease. You could go to the bureau and if you could finagle around and use a little bit of under-the-table money, you could get a ten-year or a twenty-year lease. But then the tribe--now on Navajo, the tribal council has to have a meeting and agree on it. 

Evelyn: It takes an act of Congress! 

Snick: There's two separate things here. 

Cole: Right, that's what I realize. 

Snick: First you have to obtain a lease to build that store, from the tribe. And it also has to be approved by BIA. And then you apply for the trader's license from the tribe and BIA. They're separate. And the problem in modern times nowadays is getting a lease from the Navajo Tribe. 

Jack: They just won't hardly lease you anything anymore. The McGee brothers finally got one, and it took 'em about eight or ten years, but they finally got a twenty-five-year lease. 

Evelyn: At Piñon. 

Jack: At Piñon. 

Snick: But because of gettin' their hands burned with the Thriftway Corporation--you know, they just were handing out leases to Thriftway like popcorn, and found out that Peter MacDonald was gettin' $10,000 in cash per lease--then Window Rock just completely tightened it down, and it hasn't (

Jack: Opened up yet.). It's still just very difficult, even for a Navajo, to get a lease. 

Cole: Did you get caught up in that? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. 

Jack: Our first lease when we first started there was ten-year. I think it was a ten-year lease. 

Evelyn: We weren't caught up in that because we leased from the Hopi. __________ Hopi. 

Jack: See, the place that we leased was an individually owned piece of land from the Hopi. And we leased from them directly. 

Snick: Plus the Navajo tribal business statutes and Hopi tribal business statutes are totally different. The Hopis drew up their law codes--business, criminal, all of it--to correspond with the state that they're in, so that there wouldn't be any conflict of (

Jack: Law and order.). If there was a law broken on Hopi, it would correspond to the law in <Arizona>. Navajo drew up their law code and it makes no sense. 

Cole: Well, on the Hopi Reservation then, would you pay taxes and stuff? 

Evelyn: Oh, yes. 

Jack: Oh, yeah, I was locked up every year. 

Evelyn: No, he doesn't mean that, Jack. There was a levy. We had to pay 3 percent on gross to the Hopi Tribe. 

Cole: Did you have to charge any kind of state tax? 

Evelyn: No. 

Snick: Well, the state tried several times, and they went and took it to court to try to force businesses on the Indian reservation to collect sales tax for them. And the Supreme Court has thrown it out every time. 

Evelyn: In this stuff we're giving you are some letters about the state trying to impose a sales tax on the reservations. 

Snick: Which is in violation of the United States Constitution. And the same thing they were tryin' to do with the casinos. They want to get a revenue off the Indian casinos, which is on sovereign land. It's not any different than when they were tryin' to get it off the trader. 

Evelyn: There's a lot of that stuff in that box. 

Cole: Great. 

Jack: The Navajo County treasurer locked me up every.... He wanted to charge me personal property tax. 

Evelyn: No, tax on the buildings out there. 

Jack: On leased land, and it was Indian land, see. And for a long while I paid under protest. Then he'd send the county sheriff out to lock me up the first of every February. (laughs) He'd come out with his lock and put it on there, and then we'd go fishin'. 

Steiger: You and the sheriff?! 

Jack: (laughs) Yeah. 

Evelyn: They never actually locked us up. 

Jack: No, he'd just come out and he'd say, "I brought the lock to put on your door." And then he said, "How's Wheatfield? Is it catchin' any fish?" And I'd say, "Yeah, let's go." We'd go fishin', and he'd be up there all day fishin' with me. He'd come down, "I guess I'd better go on back to <Holbrook>." (laughs) 

Snick: State governments have always tried--<New Mexico> and <Arizona>--have always tried to, by any means, collect taxes off the Indian revenues, or whatever was generated on the reservation. And they haven't succeeded yet. 

Evelyn: But you know there's a reason for that. There's so many reservations in <Arizona> and <New Mexico> that they're short of taxes all the time. I can understand the state trying to get some revenue for all the land that's tied up on the reservations. 

Snick: Well, and they're mandated by law to furnish highways. And the Indian people do enjoy a lot of things provided by the state, but don't contribute anything in taxes. 

Evelyn: Except sales tax in town. 

Snick: Uh-huh. 

Jack: But you see, reservation Indians can go into the county and get their car license. You know, we pay a terrific tax on that. And they get it for nuthin', they don't have to pay for those. Just the tag is eight bucks. 

Snick: It's twenty-five dollars now. 

Jack: Yeah, whatever it is. And if I went in with the same model car, it'd cost me $260. 

Cole: You'd mentioned there was another trading post at <Keams Canyon>. 

Jack: McGee Trading Post. 

Cole: And who operated that? 

Jack: The McGee brothers. Bill McGee and Cliff McGee, and this Clarence Wheeler--he was an in-law. You've interviewed him, I think, already. (

Cole: Yeah.) He lives in <Farmington>. But he was just an in- law and he was a clerk, he wasn't any owner or anything... 

Snick: Have you interviewed any of the--Cliff McGee or.... 

Cole: We're actually tryin' to track him down to interview him. 

Snick: He lives in Mesa. 

Cole: Yeah, I called his store in town here, and they said they were gonna.... They wouldn't give me his number in <Tempe>, but they were gonna have him call me.... 

Evelyn: It's too bad that you can't talk to Bill McGee. He's the older brother who first owned Keams Canyon Store. 

Snick: He lives in <Scottsdale>. 

Evelyn: He knows a lot about Sunrise Trading Post, 'cause he worked there for years. 

Jack: He and I worked at Sunrise for a good many months. 

Cole: That's Stella's.... 

Evelyn: Well, he only has daughters, and I don't know 'em. 

Cole: Isn't that Stella Tanner's brother? 

Evelyn: Yeah, they're brothers to Stella Tanner. 

Cole: Yeah, 'cause we interviewed Stella, and she had mentioned Bill down in Mesa. 

Evelyn: Did you interview her for the trading post over by <Chaco Canyon>? 

Cole: Well, yeah, she was over there, and then she was with her sons--you know, J. B.--quite a bit, and sort of followed him around. 

Jack: Well, she took care of Buddy and ____________. 

Evelyn: She's a fine lady, really fine lady. But those Tanner kids were reared at the farthermost trading post that's known out of <Farmington>, very near <Chaco Canyon>. And Stella taught 'em at home. They speak beautiful, beautiful Navajo, because that's what they came up with. 

Jack: Buddy Tanner and I was clerkin' at Keams Canyon together one time, and we just had a good time. (laughs) 

Snick: That's J. B. 

Cole: What was Buddy like? 

Jack: Oh, he's a hell of a guy. 

Evelyn: Lots of fun. 

Jack: One day he's a millionaire, the next day he owes five million. He can't make a lick for __________. 

Evelyn: He's a very good trader, but he's like Jack. He had such rapport with the Navajos that if they said they're hungry, Jack instantly believed 'em, and so they'd butt in, laid it out for free. We had a constant battle at our house over everything he gave away. 

Snick: You know, you can learn to talk Navajo too well. 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. 

Jack: Really, Buddy and me, we knew too damned much Navajo. 

Snick: Well, when the grandmas come in with a plight, you feel their pain. I mean, you're there. And these old traders would just hand it out to 'em. 

Evelyn: Oh, we've had many a fight at our house over that. I was tryin' to make a livin', and he was givin' it away. 

Cole: Did you have a nickname, Sammie? 

Evelyn: Unt-uh. I don't know what the Navajos called me--probably "son of a bitch." 

Jack: No, she was "sweet potato." 

Snick: Oh, the younger generation of traders, a really good trader that has his same problem with the Navajo grandmas, is Bruce Burnham. 

Evelyn: Yeah, he does. 

Snick: I mean, he is just there in their pain and suffering. 

Jack: Well, you feel for 'em, you're close with 'em, and it hurts you. 

Evelyn: And wasn't Bruce reared at Burnham? 

Snick: I think so. You interviewed Bruce, didn't you? 

Cole: Yeah. 



Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with the Lee family in <Holbrook Arizona>. It's August 18, 1998, and this is Tape 3.

We were just talking about the role of the trader in Navajo burials. Maybe you could tell us a little bit about that, Jack, and maybe some of the humorous stories. 

Jack: Like she said, he sat and got drunk down there in <California> and sat in front of the train and got cut in half. So I got him back up to Keams, and he was at the hospital there at Keams. I went over to put some jewelry--the family had brought some jewelry to put in his casket--and they said, "Just go in there and help yourself." I lifted up on that darned thing, and (whoop!) the casket just went up in the air. I thought, "Well, what in the hell?!" 'Cause he wasn't a little guy, he was about average size--I figured maybe a hundred pounds at least, dead weight. And that damned casket went up light. So I got down in there and I opened the lid, and he had a brace right across here, a steel brace, right under his chin. I moved that down, and that's all that was there, just his chin. And the rest of him was gone, cut off, and they didn't put it in the casket. So they braced it and put that stuff all in there. I thought, "Well, that ought to do, be all right, if we don't have any difficulty." So I had a string of beads and a silver belt, and I laid it down under that partition thing right across here, and I put the lid back on the casket. The next day I had the hospital bring it over to the cemetery right across the road. I got this preacher down from the mission and I told him, "Now, we're gonna have some trouble here, 'cause this guy's brothers are mean, and they’re drunkards. So let's hurry this up. Get it buried fast." "Okay, okay." We got over there and got everything, and he was doin' his preachin', and here come two of the boys, and they were drunker than hell. I could tell they were drunk. They had a pair of new pants and some boots. And I said, "Uh-oh!" to myself. They're gonna dress him and they're gonna find out that there's not all of him there, and then hell is gonna be to pay. So I nudged this preacher with my elbow. I said, "Cut it off! cut it off! Say your prayer and let's get the hell out of here and bury that guy!" "Blah, blah, blah," he just kept a-goin'--he had a chance to preach, you know. And I poked him again, just, "Damn! hurry it up! We're gonna have some trouble here, 'cause there's only half of him in the casket." I'd already explained to him, and he just kept on a-goin', just like "the Lord will take care." They started down in that damned casket, so I just popped that damned missionary, knocked him down in the casket and got down in there and threw him out and said, "Get on home! Get the hell out of here!" They were gonna open that casket and re-dress that brother of theirs. So I just put the lid back on and I said, "Boys, fill it up!" And I cussed that darned preacher for a week. He woulda got us killed! (laughter) 

Snick: I've got a funny story about the competition at Keams. It has to do with a death. I don't remember the family's name, but a Navajo man, by tradition, they believed that everything goes on the spirit trail, so they'll kill his horse, and they mark up the saddle. They'll mark it up with an axe, chop it, so that it releases the spirit of that saddle, and the horse's spirit is released, and it can all go with him. 

Jack: ____________. 

Evelyn: All goes on the ______. All in the grave. 

Snick: The men that were supposed to be doin' the horse and the saddle, they killed the horse. At Keams, it was in a canyon, and this was up on top of the canyon rim. They must have got scared of the witches or whatever, but they didn't mark the saddle. My buddies and I, we knew the general location where they did this. 

Evelyn: Tell him who your buddies were. 

Snick: The Hopi kids. 

Evelyn: No! The superintendent's.... 

Snick: Oh, yeah, it was the superintendent of the BIA agency was one of 'em, and then two Hopi guys. So we had to go see where they killed this horse. Hell, the saddle was just layin' there, and it was a brand new saddle. So we thought, "Well, hell, they didn't chop it up," and we were schemin'. We came up with the idea of pawnin' it to Cliff McGee. His ethics were that he would take pawn from a kid, knowing that it was probably stolen. He'd just give you a little bit, and then it would go dead and he'd have a brand new saddle. So we got the two Hopi kids to take that saddle down there and pawn it. And sure enough, he took it in pawn, knowing that two kids don't have a new saddle. Well, word got out that the saddle got pawned. And see, the Navajos are very superstitious of the dead. Well, in two or three weeks, hell, he didn't have any customers--nobody would go in the store 'cause that ch’©©dii saddle was in pawn. When he finally figured it out, he had to get a high-powered medicine man to go in the store and bless it. Didn't he have a big feed? (

Evelyn: Yeah.) 

Snick: and got all the Navajos to come in, and the medicine man to do a blessing ceremony to all the customers. (laughter).... 

Evelyn: (aside about lunch) 

Jack: And then another time at Two Grey Hills I was there alone, and at that time they were building that irrigation ditch from down the river, on the <San Juan River> down to <Shiprock>, and they went through an old ruin. They quarantined the whole valley 'cause it had spinal meningitis germs started. I was goin' to school over there, and workin' at Two Grey Hills. This gal died at Two Grey Hills, and the BIA doctor at <Shiprock>. I called him and I said, "Doc, what am I gonna do? That woman died from that disease in the spine." She was bent over like that. The muscles, I guess, tie up on 'em, I don't know. But she was an awful-lookin' thing. I said, "Doc, I think she has that damned disease that was quarantined." He said, "Oh, my God, I don't know what to do. It's so contagious! I'll tell you what, get some cotton gloves"--we got some. I had some of those old brown gloves. And I got a pair of those. He said, "You go out there. Put something over your face, a towel or something over your face, and don't breath much. Don't get any closer than you have to, but you go ahead and bury her. And then when you get back to the store, get that damned wash tub out...." That's what we bathed in, and old galvanized tub. He said, "Fill that about half full of water. You got any Lysol?" I said, "Yeah, I got a bottle of Lysol, quart size." He said, "Pour half of that in." I guess it was only about maybe three or four gallons of water in that damned tub. I poured that whole works in there.... 

Snick: It'd eat your damned skin! 

Jack: Stirred it around, stirred it around. And he said, "Now, get in there, take all your clothes off and get in that tub and take a wash rag and just soak yourself with that water, all over--your head and everything, face." In about five minutes I decided I would rather die! I was burnin' like hell, that old Lysol was eatin' me up! (laughter) Ooo! I was burnin'! Finally I got out, I dried myself off and the phone rang again--one of those old crankin' phones. It was the doctor. He said, "Did you get it all done? Did you get all that Lysol?" I said, "You son of a bitch! you wanna kill me?!" And he just died laughin'. He said, "You're burnin', aren't you?" I said, "You're goddamned right I'm a-burnin'!" And he said, "Well, maybe it'll kill those germs, I hope." But I never did catch it, so I guess it did. Ooo, man! I was scared. 

Snick: In the seventies, before I left the reservation for a while, I was puttin' a new water line in at their store and house in Keams, and I guess you guys had put one in, in the late forties when you first went there. (

Jack: Yeah.) Well anyway, I had a contractor come out with a backhoe, and we're followin' the old line and just kind of diggin' it. We were just goin' in a straight line, and all of a sudden the damned water line started makin' a big curve. I thought, "Well, what in the hell did they do that for?!" I went in the store and asked Jay and he said, "Oh, the Navajo guys that were diggin' that trench for the first water line hit some bones. And you know, they're really superstitious, so they just turned." Made a big damned turn to go around it and then come back to the point where [they could] continue the water line on. Just really superstitious people. 

Evelyn: Tell 'em about playin' marbles with Matso down in the wash. 

Jack: Yeah, I'll tell 'em after while. (aside about lunch) 

Cole: How long were you at Two Grey Hills? 

Jack: I wasn't there very long, about a year. What happened was that I had a birthday (chuckles) and I had a whole.... That was the most isolated place. Old Man Westover, his son owned the place, and I was out there helping him, the old man. And they didn't talk. They were some funny old couple. And I was just by myself, just isolated out there. But this was on a Sunday, and I was in the rug room, and I had a bunch of old--oh, I must have had a hundred small Two Grey Hill rugs. They were all beautiful little devils. I was sortin' the rugs and stackin' 'em here and stackin' 'em [there]. I thought, "Damn, what am I doin' this for?! It's my birthday!" So I just left the rugs layin' there and I went in and told the old man, "I'm takin' the pickup and I'm goin' to <Shiprock>. It's my birthday, I'm goin' in and look around." So I went into <Shiprock>, and up the river there my uncle lived. His boy was about my age, so I thought, "Well, hell, I'm in <Shiprock>, I'll just go up and see him." Loyd Wheeler was standin' around there, and I said, "Well, let's go to <Farmington> and see some girls." We got in that old pickup and we got up there and picked out a couple of girls. One of 'em was the daughter of the county sheriff, a cute little gal. We got in that damned pickup and we were cruisin' around and we decided we'd take the shortcut to <Durango> up by <La Plata>. We got up there and got snowbound and burned the clutch out of that old pickup. The next morning the snowplow come along and they pulled me into <Durango>. The county sheriff was waitin' for us up there at <Farmington>. He had the cuffs out, he was gonna lock me up for takin' that minor girl across state lines. That damned little ol' girl, she said, "Well, he didn't take me across the line, I drove that pickup across the line myself!" "How come?!" Because Loyd and me was back there in the back, passed out drunk. She was just lyin' to beat the.... They didn't lock me up.

When I got back to Two Grey Hills, Vic was out there from Gallup. He was a salesman for Gallup Mercantile Jewelry. He was out there and they'd got ahold of him-- the old man did--and he fired my ass. And on top of that, we bought potatoes. See, they had that damned ditch comin' from that big spring at <Toadlena>, and there was a ditch right down by the store. The Indians raised potatoes up there. They raised potatoes all the time in those days. I had a pickupload of potatoes, so ol' Vic said, "Well, on your way to Gallup, I wish you'd do me a favor." And I should have said, "Stick it up your butt!" 'cause he fired me. I said, "Okay." He said, "I'll pick the pickup up in there in a day or two, but take this load of potatoes in before they spoil." So I hauled in a load of potatoes into the Merc, 'cause he sold 'em to them. When I was unloadin', the president of the Mercantile, a good friend of mine, I talked to him, 'cause he kinda liked me, the boss man. And he said, "Vic told me you got fired." And I said, "Yeah, I messed up. I was celebratin' my birthday and got caught." He said, "You want a job?" "Damn yeah!" 'cause I didn't have no money, was broke. So he gave me a damned job. I worked at the Merc as a swamper, keepin' the place stocked up and cleaned up and stuff. Vic came in and he was gonna fire me from the Merc. The old boss man was out, "Unt-uh, I hired him. And if anybody gets fired, you're gonna get fired, 'cause he didn't do anything bad. He's just a kid." (laughs) And Vic shut his mouth. 

Cole: What store was the Merc? At <Gallup>? 

Jack: Yeah, Gallup Mercantile. 

Cole: And so Vic worked for them? 

Jack: Yeah. And he bought Two Grey Hills and his daddy and mother was runnin' it and I was clerkin' for him at Two Grey Hills. But I was doin' trading 'cause I had to buy the rugs and do all the trading, 'cause the old man was damned near dead, he was so old.

But I was gonna tell you, when you mentioned <Toadlena>, _________ about that ditch at that time. It was about this wide, and I guess maybe had a foot of water in it. But it come clear from up at <Toadlena>, that big spring up there, clear down by Two Grey Hills, and then went into a wash. And they irrigated those damned potatoes down there in that wash at Two Grey Hills in those days. Of course that was in the way early thirties. 

Cole: Did they grow anything but potatoes? 

Jack: That's all. Well, they grew vegetables and stuff like onions and stuff. But the Navajos didn't care too much about vegetables. They liked onions and corn and that was about all.

(aside about refreshments)

But that was my extent of Two Grey Hills, but I did work out there for prit near a year. I got familiar with the designs and the quality of their rugs, and I buried a bunch of people. (chuckles) Got into trouble with the Lysol. (laughs) I'll never do that again! But he told me, that damned ol' BIA doctor in <Shiprock> told me. And it looks like he would have had enough sense to have said, "Don't go overboard," but I probably would have anyway, because I was so scared, 'cause hell, that kills ya' in a little bit, that spinal meningitis or whatever. And you know they finally found that ruin was at least a thousand years old. And you know those germs are still alive. They excavated that damned thing, and boom! people all over the country had it. Isolated the whole area. I guess the death was quick. 

Steiger: So this meningitis started out from a ruin, a bunch of people had died of it? 

Jack: Evidently in this ruin, the germ was in the ruin, and they excavated. They were building that ditch, and they cut right down through the middle of it with their machines, building this irrigation ditch across the <San Juan River> from <Kirtland> down to <Shiprock>. They were gonna make a farm area for the Navajos out of <Shiprock> there. They were building that ditch, and they'd been through that, and just bing, bing, bing, they started gettin' spinal meningitis. The doctor said that's what it was, and it's so contagious that they just closed the whole works down-- schools and all. That gal, how she caught it or not, I don't know how she was over in that area. She must have went up to <Shiprock> for something and got the bug and she died right quick, and I buried her. But that Lysol must have killed those germs, 'cause I put it all over me, just strong. 

Cole: Where did you go after the Merc.? Where was your next job after you left the Merc.? How long were you there? 

Jack: Oh, I can't remember now. I was kinda on my own, and I can't remember what store I went to, whether I went to Sunrise or <Crownpoint> or someplace--I can't remember. Sunrise, I believe, with Bill McGee and Old Man Clarence Wheeler. 

Evelyn: (aside about lunch) (tape turned off and on) [voice samples for benefit of transcriptionist] 

Cole: Jack was telling a little bit about when you were at Pine Springs and what you learned about the jewelry business there. 

Jack: Oh, yeah, the cast jewelry. At that time they used slugs instead of Mexican dollars--they used silver slugs, squares. The Navajos out there had--what do you call it, that thing that you pressed to mash that silver? (

Snick: Draw plate.) 

Jack: Instead of hammerin' it. I had a contract with Gallup Mercantile for silver belts for women, that was connected with like a chain, at $7.25 each. I got those guys a-goin', and this boy and his daddy was a whiz at silversmithing. And I ran around with him. Business was terrible--I didn't have maybe a customer a week. I'd just help 'em make silver. (laughs) They taught me to cast silver and everything. He and his daddy became real prominent in cast jewelry, there for a long, good many years. We made big money at $7.25 a belt. Made twelve belts a month. (chuckles) 

Cole: When you worked in Gallup, that would have been in the 1930s you were there? 

Jack: Yeah, in the late thirties I was on the railroad. I worked out of <Gallup> on the railroad, and then I transferred to Third District in <Winslow>, from the First District. And then I went into the service, and they kept my seniority up. All servicemen that had worked for the Santa Fe, they held the seniority for 'em and built it up. When I got out of the service, I was an engineer. I went in as a fireman. When I got out of the service, I'd been in the service long enough to be eligible for engineer. So I hurried up and took the engineer examination and became an engineer, and I only had maybe a year experience as a fireman! (chuckles) And I became an engineer in a hurry. And then we worked like the dickens after the war was over, gettin' our people all back to where they come from on these troop trains. And then everything died and we was out of a job. 

Evelyn: When he married me, I told him I wasn't livin' in <Winslow>. We went back to the reservation. 

Jack: So I said, "Well, the only thing I know anything about is workin' on the reservation." So I went to <Ganado>, and my nephew was runnin' <Ganado>--Hugh-- and he hired me out there. He was my tutor for GI schooling, and I got salary plus schooling, and I taught him how to trade. He didn't know nothin' about trading, but he was my boss, he was my teacher. We got an extra $105 a month for goin' to school.

Then we transferred from <Ganado> to <Keams Canyon>. 

Snick: You'll enjoy interviewing Hugh, if you get the chance. 

Cole: I was going to ask you, Sammie, what it was like for somebody that had grown up in <Arkansas>, when you first went to <Keams Canyon>, what was your reaction? 

Evelyn: You know what, I couldn't afford a reaction. We were tryin' to make a living. We had three boys. He has two sons, and then Snick. We had to pioneer our store. 

Jack: It was from nothin' to nothing. 

Evelyn: In the first year there, at the end of the year, after living out of the store, our part of it was $98. 

Jack: For a year. But we did have a house on our head and somethin' to eat. 

Evelyn: Yeah, we had two rooms. 

Cole: What was your fare, as far as food? 

Evelyn: Oh, we had no refrigeration, and we couldn't keep meat. No freezers. We'd go into Gallup and buy a lot of stuff in a hurry and eat it. And then we ate Vienna sausage or Spam or something out of a can. And we had mutton, 'cause you can lay lamb and mutton out, it won't spoil. It'll keep for weeks in a cool dry place. So we ate a lot of that. 

Jack: And then it got to where we built that place up so good that I was handlin' all the way from eight to ten mutton a week, myself, and a beef a week. 

Evelyn: But that was after we had refrigeration. I also had no appliances, 'cause we had DC current. You could hardly find washing machines and things like that, that ran on DC current, so I had to scrub clothes on a washboard. 

Jack: It was scratch. 

Evelyn: It was a hard life for me, and totally different from what I was accustomed to. 

Cole: What about water? Did the area have any kind of well or anything like that? 

Evelyn: The government had running water, and we had a cold water tap in the house. We got it from BIA. 

Jack: The reason they let us have water was that the ECW, Bureau of Conservation, had put a water pipe from their main line, over right behind our store, in a water trough for the Indian cattle that came in. So we were right there, so they let us tap into that pipe. We had one faucet, cold water. 

Evelyn: We had no bathroom. We had a two-holer up on the hill. The second son, Jackie--he lives in <Winslow>--he went to school one day and got a dumb look on his face, and the teacher said, "Jackie, what's wrong?" "Miss Marken," he said, "can I have the key to the outside toilet? I need to take it to my mother. But that's all right, she can use the pot." (laughter) 

Jack: Molly Marken [phonetic spelling] come right over and told her about it. She just died. She said Jackie just embarrassed me to death. "Oh, that's all right, she can use the pot." 

Cole: Was Snick born at <Keams Canyon>? 

Evelyn: He was born at <Ganado>. He was eighteen months old when we went to Keam. He was delivered by Dr. Salisbury. 

Cole: What date and year was that? 

Snick: Forty-seven [1947]. When did they open the hospital at Keams? 

Evelyn: It was open when we went there, but we weren't allowed to go there. It was for Indians only, except in emergency. 

Cole: Where would you go to the doctor, then? 

Evelyn: Usually in <Gallup>, sometimes <Flagstaff>. 

Snick: And dirt roads. 

Evelyn: And no bridges. And if there'd been a rain, you waited for the washes to run down. 

Jack: We stayed all night at <Indian Wells>, Bitahochee, and that guy was just as rude as he could be, and I don't even know what his name was. 

Evelyn: He gave you a bed, Jack. 

Jack: Yeah, he gave us a bed. We got out of the water, but he was sure a rude person--didn't act like he was doin' anybody a favor. 

Snick: The first paved road was completed out there in, what, 1964? 

Evelyn: Uh-huh. It was a hundred miles of dirt road to Gallup. 

Cole: So how long would a trip to <Gallup> take then? 

Evelyn: Well, we usually had to stay overnight, 'cause we had to shop for everybody in the community. Rare occasions when I went and we were going to shop, all the Hopis had something they needed that we didn't have in the store, so I spent my day shopping for them. And then he had so many relatives on the way back, see, everybody, all of his relatives had trading posts, so we'd come out as far as St. Michael's and stay with his brother there and then go home the next day. We always took blankets and food and water, because we never knew when the hills were gonna be slick, and we couldn't make it home. 

Jack: But we weren't the only ones. We all had a gang, and every damn, we knew which hill we couldn't make when it was wet. We'd all congregate there and build us a camp. 

Snick: Everybody would help everybody. 

Jack: Everybody would help. We'd take turns, and everybody helped get up over the hill. Then we'd come back and get another car and get it over the hill. Then we'd come back and get another one. 

Cole: Would you push 'em up? 

Jack: Yeah, and dig and push and push. We'd have cables in the darned car, and we'd get them up on a dry spot and hang onto 'em, and then we'd jerk 'em and pull. 

Snick: The Indians just had hell, 'cause they just had wagons. So it was tough for them. 

Jack: Buddy Tanner's dad, Chunky, come out there when we first got out at Keams. He came out with a truckload of potatoes, and half of 'em was frozen. We had to go out between Keams and <Ganado> and get him out of a mudhole and get him into Keams before the potatoes froze. We had potatoes for a while! But he was a good old guy, ol' Chunky was. 

Snick: A lot of the customers would come in and stay all night, 'cause it was so far, comin' by wagon on dirt roads. 

Jack: Oh, yeah, we had a community hogan that we kept groceries and everything in it for 'em to stay overnight. The Indians come in, and for groceries we had a big ol' box with coffee and potatoes and sugar and salt and a can or two of tomatoes. We left that in that hogan, and they'd go in and fix 'em somethin' to eat and stay overnight and do their trading the next day and then go on about their business. Every trading post in that day and time had overnight lodging for the Indians, their customers. 

Snick: Babbitts' was a wholesale company that sold to the trading posts, and they were like an automobile franchise with Studebaker wagons. And then we would order the wagons from them, and the Navajos would save up, and when their wagon came in, I remember them coming in and you'd put the new wagon together. 

Jack: The whole community would. All the Indians around would all help put up the wagon. They could put a danged new wagon together in two hours. 

Snick: They'd bring their best team in. 

Jack: Yeah, a fancy team, and they'd drag that new wagon.... 

Snick: _______ bring it home. 

Cole: What would happen to their older wagon? 

Snick: Didn't they trade 'em in sometimes? 

Evelyn: I don't know. 

Snick: There was a trader--Bruce Burnham told me about him--that bought the old wagons and re-did 'em. 

Jack: Well, the ones that I handled, they were new ones, and I didn't take any trade-ins. 

Snick: No. 

Jack: But they'd deal for two or three months, and they'd finally make a deal. They'd come in with all their clean fancy duds on, and a big celebration with that new wagon. That's like buyin' a new car! (chuckles) Worked together, get that darned thing-- they were green and red. 

Cole: So they actually were responsible for putting it together then? 

Jack: Oh, yeah, they'd put 'em together. They knew how. They wanted to, they liked to do that. Even to this day, a lot of those families will buy a brand new car or pickup, and they'll take it home and lay out a great big tarp and they'll tear it out, piece by piece, and put it back together. Then they know what's wrong if something goes haywire, and where it comes from. 

Snick: When did you guys get AC electricity? 

Evelyn: In the late sixties. 

Jack: In the late sixties when they built that new powerhouse there. 

Snick: And you had converters 'til then and a propane refrigerator, too? 

Evelyn: Oh, yeah. 

Jack: We had a Hopi man that worked for the BIA, and we had a big ol' double-doored gas refrigerator. It'd sometimes quit, and we'd get him over there, and he'd get about eight men--it weighed a ton--and haul it up in the back yard and turn it upside down, leave it there three days, and then come bring it out. "Now it'll work, Mrs. Lee." I found out way, way years later the reason they have heat under those damned things is to get that gas hot. When it raised up and then it freezes when it comes back through those coils. And he figured that out, that old Hopi man, and he turned it upside down and let that gas come up, and then he'd turn it back up straight, and that gas come back down and it'd work. He figured that out! "I can fix it. I'm a good mechanic. I'll make it work." Turned it upside down! .... 

Cole: What about as far as the life of the trader? We were talking over lunch about.... Was alcohol and gambling prevalent among traders? Evelyn and 

Jack: Not really. 

Jack: There were just some drunkards. 

Evelyn: I'll tell you where the gambling story started. We used to gather, go miles on Saturday night, and play poker. 

Jack: To different trading posts (

Evelyn: Penny ante.) with friends. And there was nothin' else to do. You either went and visited your neighbors and we'd play cards and fiddle around and go picnic the next day or something. And we'd play cards at night, penny ante. And everybody got to gamblin' a little. It was fun to play cards. We played penny ante and nobody lost anything. Then some of 'em got carried away and they [got into] big money. I think that's the way it started, because hell, you could go thirty, forty miles to a neighbor and it'd take you an hour-and-a-half to get there, so you visited them instead of goin' to town where it took you a week to go to town. And we'd just visit our neighbors and we'd picnic and play cards and shoot the bull. That's the only time you had any contact, other than the Indians. So we became friends with 'em, and some of 'em was good people and some of 'em was trashy. (chuckles) 

Cole: Who were some of the people that were close to you, that you'd visit once in a while? 

Evelyn: Well, they weren't necessarily close.... 

Cole: Not close, but.... 

Evelyn: We were close friends with Troy Washburn. 

Jack: They was thirty miles away. 

Evelyn: They were at <The Gap>. 

Jack: Yeah. 

Evelyn: Mrs. Washburn, his wife until she died, was from <Puerto Rico>--a most educated lady, and most interesting. I guess they were our main friends on the reservation. Of course there was always relatives. We couldn't go to <Gallup> because relatives would be mad if you didn't stop and visit all of 'em, you know--one trading post right after another.

(Snick leaves) 

Jack: But we entertained ourselves pretty much by visiting back and forth. Somebody would have a cookout, and we'd all go to have steaks, and things like that. Or we'd go to Na’ahóóhais that another trader would put on for the Indians, and spend a day or two with 'em. 

Evelyn: A Na’ahóóhai is a chicken pull they called it, but it was horse races and things like that. 

Jack: You know, the old chicken pull is kind of like polo, only they bury a chicken and have its head stickin' out. And they get on their race horses and they have teams, and then ride by that chicken and lean over and grab ahold of that chicken. And the one that could [pull?] it out of the ground, then the others would try to chase him and take it away from him. And then they had a point up here at the end where that was the goal. And if the guy that pulled it out of the ground got up to the goal with the chicken without somebody stealin' it away from him, [he] got a prize. It was just like a game. 

Cole: Was that Navajos? 

Jack: Navajos. And they call it Na’ahóóhai because the chicken's name is na’ahóóhai. And they bury that chicken, then they'd race. They had race horses and everything--barebackers, all bareback, no saddles or nothin'. My brother Lester, my oldest brother, hell, he'd promote those damned things, and he had horses of his own, race horses. And God darned, there'd be big money. Those Navajos could sure bet on their race horses. Fast little devils, too! The horses were just as fast as they could be. Lester would get up there and just gamble with 'em, and they'd laugh and holler, have the best time. We'd always have a big, big feast for 'em, the whole community. We may have 2,000 Indians there for a week at the Na’ahóóhai. 

Evelyn: What else do you have on your question list? 

Cole: Oh, I wanted to ask you if you were members of the United Indian Traders Association. 

Evelyn: Oh, yes, we were, but not active. 

Cole: When did you join, do you remember? 

Evelyn: We joined when we worked at <Keams Canyon>, in the forties--1948, 1949.

(Snick returns) 

Jack: We attended most of the meetings and sometimes we didn't. 

Evelyn: They weren't much interested in the traders on Hopi, so we mainly paid our dues and that was it. 

Cole: What were the annual meetings like? 

Jack: We just discussed regulations and.... 

Evelyn: They had business sessions, and then usually there was a banquet and a dance. 

Jack: Kind of a celebration. (Evelyn and Snick exchange a few words.) 

Jack: You ask the questions, and we'll see if we can answer 'em. 

Evelyn: Well, let's answer 'em one at a time. 

Jack: Okay, you do the talkin'. 

Evelyn: So he don't have to swing this thing [i.e., the microphone] back and forth. 

Cole: Oh, he can swing it. Like I say, we pay him real well. (laughter) 

Steiger: I'm makin' out like a bandit here. 

Evelyn: But how boring! 

Cole: Not boring at all! 

Steiger: Not at all! 

Cole: Do you remember any of the bigger issues the Traders' Association was involved with? 

Evelyn: Oh, usually what the Navajo Tribe was tryin' to do to the traders. 

Jack: We would get together, and we'd assign two or three people to meet with the Bureau of Indian Affairs for wool tactics and where they would.... The Bureau of Indian Affairs got so involved with everybody, that you had to go to a certain place to sell your wool, and they'd inspect it. 

Evelyn: Well, you could sell it where you wanted to. 

Jack: Yeah, but it was so involved that we finally would get representatives from the Traders' Association to go meet with 'em and try to straighten things out that they'd messed up with. 

Evelyn: A few times I think the traders on Navajo, things got so rough that they sent delegations to Washington. 

Jack: Over the pawn regulations and the tax regulations and stuff. The tribe got to where they was pinchin' you--every time you turned around they was pinchin' you for a little more. 

Evelyn: But we weren't involved in that--we weren't on Navajo. 

Cole: Did the pawn regulations, when those went into effect.... 

Evelyn: That put us out of the pawn business. 

Cole: Did that have much impact on your business? 

Evelyn: Not too much. 

Jack: No, because we were fairly honest with our pawn anyway to begin with. A lot of traders was real tough, and they'd just keep addin' on interest and addin' on when they'd come due, and add more and add more and add more. The first thing you know, they'd sell it without lettin' 'em know they were gonna sell it, and get into trouble. 

Evelyn: Most of our pawn were old pieces that they had in our vault for safe keeping, and it stayed there year after year. 

Jack: Some of that pawn we had for, oh, I'll say from eight to fifteen years, and they never took it out. 

Evelyn: But they'd pay it and leave it there. 

Jack: Just leave it there. 

Cole: Would they ever borrow it for ceremonies? 

Evelyn: Oh, yes. 

Jack: Yeah, they'd borrow it and bring it back. We'd just let 'em use it, except if they brought it back, we'd just hang it back in the vault. 

Evelyn: Transient pawn is what you lose on. They're only after cash, and they just sell it to you. 

Jack: We had one customer there that I would have give my right leg for a piece of their jewelry, but it stayed there and she died and they buried it with her.

