STANLEY SYKES INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-20



[Tr.'s note: Narrator has English accent, recording done in echoey room (perhaps inside a telescope dome at Lowell Observatory), difficult to understand speakers.]



[BEGIN SIDE A] 



Babbitt: Now Stanley, you're part of the famous Sykes family. Your brother was known or connected with the Carnegie Foundation in <Tucson>. You've been with the Lowell Observatory here for a number of years, isn't that correct, Stanley? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: When did you come to <Flagstaff>? 



Sykes: 1896, horseback from <Kansas>. 



Babbitt: And your brother was with you at the time, wasn't he -Godfrey? 



Sykes: Yes, Godfrey and another boy who was along. 



Babbitt: When you came to <Flagstaff>, what would you do? Did you buy a cow outfit first? As I recall, you said something about that. 



Sykes: Well, the next spring, it was snowing when we got here. We talked it over (unclear) so went back to England to spend Christmas. Then I came out in the spring and looked at a good-sized (unclear). Nowadays I stay near (unclear). It agrees with me. I'll keep on staying here. 



Babbitt: What year was that you came here? 



Sykes: '86 I had [rum?] trouble, and I thought this might help it. I guess maybe it will. I'm going to give (unclear). 



Babbitt: And you bought this cow outfit out near Turkey Tanks to begin with? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: And then what did you do, Stanley? 



Sykes: Well, what cows didn't die, the rest I guess got stolen, so I went out of the cow business. 



Babbitt: Did you have trouble with the rustlers? 



Sykes: Oh, quite a lot, yes. 



Babbitt: Charlie Clark mentioned there may have been several men who seemed to help themselves to the other men's cattle. 



Sykes: Yeah, it was a common thing here. You pretty much had to, to keep enough beef so they'd have anything to eat. 



Babbitt: What would the rustlers do? Would they take these cattle and brand 'em and sell 'em and (unclear). 



Sykes: (unclear) a lot of 'em (unclear) schemes picking brands on a cow with your knife, so the owner would think they were branded, and then next year, when the cows shed, the brands would be gone. Then you could put a real brand on 'em to suit yourself. 



Babbitt: What would you do to pick a brand on a cow with a knife? I never heard of that. 



Sykes: Just pick the hair out, and it would look as though the thing was branded. Just in a hurry, they'd see the brand on there, but it wasn't burned. And then next spring, when they shed their hair, fresh hair came out, that disappeared. Then you've got a sleeper, and you could put the right brand on it (unclear). 



Babbitt: Would these rustlers put their own brand on 'em? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: With the knife? 



Sykes: No, they'd put the owner's brand on there. The calf was still running with the cow, so they put the owner's brand on it. But in the spring, when it didn't have any brand, then they'd put their own on it. There were a lot of schemes. I wasn't an expert (unclear). 



Babbitt: You were fresh from England. (laughs) 



Sykes: I didn't know anything, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Well, after these rustlers helped you out of the cattle business, what did you do? 



Sykes: Oh, went to work. (unclear) 



Babbitt: What do you remember about the early days of <Flagstaff> here? I suppose they were quite interesting. Didn't they have a band? Is that what you said, you played in the band? 



Sykes: Oh, yes, we had a band. It was a good band, too. We used to have kegs of beer, too, to help play. 



Babbitt: You told me one time about going up to a brewery. Was there a brewery in <Flagstaff> (unclear)? 



Sykes: Yes, up near Old Town Spring. Yes. 



Babbitt: Do you remember the name of the brewery? 



Sykes: No, I don't. 



Babbitt: Or the man who owned it? 



Sykes: There were three men owned it originally, and then Cornish -Doc Cornish's brother -took it over. It became then more or less a bottling works. We helped it. 



Babbitt: Can you name some of the men who were in the band with you? 



Sykes: Well, they were principally Joneses: Ott [phonetic] Jones, Dick Jones, Edgar Jones, Dutch Louie [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: Who was he, Dutch? 



Sykes: I wouldn't know. I forget what his other name was. 



Babbitt: Hochderffers were pretty (unclear). 



Sykes: (unclear) then they came in later. Then the band kind of split up. 



Babbitt: How many pieces were there, about, in the band, to begin with? 



Sykes: Oh, about eight or ten. 



Babbitt: And what did you do, play for festive occasions? 



Sykes: Played on the slightest provocation, whenever they let us. Whenever we had a celebration of any kind, every election we'd play. 



Babbitt: Would they pay you for playin'? 



Sykes: Oh, sure. We'd go out, and at election time you had to travel just from one saloon to the other. And they'd congregate, we'd all play a piece, Number 7 in the blue book, or something, and then he'd put up twenty dollars, and all take a drink, and move on to the next saloon. Sometimes we'd make it two or three times around, if we ran out of saloons. 



Babbitt: How many saloons were there in those days? 



Sykes: Oh, I don't know. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Must have been feeling pretty good after the second round. 



Sykes: Oh, yes! We could play pretty good then, except when somebody (unclear) standing up in front of us and sucking on a lemon. And when we saw them, that made everybody's mouth water. It kind of broke up the [tune?]. 



Babbitt: Sounds like you had a lot of fun in the early days. 



Sykes: Yup. (unclear) town. 



Babbitt: What was that story you were telling me one time about the Jones fellah who couldn't blow on his horn because he had it full of liquor? 



Sykes: Oh that was the one where we'd been up to the brewery, yes. And when we got back, he was playing the tuba, Ott Jones, and didn't work very good. We got to the hall where we had our meetings. He dug three bottles of beer out of the mouth of the tuba, that he'd put in there up at the brewery (unclear) plugged up. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Would you play for dances, too? 



Sykes: Yes. Oh, sure. 



Babbitt: What did they have? Was it square dancing? 



Sykes: Yes, square dancing, although just beginning to waltz and do various things, but mainly square dances. Had to have somebody call, you know. 



Babbitt: Did you have a hall? 



Sykes: Yes, we used to, oh, various places. (unclear) wood company hall (unclear). And then [Powells?] built a hall. 



Babbitt: What was this wood company hall? I've heard of that. 



Sykes: I don't know, it was here when I first came here. It was some connection with the sawmill there, as I understand it. 



Babbitt: Oh, that's where they got the Woods Company. 



Sykes: Yes. Then later, upstairs in Babbitts' place, where they had their show (unclear) or their theater. Used to have shows and vaudeville up there, up where the furniture department is now. 



Babbitt: Do you remember the names of any of the folks that used to be in the plays? 



Sykes: Oh, no. 



Babbitt: Were you in some of them yourself? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: Well, later on then, you went up and became associated with the Lowell Observatory? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: Was your brother there prior to your connection? 



Sykes: Yes, he was. I was here when Lowell first came here, and I wandered off somewhere -<Phoenix>, I guess -and then when I came back, my brother was building a house for Lowell, and we put up the first dome. 



Babbitt: Well, I've seen pictures of them moving in portions of this telescope. Did you assist in that operation? 



Sykes: Yes, there wasn't much of a load up there then. They used to have to get about six horses on there and drag the heavy pieces up. 



Babbitt: Is that the telescope that's now in this dome farthest east here? 



Sykes: Yes, twenty-four. 



Babbitt: Twenty-four inch, is it? 



Sykes: Yes. There was a smaller one there first, a sixteen-inch, I think, that belonged to Harvard, as I remember. And then Lowell had this one made. 



Babbitt: And this is a twenty-four inch? 



Sykes: Twenty-four inch. 



Babbitt: What did that weigh? 



Sykes: Oh, I don't know, (unclear) probably doesn't weigh over, with its mounting, 200 pounds or so. That'd be a lucky guess. There's one up there, the forty-two inch. That's a reflector. It weighs about 1,000 pounds, I remember. 



Babbitt: You were hauling the material up with mules, is that it, Stanley? 



Sykes: Yes. A man named Mayflower did the hauling. 



Babbitt: That's Carl Mayflower's daddy? 



Sykes: Yes. I'll have to be going. (recording turned off and on) 



Babbitt: When you were working on the observatory up there, do you remember anything particularly about Mr. Lowell? He was a big astronomer. Certainly he was quite a character personally, too, wasn't he? 



Sykes: Yes. Very brilliant man. Very quick in his taking up ideas. If you told him anything, he knew all about it (unclear) the answer about the time you got through telling him. 



Babbitt: He was a nice fellah personally, too? 



Sykes: Yes. Really a very brilliant man. 



Babbitt: About when was that, that you moved the telescope in -in the '90s? 



Sykes: I give up. I don't remember dates. 



Babbitt: You know, I heard something a while back about the Indians came to town here, going back into the history of <Flagstaff>. One man told me that some hundreds of Indians came into repossess their chief who had been placed in the jail here, to release him. Is there anything to that? 



Sykes: Yes, that was Old Bowetin. We had trouble down the river, been stealing cattle, I think. And we went down to arrest him. I was with the posse. 



Babbitt: Who do you mean by "we"? Was that the posse, or was it a National Guard outfit? 



Sykes: That was [Riggs?] and a sheriff's posse. And we went down there. The word got around that the Indians had surrounded this posse, and then they called out the National Guard to go down and relieve them. I came in with this Indian. We put him on the train at <Canyon Diablo>, and I came through with him. (unclear) they gathered up the National Guard, and they went down to rescue the posse. So I went down with them again that night. The posse didn't need rescuing, we met them going home. 



Babbitt: Who was the sheriff? 



Sykes: Let's see, Frank Childs [phonetic] I guess was the deputy then, but he was the one that was in charge of that. 



Babbitt: That's Frank Fairchilds? 



Sykes: Well.... 



Babbitt: Was John Francis the sheriff then? 



Sykes: I don't think so. 



Babbitt: Was this Bowetin a mean hombre, a tough nut? 



Sykes: Well, I think he was, yes. They had trouble with him afterwards out by Canyon Padre when he killed a man, and they killed an Indian. 



Babbitt: Did the Indians actually come into town here and more or less threaten the community? 



Sykes: No, it was all down there. They (unclear) when we put the man on the train at <Canyon Diablo>, the Indians were beginning to gather around there. About that time, the train pulled out. As we crossed the bridge -it was just the Navajo Bridge then, only one track -when we crossed that, quite a bunch of Indians gathered on this side of the canyon, but they didn't shoot into the train or anything. 



Babbitt: They were quite hostile about it? 



Sykes: Oh, yes, they disliked us taking him. But I think maybe he was just turned loose. It was afterwards he was mixed up with this killing. 



Babbitt: Were there any tough hombres around those days, or bad men, outside of rustlers? Were there any gunmen? 



Sykes: Oh, well, everybody packed a gun. Some were better shots than others, and some would use it more than others, but it wasn't a bad town. 



Babbitt: You mean you generally carried, what, a .45 was it? 



Sykes: Yeah, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Those are Colts, I suppose? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: It was accepted routine to carry a gun, wasn't it? 



Sykes: Oh, yes. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Sykes: Yes, it wasn't necessary to.... It was protection. You didn't know when you might need it. But I have had to use it on a horse, to save myself. Horse went down, and my foot was clear through the stirrup. If the horse had got up, he'd have got me. Wasn't much of a horse, and I got him (unclear). 



Babbitt: You never had to use it on a man, or never had a man use it on you, did you? 



Sykes: Oh, no, I'm a good shot (unclear). 



Babbitt: Do you remember the names of any of the old-timers around here, some you used to have good times [with], or work [with]? 



Sykes: Oh, not many of them. I don't remember names very well. Of course there was the Hashknife outfit -brought in several pretty tough men to kind of clean up things here. They were stealing the Hashknife cattle quite a lot. They brought in a pretty tough gang. I don't remember many of them. Jim Saunders was one. I think he was shot in <Winslow>, but not killed. Then the tough ones seemed to have gone up into <Utah>. Up in the southeast corner of <Utah> there's some country in there that's pretty tough. 



Babbitt: <Flagstaff> was always a pretty law-abiding little town? 



Sykes: Oh, yes. 



Babbitt: You met Mrs. Sykes here in <Flagstaff>, didn't you? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: Let's see, what was her name? 



Sykes: Beatrice. 



Babbitt: She was a Switzer? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: Billy Switzer's sister, right? 



Sykes: Yeah, they were here. They'd come here two years before I came. 



Babbitt: They came here in '84? 



Sykes: Yes. 



Babbitt: How'd you happen to come to <Flagstaff> from England? That's quite a long jump. 



Sykes: Well, it was getting too much settled in <Kansas>. They were putting up barbed wire fences, and there was a town started within about four miles of us, and we thought we'd get out.... (tape speeds up into oblivion) 



Babbitt: (sound quality different, no echo) If you don't get a good lens on these things, or one of those Ott lenses....





