Serena Supplee

July 11, 2009

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyo River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



STEIGER:  Okay, so I’m now recording.  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is Lew Steiger, and this is an interview with Serena Supplee [pronounced Soo-plee].  We’re in Serena’s home and studio in <Moab Utah>, and it’s July 11, 2009.  The transcript and recording of this interview will be archived at Cline Library, Special Collections, Northern Arizona University.  (overview of project not transcribed)

	Just for organizing and stuff, I sort of have a format that I follow with these.  I ask you to tell me just a little bit about yourself and your background, family circumstances and all that, kind of before you came to river running in general, just because that kind of puts your experiences in a little better perspective.  So if we could just kind of start with that, that would be good.

SUPPLEE:  I was born in <Waverly Iowa>, which I always thought was funny--I ended up on the river.  And then my father was in the Air Force, I was born on an Air Force base, and at that time they had a program where he could become an air traffic controller if he just went to a particular school for a year or something.  So my father became an air traffic controller, and we moved often.  I really didn’t ever....  In my childhood I lived different places for like a year or two, and then we moved, and then we moved, and then we moved, and then we moved.  By the time there were four kids, he really did believe in having a three-week-long family vacation every summer, which was awesome.  He did get lots of time off, which was really great as a kid.  We did a lot of family things.  Our whole family went camping.  He got into four-wheeling, and took us all four-wheeling.  We went to the <San Juan Mountains> in <Colorado> a lot.  And then we came to <Moab> a few times.  And the first time I came to <Moab> I fell in love with it, and I was probably eleven.  And then I got to come again when I was thirteen.  And then by the time I had my own car and all, I would come here in the summer.  I have an aunt and uncle that live here in <Moab>, and so it was super-comfortable and super-fun.  My uncle, Tom Reese, was a river guide in the seventies.  And so I was introduced to the river at that point.  When it came time for me to go to college, I kind of did a whole Southwest tour, because I knew I wanted to live in the Southwest, and I chose NAU, so I have a bachelor of fine arts from NAU.  As soon as I graduated, I moved to <Moab>.

STEIGER:  Tell me about your first river running experience.

SUPPLEE:  I remember my first time I went down <Westwater>, and a woman named Kathy Howe [phonetic], who lived in <Moab> at that time--she does rivers in <Montana> now.  She let me row, and I think I was thirteen, and I really, really liked it.  When I was going to school at NAU, I actually worked as a school bus driver, so I took the kids to school, I went to school, and then took the kids home.  But I really liked it, because I had nights off, holidays off, weekends off.  But I didn’t have summer work.  So I ended up coming up here and working as a river guide.

STEIGER:  In the summer?

SUPPLEE:  In the summer.  And I did dailies for Tagalong Tours.

STEIGER:  And what does that involve, doin’ all that?  How’s that work?

SUPPLEE:  Well, at the time, I was living with my aunt and uncle out in <Castle Valley>, and so I drove into town and then loaded the boats and drove back out to the river and went down the river, and back into down, then back to <Castle Valley>--every day.

STEIGER:  And the dailies are upstream of here?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  At the time when I was doin’ 'em, you actually rowed like twenty-six miles.  You rowed all the way to the bridge.  And at this point now, they have what they call the BLM takeout, and it’s only a thirteen-mile trip now, which is a lot easier than twenty-six.

STEIGER:  But you probably didn’t have trailers either--or did you?

SUPPLEE:  We had trailers.

STEIGER:  You did, so there was no riggin’ and de-riggin’.

SUPPLEE:  No.

STEIGER:  They’d already figured that out right away.  "No, no, we’re not gonna do this every day."

SUPPLEE:  No.  But we did have to take pumps, because some of the boats leaked.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  You guys were a lot smarter up here.  I did a couple of 'em, the one-days from the dam, down--you know, there at <Page>.

SUPPLEE:  Oh yeah, I did that trip.

STEIGER:  Oh, you ran a few of those?  Were you riggin’ and de-riggin’?

SUPPLEE:  No.  Wilderness wanted a tee shirt design, and so they took me on an overnighter, doing that trip.  And it was beautiful, Glenn Canyon’s beautiful.

STEIGER:  Took you down there just so you could paint something?

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.

STEIGER:  Very good.

SUPPLEE:  So how did you guys do the trip?

STEIGER:  When I did it, it was for Fort Lee Company.  Pat Conley was the manager, and they were runnin’ these.  If you go down there today, you see these motorized kind of five-tube little short snout boats.  Are they four-tube or five?

SUPPLEE:  I think they’re five.  I think you’re right.

STEIGER:  I can’t remember.  Yeah, maybe they are just four, I don’t know.  But a bunch of tubes, and had a little frame on it, and we had to take those things apart and put 'em together every day.  I mean, I only did it a couple of times, but in <Grand Canyon>, the whole mindset, nobody had any trailers.  You had to roll the rubber and stack the stuff up in the truck--every time, day after day.  People laugh about Karen Byerly, the statue of her is up there at <Marble Canyon>.  She broke in that way, she did a million of those.

	Now <Waverly Iowa>, is that like all flat or something?

SUPPLEE:  Pretty much.  It’s rolling hills.

STEIGER:  No rivers?

SUPPLEE:  No rivers.  Beautiful deciduous trees.

STEIGER:  How about if you just kind of chronologically run through your river running career, and what stands out for you and stuff like that?

SUPPLEE:  Okay.

STEIGER:  I don’t want to make you uptight.  I need to keep my mouth shut.  My theory is my job is to ask the shortest questions that require the longest possible answers, but I know you’ve been thinkin’ about this, and there’s probably things that you want to get into this thing.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I ended up working as a river guide for nine seasons, 1980 being the first one.  I graduated from NAU in ’81, and then I moved to <Moab> like it was gonna be my career, but I guess that’s kind of how it turned out anyway.  I worked for Tagalong for ’80, ’81, ’82, and then in ’83 I really wanted to be in high-water Cat.  And the new owner of Tagalong at that time, Bob Jones, did not want to send me.  And so I quit, and as other people did, I freelanced.

STEIGER:  Why didn’t he want to send you?

SUPPLEE:  I don’t know.  Maybe because I was a woman, but I don’t know if that was all it either.  I don’t know, I didn’t wait to find out.  I just moved on, because I knew they needed Cat boatmen.  And it was very exciting, running high-water Cat.

STEIGER:  Oh yeah.  And there was some really pretty high water then too, wasn’t there?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, there was.

STEIGER:  What did it peak out at in those years?

SUPPLEE:  Seems like I remember like 113.  Anyway, I was totally into it, totally.  And I swam a few times, but I never did flip, and I only went in the gut once.  But I had three really, really big guys in front, and two big women in back.  You know, we were talking about the people that are around 250 pounds now.  It’s like I had 'em on that trip.  And who knows, maybe that’s why I did go to the gut, but not that you have really any control when you’re in the big drops at that water level.  And at that time it never really occurred to us to go right of Niagara, which is kind of what they do in really high water now.  We just went down the tongue.  And then when it got really....

STEIGER:  You go right of Little Niagara?

SUPPLEE:  That’s what they do now.

STEIGER:  Oh my God.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  And then in the nineties when it got really, really big, and granted there was more insurance and liability things than there were in the eighties, what a lot of the commercial guides did then is they just sent the boats down, the park service picked up the boats, and they walked the people.  They called it "ghost boats," and that was really common in the nineties.

STEIGER:  The park just picked 'em up?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  In the eighties--and I’m not quite sure why they did it--but they had the ranger set up above Cataract at <Spanish Bottom>.  And then come the nineties, they had the ranger set up below the drops to pick everything up.  When I went down there last year, when it got up to 65,000, it was the same thing, they had the rangers down below pickin’ up the boats.  I actually got a ride from Western, down to Big Drop 1, got a backcountry permit, camped there for a few days, and then had Western pick me up again.  So I didn’t actually row a boat, but I was down there, I had fun helping all the people that were gonna scout, tie up their boats, and watching their hands shake, and watchin’ flips every day.  It was really fun, I had a blast.

STEIGER:  And people were flippin’ every day?

SUPPLEE:  People were flippin’ every day.  And I got some great wave drawings done.

STEIGER:  I guess we should say here, for anybody that doesn’t....  You’re known for your art work, and you’re known throughout the river community for your art work.

SUPPLEE:  I love painting the river.

STEIGER:  Are these watercolors?

SUPPLEE:  These are oil paintings, but I do mostly watercolors, because I do the watercolors on site, and the oil paintings at home.

STEIGER:  And so when you got the ride between 1 and 2, you were there to paint.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I brought my paints.

STEIGER:  And that’s some of the work that we looked at here this afternoon.

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.

STEIGER:  Striking stuff.  Now, when you were rowin’ in the eighties, were you motorin’ too?

SUPPLEE:  I did some motoring.  I got trained on it and everything, but actually I really liked rowing.

STEIGER:  What kind of boats were you rowing?

SUPPLEE:  When I worked for Tagalong, we had these eighteen-foot Salmons.  They were the really old, heavy material, military boats.  And then a lot of the companies went to Havasus, Campway Havasus.  So those were the boats I rowed, eighteen-foot rafts.  And then sometimes, like on <Desolation>s trips, I worked in <Desolation> off and on for a few years too, and we would just strap a little 7-horse motor on the back.  But I never worked as a motor boatman in <Cataract Canyon>, on the J-rigs, as they call them here, or the snout rigs.

STEIGER:  So you ran through Cataract at 100,000 plus.

SUPPLEE:  I did.

STEIGER:  In a little bitty Salmon or Havasu--not once, but....

SUPPLEE:  More than once.  I don’t know how many.  I did a bunch of trips.  I tried to go every week.

STEIGER:  And I guess in that day and time, that was possible?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, it was.

STEIGER:  Do you remember which year was the highest water?

SUPPLEE:  I think it really was ’83, although I couldn’t tell you for sure.  A lot of that just mushes together.

STEIGER:  Man, we had all that carnage in the <Grand Canyon>.

SUPPLEE:  But I did baggage boat for the Dories then, also, in those years.

STEIGER:  For Martin Litton?

SUPPLEE:  For Martin Litton.

STEIGER:  In the <Grand Canyon>?

SUPPLEE:  In the <Grand Canyon>, in ’85.  I ran <Grand Canyon> when....  I don’t think I ever did 50,000, but I did 30,000 several times, and 40,000.  One of my flips that I’ve had--I’ve had three flips all at <Lava Falls>--it was in <Lava Falls> at 40,000 and the second big wave comin’ off of the black rock I went over.

STEIGER:  Had you run left and then got over there into that?  Or were you guys....  You weren’t going down the right?

SUPPLEE:  I think we went down the right.

STEIGER:  Oh my God!

SUPPLEE:  We were traditional guys.

STEIGER:  Who were those guys?

SUPPLEE:  I’m trying to think who was on the trip.

SUPPLEE:  I know Bego was on the trip, and maybe Kenton, and maybe Brad.  I did trips with all those guys.  I did baggage boat for 'em, like maybe once a year in those years.  I would do that, and then I’d get on a private in the winter, which I did a lot of winter privates.  It was before <Crystal> changed.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Well, that was ’83.

SUPPLEE:  Was that in ’83, when it changed?

STEIGER:  Uh-huh.

SUPPLEE:  I remember <Crystal> before it changed, and then it just got so much bigger.

STEIGER:  It got different.  I think it was harder.

SUPPLEE:  Do you think it was harder before?

STEIGER:  Depending on the water, yeah.  I mean, not necessarily, but I remember the old <Crystal> fondly.  Seems like most of 'em in <Grand Canyon>, if you had a good entry, you’d be okay.  But <Crystal>, you had to have a good entry, and then you had to do....  Depending on....  Then you had to be kind of right on in the middle, and then right on two-thirds of the way down.  Pretty much in one spot or the other, all the way down.  And it was easy to get out....  If you got out of whack anywhere, there’d be....

SUPPLEE:  Damage.

STEIGER:  Yeah, disaster.  Okay, I want to go back to what it was like being a woman boatman in <Moab Utah>, in the early eighties.

SUPPLEE:  There were actually quite a few that were hiring women at that time.  I mean, I’d say maybe it was....  It wasn’t half and half, but maybe one-third were women.

STEIGER:  It was more an accepted thing.

SUPPLEE:  It was more accepted, yeah.

STEIGER:  That was the same in the <Grand Canyon>, but it was harder in the late seventies, for sure.

SUPPLEE:  It was.  It was.  Although, in the early eighties, I did do trips for Kenny Ross, and he was one tough goat.  He really didn’t like women on the river.  And if I did a trip for him, because he’d gotten older and he didn’t row, he would always sit on my boat.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Just to keep an eye on you?

SUPPLEE:  (laughs)  Yes!  To keep the tension alive, you know (laughs) it seemed as though.  He liked a little tension, I think.  It made him feel alive.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  What was he like, in general?

SUPPLEE:  Knowledgeable, liked the people, and enjoyed his rough character.  Yeah, he really did.  But look what he pulled off.  Wild Rivers, last November, had its fifty-year anniversary.

STEIGER:  So that’s his company, Wild Rivers?

SUPPLEE:  That was his company, Wild Rivers.  They ran the <San Juan>....  Well, and I think maybe they’re including Norm--I’m not quite sure.  But Wild Rivers, as a company, has been alive for fifty years.  Last year they bought a hog, and they fed that pig all summer, all the leftover river food, and then there was a big pig roast last November for the fiftieth anniversary of the river company.  It was really a great party.

STEIGER:  That hog got pretty big.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  Yeah.  We built a big pit for it and roasted it.  It was a good one!

STEIGER:  I’m not supposed to interject, but I started with Arizona River Runners, and I worked for Fred and Carol Burke, who owned <Vermilion Cliffs>.  I started in ’72 and back then <Vermilion Cliffs> was just a stone building, and they had one little ol’ trailer in the back, and no warehouse--the boats were just out in the back yard.  And Fred would make me get a pig, because I was coming from Prescott, every year.  And I had this Dotson truck with a camper, and I went up there, and for a couple of years I just lived in my truck.  There were rooms that he put us all in, it was room and board all summer, but the whole place was just dedicated to the company.  But he assigned me, and I’d have to go get two piglets and put 'em in my truck and drive 'em out there, when I was coming to work.  These little babies, you know, and they would just trash the back of my truck.  All my stuff’s in there for the whole summer.  But we did the same thing.  The pigs went in a little pen, and we fed 'em all the river garbage.  That went on for like two or three years, and every fall they’d butcher 'em.  But people got too attached to 'em.  They would have names, and then the girls were all cryin’ because we had killed So-and-So.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, this one had a name too.  I can’t remember what it was.

STEIGER:  Yeah, but that was pretty funny.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I think it was kind of a cool thing, the circle of the season.

STEIGER:  Fifty years in the river business.

SUPPLEE:  It’s huge.

STEIGER:  Well, <Moab>, I’ve only been through here a few times, and never really lingered.  When you’re far off, you get these kind of news things coming from <Moab>, and it sounds like this whole town is just nothin’ but hard-core, right-wing, four-wheel-drivin’....  Yet it seems like there’s both extremes:  there’s real conservative and extremely liberal here, huh?

SUPPLEE:  There is.

STEIGER:  That’s an interesting....

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, as a community it’s very diverse, because here we are in <Utah>, and yet maybe we’re 40 percent Mormon.  The whole spectrum of it, I’ve heard people say like there’s 30 percent of the people who live here are government employees because we have forest service, park service, BLM.  There’s probably a thousand Hispanic and a thousand Navajo.  Our population is maybe 9,000.

STEIGER:  All told.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, so it’s a huge mix, although our income is tourism.

STEIGER:  Now, where does the Hispanic influence come in?

SUPPLEE:  They’re here, they work.

STEIGER:  You think that’s just general people?  The proximity to the border, and people comin’ up that way?

SUPPLEE:  They’ll clean the rooms in the hotels.  They’re the best workers in town.  Yeah, if you have the right connections, you can get a ditch dug faster with a few Hispanics, than you can to get the backhoe guy to even show up.  That’s the story.  That’s a Moab story.

STEIGER:  Well, that’s an American story, I think.

SUPPLEE:  That’s an American story that’s probably got truth to it.  They’re very good with stucco and cement.  We probably need 'em.

STEIGER:  We’re really digressin’ here.  In Prescott there’s a corner where these guys all go every day, and they just stand out there until somebody comes and picks ['em up].

SUPPLEE:  I kind of wish we had that.

STEIGER:  Well, the local citizenry is all up in arms about it.  It’s been goin’ on for thirty-five years, but now there’s these guys, the posse guys that are gonna protect our borders.

	Back to river runnin’!  I want to hear a high-water Cat story, the one about you goin’ in the gut.  Tell me your favorite high-water, early eighties, river [story].  Say we end up in the BQR, there’s something that....  Here I’ve been in the river business since 1972, and I just ran my fourth trip ever in <Cataract Canyon>.  This was on about 20,000.  And one I did in low water in ’77 when the <Grand Canyon> was shut.  Another one was a couple of years ago, and it was low too.  No big deal, didn’t think much of it.  I mean, I thought it was nice, but it didn’t leap out at me.  But the one I did at 40,000, and the one I just now did at 20,000, just blew me away.  You talk about a big-ass, gnarly stretch of whitewater right there!  A mile long and the big drops.  I mean, that is a ferocious stretch of river.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  When you had 40,000 it was the North Sea, like Rapid 7-8 was really, really big.

STEIGER:  Talk to me about that.  I don’t think that....

SUPPLEE:  Well, what did the old Cat boatmen teach me?  When it’s high-water Cat, you can’t count the rapids, you count the canyons.  So you gotta learn your canyons, figure out where you are.

STEIGER:  Your side canyons?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, you gotta learn your side canyons so that you can figure out where you are.

STEIGER:  Because it’s just all waves and boils and....

SUPPLEE:  (laughs)  It’s just all big, and you’re just tryin’ to get 'em all straight.  And the other thing about high water in Cataract is the waves move positions.  It just boils up, and then there’s a big wave.  You take two pull strokes to the right, but then you’re in that big wave that you thought maybe you were gonna avoid, because it moved over.  The boils are amazing!  Really, you try not to go in the eddies, because the eddy fences are so high.

STEIGER:  They’re the worst.

SUPPLEE:  They’re the worst.

STEIGER:  That was <Grand Canyon> in ’83, too.  The times I saw it up over 30,000....

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I think that is, I think that’s an over 30,000 thing.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you want to be conservative, go down the middle, stay the hell away from the edges.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  (laughs)  None of this "cut the run" or somethin’.  It’s not about makin’ the cut, it’s just whatever’s coming your way, hit it straight.

STEIGER:  Yeah, go with it, and stay out of the transitional zones.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  Exactly.  I remember one private I went on, and there were eighteen of us.  I think this was in ’85, and it was maybe runnin’ 72,000-74,000, which is still really, really big.  We had hired a sport boat to be at the bottom of the drops for us, for rescue and so on and so forth.  So we’re at the drops, and it’s hours and it’s hours, and finally the shade has hit the drops, and we’re like, "He didn’t show.  We’re gonna have to just run without him."  Of the eighteen people on our trip, thirteen of us swam.  My boat didn’t flip, but I did get knocked out of the boat in Big Drop 2.  It went up the big wave, and it just, you know like sometimes--there was a little window, but sometimes the window was a crushing wave, and sometimes it was open.  And when I got there, it was a crushing wave.  Turned my boat sideways, and I got knocked out of the boat.  My passenger went out in the gut, but anyway, when the sport boat guy that we had hired, John Williams, when he comes upstream to start the rescue, the first thing he sees is my boat, no people.  So he ties it up to shore, and then just makes his way, pickin’ up bodies.

STEIGER:  So he wasn’t coming from the top down, he was coming from <Hite> up?

SUPPLEE:  He came from the lake, yeah.  Exactly.

STEIGER:  Got there a little bit late, but not too late.

SUPPLEE:  But not too late.  But that was one of the more amazing times ever.  And I remember I swam as hard, hard, hard as I could, so I wouldn’t go in the gut--me, myself, my body, when I’m in the river.  But I went over the big pour-over at that next rapid that they call Powell’s Pocket Watch, because they found a really old watch there.  Even though it was probably from the 1923 survey trip, they still called it Powell’s Pocket Watch, because it sounded better.  I went over some big domer there and ended up in this eddy filled with logs, and that was actually the most brutal part of the whole trip, of my whole swim, was bein’ in this eddy filled with trees, and trying to get to shore between the trees, and going underneath and trying to bob up and not get hurt, and not hurt my head between the trees.  But I did finally make it, and I was okay.

STEIGER:  Wow.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  All the other times I stayed in the boat, it was really good.  Lucky.  A lot of people swam.  Big 33s would flip--say they’d flip in Satan’s Gut, and I’d be comin’ down there on a raft, and somehow missed it and made it and everything, and pickin’ up bodies.  And the thing I will never forget about the people that flipped in these big motorboats and stuff is they all felt like reborn, like they had died and now they were in the blessed land, and this was the beginning of the rest of their life.  That is one of the beautiful things about that high water.  And if people do have a swim or somethin’, there’s a rebirth.

STEIGER:  Now why do you think that is?

SUPPLEE:  Their sense of survival.  It’s like they’ve faced or whatever, had the most amazing experience, and they lived through it, and so they feel....  I don’t know what-all they let go of, but it brings 'em a whole new inspiration.

STEIGER:  A swim is not just, "Oops we went over, and now I gotta swim back."

SUPPLEE:  Right.

STEIGER:  That’s more like, "Holy shit, I’m a goner!"

SUPPLEE:  It’s like, "Holy shit, I’m a goner!" and "Oh my God, I’m still alive!" and "Oh my God, I lived!"  But that’s the sense I got from the people in the eighties, at the bottom of the gut.

STEIGER:  And that was when the park went from up above to down below?  Or no, you said that was not until the nineties.

SUPPLEE:  It didn’t happen until the nineties.

STEIGER:  They finally decided, "We’d better go down there where the people are."  And people did die, huh?

SUPPLEE:  They did.  I don’t know, not all that many.  I mean, there was a guy named Stan who actually thought he could swim it.

STEIGER:  I remember Stan.  Stan....

SUPPLEE:  Was it Holstrom?  No, not Holstrom.

STEIGER:  Holtz?  (pause)  Hollister! [phonetic]

SUPPLEE:  Hollister.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I did a trip with him, when he worked for Dave Kloepfer, Harris Trips.  He was a very well respected boatman in <Grand Canyon>, very together dude, very meticulous, not like what you’d think of as a loose cannon or anything.

SUPPLEE:  Right.

STEIGER:  But he would swim, and he did it deliberately.  Would he put on a wetsuit and a big ol’ lifejacket?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And just swim through there at whatever he thought was the highest flow?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And then one day he did it, and that was that.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  They never found him.

STEIGER:  They didn’t even find him?

SUPPLEE:  I don’t think they found a body, but I don’t know, you should ask Bego.  Bego would know.  It’s not uncommon that they don’t find a body.  I mean, there was a guy that drowned ten days ago, and they still haven’t found the body.

STEIGER:  In Cataract?

SUPPLEE:  On the daily.

STEIGER:  Oh, in <Westwater>?

SUPPLEE:  No, right here in <Moab>.

STEIGER:  Really?!

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I saw Bego last night at some party that I went to briefly.  And he’s like, "Well, we’re gonna go look one more time, for the family."  So there’s some years there’s not drownings here, but this year there’s been....  Usually <Westwater> has the most drownings.

STEIGER:  Uh-huh.  I know there was one last week.  It’s funny that here’s <Grand Canyon> and the water’s so much colder, and yet it’s....

SUPPLEE:  There might be more drownings here.

STEIGER:  I think there’s way more.  Don’t you?

SUPPLEE:  I do.

STEIGER:  <Grand Canyon>, there’s one every few years--a private trip usually.  I can’t remember when the last commercial....

SUPPLEE:  And it’s usually heart attack related.

STEIGER:  Or somethin’.  But you would think that with the water being as cold as it is there....

SUPPLEE:  ... you would have more drownings.  I get your point.

STEIGER:  But there’s something about the nature of this river up here.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  We were talkin’ about it.  I guess it’s that salt dome thing.  The geology’s so different.  You don’t have such a well defined channel.  That thing’s just rippin’ through there, and there’s these gigantic rocks at random, wherever the heck they decide they....

SUPPLEE:  Well, <Cataract Canyon> was totally formed differently than <Grand Canyon>.  It’s a fracture thing, where there’s a fracture, a big chunk of the canyon wall falls off into the river, so you’re going to have these huge boulders that water did not move into the river, but that actually fell from the cliff wall into the river.

STEIGER:  And the water’s just gettin’ through it any way it can.

SUPPLEE:  Exactly.  And the channels change a lot here.  I mean, having run <Grand Canyon> over the years, it’s not that none of the channels have changed, but I run the daily section or whatever here, and the channels change.

STEIGER:  On a daily basis?

SUPPLEE:  No, but every few years it’ll move from one side of the river, back over to the other side.  I’m not quite sure why all that is, but the channels change here.

STEIGER:  (pause for equipment check)  I think rivers in general--it took me forever to figure this out, but finally I’m gettin’ it.  Certainly <Grand Canyon>, it’s all so dynamic, everything’s gonna change, it’s all changin’ all the time.  You know what I mean?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I do.

STEIGER:  Just on a scale that we don’t....  It takes us a while to comprehend that none of this stuff is permanent--nothin’.  You watch Havasu get blown out a few times, and the Havasu of today is nothing like the Havasu that we first saw.

SUPPLEE:  I know.

STEIGER:  And so on and so forth.  <Deer Creek>.

SUPPLEE:  That’s true.

STEIGER:  Remember <Deer Creek>, up above, before it burned the first time?  All those big old cottonwood trees and all that stuff.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  It’s true, it does change.  One of the things I really notice here and in <Grand Canyon> is whatever beaches there are, the plants are takin’ 'em over.  It’s kind of like there’s so fewer beaches than ever before.  I’m not quite sure why it is that the plants are takin’ the beaches.  It’s like, yeah, well, we’ve had some low water, some high water, but maybe not consistently enough, because people always talk about, "Oh, it’s the fluctuating water."  But I don’t even know if it’s that anymore.

STEIGER:  Well, if it was just <Grand Canyon>, we could blame it on the dam.

SUPPLEE:  But we can’t.  It’s up here too.  The plants are taking over the beaches.  I have such fond memories of just like floating in my life jacket along my boat, and then going to shore and running the beach for a while, and then back into the river, jump on the boat.

STEIGER:  The great big, plain, white, sandy beach that went....

SUPPLEE:  Remember 'em?

STEIGER:  Yeah, I do.  I do, yeah.

SUPPLEE:  That is a beautiful memory I have.

STEIGER:  Pre 1983.  I mean, I remember the beaches being a lot bigger than they were after all that.  And bein’ just exponentially fewer.  Or tamarisk trees back then, they were just gettin’ in there, I guess.  Now we have this beetle up here goin’ to town.  We’ll see what it does.

SUPPLEE:  It’s doin’ it!  It is eating all the tamarisk, and they’re all turning rust, and then after they turn rust, then all the leaves really, really fall off, and then they look like they’re burnt, and that’s our new landscape--until the BLM comes in and either chainsaws 'em down and then tries to burn the roots and replant somethin’ else.  It’s all gonna be interesting.

STEIGER:  Martin Litton, I remember--I talked to him several times--I remember him talking about all that.  He saw the river, he went down <Grand Canyon> the first time, I think it was ’55 or somethin’--somewhere in there, ’54, mid fifties.  And I remember asking him, after a long interview, to just sum up all the changes that he’d seen, and how it was goin’.  He said the hardest thing to get used to, for him, is just all the footprints that you would see today, compared to when he went down those first trips--there was nothing but sandy beaches with no footprints on 'em, not a track on 'em.  You’d be the only trip that had come along for weeks.  So it was hard for him to get used to that.

	But for you, I mean, the ebb and flow of the business up here, I guess the eighties were kind of....  I mean, how has that gone, how has that been?  It sounds like the eighties were the biggest time of all for up here.

SUPPLEE:  Mmm, for me they were, but I was a guide then, and I was on the river all the time then, so....

STEIGER:  And hadn’t been doin’ it.  I suppose we should just talk about....

SUPPLEE:  Oh, we could talk about, I could startin’ to think, it’s like, well, when did that....  I mean, after I decided not to be a guide anymore, which was a beautiful thing.

STEIGER:  How did that come about?  What was all that about?

SUPPLEE:  Actually, I was on a <San Juan> trip, and the woman that was my passenger on my boat, she refused to put her feet in the mud.  I had to carry her to and from the boat every day.  And then when I got to <Clay Hills>, I ended up putting her on a cooler, and pulling her across the mud on a cooler.  And I was like, "I wasn’t meant to do this.  I really want to be an artist."  So even though she really drove me over the edge, she was the gift.

STEIGER:  Okay, we’ve got to delve into a little more detail.  Tell me about this woman from start to finish.  Tell me about the whole trip.

SUPPLEE:  She was from <Texas>.  She was doing this river trip and had to get off just in time so she could go buy some prize dog.  She was there with her husband.  Her husband basically wanted nothing to do with her.

STEIGER:  What company?

SUPPLEE:  I was working for Wild Rivers, doing a <San Juan> trip for Wild Rivers.

STEIGER:  How many days?

SUPPLEE:  Probably eight.

STEIGER:  What water level, time of year?

SUPPLEE:  Low.  It had just dropped out.  It was super-muddy, super-super-muddy.  But it was low.  Yeah, I was just tryin’ to get her downstream without listening to her bitch and whine.  So I carried her on and off the boat, because she couldn’t get in the mud--so she said.  Someone said, "Why didn’t you throw her in the mud?"  I’m like, "I don’t know why that didn’t occur to me."

STEIGER:  Was it just a one-boater?  How many other people on the trip?

SUPPLEE:  What was it?  There was another boat.  It was a small trip, but there was another boat, and I think I was in charge.  There might have only been six, seven people on the trip.  But by the time I got to <Clay Hills>, and once I realized, "How am I gonna get this woman across here?"  And then I came up with that.  I just realized that I was not meant to fetch and tote for these people anymore.

STEIGER:  And this woman, you get to the first stop, and she’s like, "Well, I’m not walkin’ across that!"

SUPPLEE:  Right, and I just left her on the boat for a while, and didn’t deal with it, and then ended up carrying her into camp once.  And then I did it more.

STEIGER:  Was she big?

SUPPLEE:  No.  She wasn’t.  She was smaller than me--which was good.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  And what had you been doin’ with your art before then?

SUPPLEE:  Not as much.  Thinking I was going to get so much done at the end of the season, and then realizing....  I don’t know, my experience when I was a full-time guide was I pretty much worked until maybe mid October, and then it really took me 'til mid November to be back to be the artist, and be who I really am.  And then it was the holidays.  You know, Thanksgiving and then Christmas, and then it was January, and then I’m like, "Okay, here it is mid January, and I’m just now really getting back to my painting."  But the bottom line is, I wasn’t getting any better.  I’d kind of like pick up where I’d dropped off, doin’ stuff, and I don’t think I was getting better.  Although I really can’t all the way say that, because I did always make time to draw.  Whether I got to paint or not, I did get better at drawing during those years, because I would make time to draw.  But I don’t think I became a better painter during those years than maybe now.  And she just woke me up.  It’s like, "Wait a minute!  I want to be an artist!  What am I doing here?!"

STEIGER:  Now this is when?  When you’re dragging her on the cooler?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, this was the cooler.

STEIGER:  Okay, tell me the whole scene there.

SUPPLEE:  Well, it’s <Clay Hills>.  It’s what, a hundred yards of mud, at that time.

STEIGER:  To get to the dry sand.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And this is like camp?  Because I can’t remember, I’ve only done like one....

SUPPLEE:  It’s the take-out.  <Clay Hills> is the take-out, and there’s a hundred yards of mud probably.  Maybe only fifty.  But a long, long ways--a long ways of mud.  And you had to drag all the equipment across the mud.  It’s not like you can just clean it up.  You clean it up back at the warehouse.  You roll the boats up in the mud, but you can’t clean 'em, so you just take everything back and then blow it all back up, and then clean everything there.  That’s how we did it on the <San Juan>, because it was impossible.  You can’t get stuff clean.  The <San Juan> doesn’t really come off of boats anyway.  You almost have to use....  Well, it’s not the green scrubby, but they’ve got those ones that are reddish.  The <San Juan> comes off with the red scrubby.  (laughter)

But yeah, the woman that wouldn’t walk in the mud.  And she just really helped me realize I didn’t want to be a guide anymore, and I really wanted to be an artist, and I wasn’t bein’ who I really wanted to be anyway.  Like in "Porcine Canticles," with David Lee, loadin’ the hog.

STEIGER:  I missed that one.

SUPPLEE:  That poem?  You were talkin’ about the pigs, and I just thought maybe you’re read those David Lee pig poems.

STEIGER:  No, I missed it.

SUPPLEE:  Anyway, he’s written a poem about loadin’ a hog, and how it tore out the stock racks and bit him in the knee, and he finally got it, and he just kind of told himself he just can’t do this anymore.  And his wife Jan says, "Well, why don’t you write poems, like you always said you were gonna do?"  You know, "Why don’t you be who you’ve always said you were gonna be, instead of loadin’ hogs for a living."  And so David Lee did, he’s written poems, and he’s making his living writing poems now, instead of loadin’ hogs.

STEIGER:  Feels a lot better about it.

SUPPLEE:  And feels a lot better about it.  So that woman was my "hog," even though she wasn’t as big as one.

STEIGER:  What year was that?

SUPPLEE:  In ’88.

STEIGER:  And so how’d you do it?

SUPPLEE:  Well, I came back here, and I was really broke, fast.  But there was a lot of movie work here then.  And actually Bego kind of saved the day.  He’d already kind of gotten into the movie business.

STEIGER:  Became the Upper Basin’s Brian Dierker?

SUPPLEE:  He did!  At that time, he kind of did.  He would just tell 'em to hire me, and they did.

STEIGER:  What kind of stuff did you do there?

SUPPLEE:  Oh, all kinds of crazy stuff.  One time I had to make sure--one job I had, I had to make sure the stunt men had their clothes on just like the actor.  Another job I had, they put all the cameras on me, so that I was the same size as the actress, and so when the actress came on, everything was all set for her.  I cooked.  I actually cooked for ABC when they did a wildlife series here.  Whatever they needed.  Whatever I got a job doing, I did it.

STEIGER:  And then art-work-wise?  How did that evolve?

SUPPLEE:  Well, that was like a whole lot of work quick and fast.  It wasn’t seasons long.  I slowly started gettin’ shows.  That dribbled off, and what I wanted to do started dribbling forward.  And it all worked out.

STEIGER:  Just tell me a little more of the particulars there.  How did you make it work out for you?

SUPPLEE:  Well, I started a series of note cards in 1983.  Took out a pretty big loan.  I bought my first raft, and I bought my first series of cards, and slowly paid that off.  I did another series of cards.  I think in ’85 was the second series.  The third series was in ’88.  And actually, after the third series--and this was like twelve different designs in every series--they started to sell, finally.

STEIGER:  When you say you "buy a series"....

SUPPLEE:  That means I had a thousand printed of each image.  In those early series, there were twelve images.  So offset litho printing.

STEIGER:  And then so they box....  Here’s a set of twelve, you had to do it?

SUPPLEE:  I did everything.

STEIGER:  You get a thousand of each, and then you’d individually separate 'em and put 'em....

SUPPLEE:  They come in boxes all the same.  But you have to count 'em, and count the envelopes.  It’s not hard, it’s just marketing.

STEIGER:  Here’s your stack of a thousand of this, and a thousand of that, and a thousand of that.  So you take one of each, put 'em all together?

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.  I didn’t actually sell 'em as sets.  I sold everything as singles.  And I’m not quite sure why I made that choice.

STEIGER:  How did you get those around?

SUPPLEE:  How did I market those?  Out of my ’61 Dodge panel wagon.

STEIGER:  You just drove around to wherever they were sellin’ cards?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, and asked 'em to look.

STEIGER:  And would they carry yours.

SUPPLEE:  And would they carry mine.

STEIGER:  And how’d that go?

SUPPLEE:  Well, like I said, I started in ’83, and nothin’ really happened 'til ’88, even though I never gave up.  Took five years to get it goin’.  And now it’s easy.

STEIGER:  So did you change, or did somethin’ else change?  What was up with that?

SUPPLEE:  I think they just didn’t initially....  They didn’t believe me.

STEIGER:  Did the work change?

SUPPLEE:  Oh yeah, the work got better too.  I got better.  I think there was just somethin’ about where I kept comin’ in and buggin’ 'em.  Just like the river guide business, if you keep goin’ in that same office, they’re eventually gonna say, "Yeah, we do need you."  "Yeah, we do need cards."  I don’t know.

	Young artists now ask me, "How do you do it?"  And I’m like, "I have no idea."  I would leave <Moab> with fifty bucks in my pocket, and thousands of cards, and hope I made it home!  (laughs)  That’s not how kids today do it.  They’ve got credit cards and stuff.  See, I didn’t have credit cards, so it’s a whole different deal.

STEIGER:  Give me a little more.  You would leave....  Now you say "Mohb," not "Mo-ab"?

SUPPLEE:  Mohb.  Maybe Mo-ab.

STEIGER:  So 1989-1990, you have fifty dollars to your name.  You’ve got a thousand cards that you just paid how much for?

SUPPLEE:  Thousands for.

STEIGER:  Thousands of dollars for.  And you’re gonna drive around and sell these wholesale....

SUPPLEE:  Wholesale.

STEIGER:  And what kind of increments to all these stores all around?

SUPPLEE:  Whatever they’ll buy.  I always did good in <Bluff>, which was thankful.

STEIGER:  But you’re gonna sell 'em for twice what you paid for 'em?  Is that how that works?  Not to spill the beans....  Is that how that works?

SUPPLEE:  Basically, yeah.

STEIGER:  You sell 'em for twice what you pay for 'em, and they sell 'em for....

SUPPLEE:  Twice what they paid for 'em.  Yeah, that’s basically how it works.

STEIGER:  Well, tell me about the work.  How do you handle that, how do you deal with that?

SUPPLEE:  You mean the homework?

STEIGER:  How do you get better, if you want to be an artist?

SUPPLEE:  Oh, you just do 'em.  You know, young artists, they say, "I want to learn how to do this."  And I’m like, "Well, show me one of your paintings, and then tell me what you do and don’t like about it.  And then I’ll help you with the part you don’t like."  But it needs to be their idea and so on, on how you become a better artist.  You keep doin’ your ideas.  I think you just keep doin’ it.  You do a hundred paintings, and then pick out ten that you really, really like out of your first hundred.  And then you do a thousand paintings, and you’re probably going to have a hundreds really good ones.  And pick out a hundred really good ones, you can start making a living.

STEIGER:  But you’ve got to do a thousand to get the hundred.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And does that mean you’ve got to do it every day?

SUPPLEE:  Well, I don’t, but I’m more of a binger.

STEIGER:  So how does that work?

SUPPLEE:  I really like my painting binges.  They’re just hard to create for myself.  I talked to Terry Tempest Williams once, and she’s like, "You know, I just quit answering the phone, I don’t return e-mail, I don’t do anything--[in order] to create the space for me to do the writing, to have my focus, to do the writing I need to do.  So that’s how some artists do it.  I don’t know.  I like people, and yet I try to create some space for myself each day to paint.  So I just do my best.  I’m not a person that’s about routine.  [unclear] thought routine might solve some issues, but here I am over fifty, and I haven’t created one yet.  So maybe I’m just fine without one.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Apparently so!  You’re doin’ pretty good here.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, you see what I mean.  When Tatiana came to do the walls, she goes, "I really want routine."  And I told her, "Well, if you’re lookin’ for routine, this is probably not where you want to come."  I really gave her the clues and stuff, and she was like, "No, I can create routine for myself."  I said, "Within this chaotic environment?"  And she’s like, "I’m gonna do it!"  And she pretty much has, to her credit.

STEIGER:  We should say, for the record here, this is Serena’s "intern," would you say?

SUPPLEE:  No, she is a young boatwoman who is not guiding this year, and she’s putting a coat of cob adobe coating on my big, seventy-five-yard sandbag wall.

STEIGER:  Which surrounds one corner of Serena’s property here, which also is this kind of beautiful and whimsical space right here in a quiet little corner of <Moab>.  There’s these two monumental sculptures sitting out in the yard that we just went and toured before this interview, that are quite spectacular.  You can see the Serena touch to 'em.  They have this feeling that’s akin to the paintings and the watercolors that we’ve seen, but [unclear].

SUPPLEE:  And rock and water, you can feel rock and water.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you can feel the Southwest here, you can feel the redrock country for sure.  But it’s a long way from a water cooler to these big sculptures.  (Supplee chuckles)  And there’s a pelican or a heron or some kind of bird out there, taking shape right now.

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.

STEIGER:  And so you just do that as....  You don’t sit there and go, "I’m gonna make this, and make this much money out of it"?

SUPPLEE:  No, I haven’t ever looked at it as "if I build this, I’ll make this much money."  You know, I’ve listened all my life to people that work the nine-to-five, and they’re like, "I work forty hours a week, and I only come home with this!"  And I’m like, "Well, I work sixty hours a week, and I might get paid someday!"  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Yeah.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I don’t get it.  But I’m so lucky, because I really have gotten to do so many of my ideas.  And I’ve gotten to do so many projects I’m passionate about.  I’m pretty lucky that way.

STEIGER:  And to what do you ascribe that luck?

SUPPLEE:  I think I just decided to do it, and just do it no matter what it took.  And usually the helping hands just kind of come along.  Just like when I wanted to start making sculptures, this one guy that hangs out at Dave’s corner market--and I don’t know if he really works or if he doesn’t work or not--but he was like, "She’s gonna need a sculpture cart."  And he built me a sculpture cart and came over with it, and said, "What are you gonna trade me for this?"  And we found something to trade in.

STEIGER:  Well, now, what’s a sculpture cart?  That’s what you carry the thing around on?

SUPPLEE:  Well, he built me a sculpture cart, but it can only take 500 pounds, and most of the sculptures I’ve built have actually had to go on the dory trailer, because they’ve been over 500 pounds.  But when I start buildin’ the sculptures that are under 500 pounds, I’ve got this beautiful sculpture cart.  But it’s the thought.

STEIGER:  What did you trade him for it?

SUPPLEE:  A mat cutter, because I really don’t want to cut mats and be framing that much anymore.  But I actually had a spare mat cutter in case this one broke, and he got the mat cutter, so it was a good trade.

STEIGER:  Out in Serena’s yard are two really nice dories that she’s accumulated over time, both 16-footers.

SUPPLEE:  No, a 14 and a 16.

STEIGER:  A 14, one-and-one-half-person dory; and a 16--you could probably carry four, you could probably put five people?

SUPPLEE:  Mmm, two passengers.

STEIGER:  Three--one in the front, one in the back, comfortably.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I’ve had two in the front before, but you don’t want to do that for a bunch of days in a row.

STEIGER:  Too heavy.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I actually have never left <Lee's Ferry> in that boat without water in the foot well.

STEIGER:  Welcome to the club!  (laughter)  Actually, GCE, because we have the motor support, we can usually....  But GCE, [unclear] even with a commercial boat, you typically....

SUPPLEE:  Even with the rafts taking the major gear.

STEIGER:  You typically have water in the foot well to start.  Serena has these boats, and before we started this interview, I got a little tour of some of her art work.  I gotta say, I’ve been a fan of yours forever, and I buy your cards all the time, and I’ve seen your art work for years and years, and I’ve admired it.  Until this summer, until I saw you on the river, I had no idea who the hell [you were], what the hell you looked like, or anything.  I’d just seen your name.

SUPPLEE:  "What kind of body goes with this work?!"

STEIGER:  Who is this person that’s churnin’ all this stuff out?  But even lookin’ at the work, I had no idea of the process.  And lookin’ through this work today, Serena was describing for me, before we sat down for this thing, we looked at a painting of "Capsize" here, and a painting of "Big Drop 2," where Serena went and did a one-boat trip down Cataract, big water Cat, where you go by yourself, and you do it so that you can paint, and you stop at a place when you want to paint, and you stay there for however long it takes.  And you finish that, and then you worry about goin’ downstream and hookin’ up with another trip to safely get there.  And then you talked about, there’s this beautiful painting of <Hance>, and you said you spent five days there doing that.  Tell me a little bit more about those things, about that process where you’re goin’ out there, and you’re gonna sit in one place.  You’re gonna sit at <Hance> in July for five days to make a painting.  What’s up with that?

SUPPLEE:  Well, I didn’t really chose July, but it’s when the Grand Canyon Expedition boats were not full, and they could give me rides.

STEIGER:  Because they had a date.  Or was this before the new plan?  This was a while ago, huh?

SUPPLEE:  This was a while ago.  I think it was in ’04--either ’03 or ’04.

STEIGER:  We should just start at the beginning there.  So you decided you wanted to go down the river, have time to paint, and you made a deal with Grand Canyon Expeditions, Mike and Marty.  Just tell me that whole story, okay?

SUPPLEE:  I’m gonna start even a little before that.  Part of the millennium, <Phantom Ranch>--and this kind of brings the whole <Grand Canyon> in a little bit.  <Phantom Ranch> was planning this huge millennium party.  I’ve had this job to do a tee shirt design at <Phantom Ranch> since ... 1995 was my first year, and they basically invite me down.  I go and paint one, and then that becomes their tee shirt, is the job plain and simple.  Which I love the job.  When I get to the ranch every year, it’s a great reunion, and so on and so forth.  So all the maids and cooks at <Phantom Ranch>, they pooled their money together and put together $3,000 and they wanted me to do a mural for their bunkhouse for the millennium party.  And I said, "Well, you already have thirteen people living in this one building.  You don’t need a fourteenth.  Because it’ll probably take me a few months."

STEIGER:  But they say, "We’re gonna give you three grand.  You give us a mural for the bunkhouse."

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  So that was the beginning of these big oil paintings, because I really had just been doing watercolors, thinking, "I’m gonna get back to oils someday, I’m gonna get back to oils."  And this was just the foundation that was created for me to buy the supplies and take the step and do it.  And so I created the first big oil painting.  It’s four feet by six feet, and it’s still in the bunkhouse at <Phantom Ranch>.  And so I started going, and that all continued, and I continued to do the big oils somewhat.  But part of my thing when the millennium happened, I don’t know, a lot of people thought about, "Okay the world is gonna change."  And remember the Y2K, and [so on and so forth].  And the thing I thought about for myself is I had paintings strewn all over the countryside, and I wanted to get out of all the galleries and bring everything home, and then just reevaluate what I’m doing.  It actually took me a year and a half to get all the paintings home, because you gotta get the gas money together, and you gotta have the days off or whatever, to drive there and get 'em and bring 'em home, and box 'em up and organize 'em all.  And I did all that, and it took me a year and a half.

STEIGER:  Now, you’re bringin’ all the paintings home....

SUPPLEE:  Why?

STEIGER:  Just because you wanted to get yourself totally out of the market?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And reinvent yourself?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Or reassess?  You wanted to see 'em again?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I wanted to see 'em again and reassess what I was doing.  So I brought 'em all home.  And at that point, it came to me that I’m gonna try museums.  And Dennis Willis, who was the head river management guy for the BLM in <Price>, invited me to have a show at the prehistoric museum in <Price>.  "Please come and spend a couple of years in <Desolation Canyon> and do a hundred paintings."  So I did!  And it was a blast!  And I had the big show, and I loved that, and it was totally awesome.  It was called "Destination Desolation."

STEIGER:  Now, this is Dennis....

SUPPLEE:  Willis.  He just retired in January.

STEIGER:  He was the superintendent?

SUPPLEE:  He wasn’t superintendent, he was head of river management.

STEIGER:  "Come do a hundred paintings in <Desolation Canyon>."

SUPPLEE:  "And we’ll have a big show of 'em at the prehistoric museum in <Price>."  And he gave me special artist’s permits.

STEIGER:  You took your little dory?

SUPPLEE:  Took my little dory.  Except one of the summers, 2002, was super, super low, and then Bego loaned me his seven-man.

STEIGER:  Oh, that has a name, too, doesn’t it?

SUPPLEE:  I think it does.  Anyway, I took his itty bitty little raft with the itty bitty little oars, and didn’t hit a rock!  And it was kind of cool, too, because all the commercial companies, it was so low that they all quit running <Desolation>, so I kind of had it all to myself.

STEIGER:  You did a hundred paintings?

SUPPLEE:  In those two years.  I did.  The show itself, I think--because I sold some of them along the way--the show itself I think was seventy-some paintings.  It was great!  (brief interruption)  So after I got done with that, because I did some of the whitewater in <Desolation>, and I just really wanted to paint the rapids, and I really wanted to paint the rapids in <Grand Canyon>.  It was almost like the idea of doing the series of painting all the rapids in <Grand Canyon> happened when I was in <Desolation>.  And so I just tried to do everything I could to move that idea forward.  I wrote a proposal to the Grand Canyon Natural History Association, GCA, at the time.  They said yes.  Mike Denoyer said he’d do anything he could to help me accomplish that project, and he also told me to write a book, which I did.  And it just all kind of came into play.

STEIGER:  How’d you come to know Mike, and how did that connection get made?

SUPPLEE:  He and I were in a first aid class together.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  You guys just hooked up and he said he’d help you out?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  That, and he’s been a patron.  He’s bought a lot of paintings over the years.  It’s like if I haul the paintings to <Kanab>, I’d get by.  So I used to, after the whole thing....  I had a really good thing goin’ in <Bluff> for a while, and I thought, "As long as I can get to <Bluff> I could probably come home with $500-$1,000."

STEIGER:  Get through another couple months.

SUPPLEE:  Exactly.  "As long as I get to <Kanab>, Mike’ll probably buy one and I’ll be fine."  But there were years like that, yeah.  And the thing in <Bluff> has taken a big shift in the sense that....  It kind of started, I guess in ’96, and then ’97, ’98, I used to go down there.  Because sometimes I’d have these shows in <Flagstaff> and stuff, and nothin’ sold--I mean, zero, nothing.  And I’d come into <Bluff> or whatever, and it was like, "Well, how’d your show go, Serena?"  Because by then we were already friends and stuff--they’re sellin’ the cards by then and so on.  "Didn’t sell a thing."  They said, "Well, I don’t know if it’s such a good idea for you to go home with all the same paintings you went with."  And I said, "I know, it feels really weird."  And they’re like, "Bring 'em in."  And so they’d trade me, and I’d trade for rugs and things, and I got all this....  Well, now I have a cedar chest, because I gotta have a good place for all those rugs, right?

STEIGER:  Well, yeah.

SUPPLEE:  (laughs)  It was just so interesting how it all unfolded.  But at this point, I actually have done rug designs and basket designs for Twin Rocks--I say off and on, but a few every year since ’96.  That whole concept may take off at some point.  We’ll see.  I mean, one of the rugs was purchased by the American Craft Museum in <New York>, which was pretty cool.  So we’ll see.  But that’s been kind of a side job.  That’s one way they have helped keep me doing art.  And they really understand that artists have got to sell their art to keep it alive, so they don’t go get a job somewhere.  They are very concerned about their basket weavers and rug weavers and jewelry makers.  If they don’t continue to buy these artists’ work, then the artists are gonna quit doin’ the work.

STEIGER:  So back to this <Grand Canyon> thing and the GCE thing:  So you write a proposal, GCA says yeah, so you’re gonna have a show at Kolb Studio.

SUPPLEE:  Gonna have a show at Kolb Studio.

STEIGER:  But now you gotta go down there and spend how many days?  "X" amount of days to paint.  How did all that....  Tell me a little bit about that, how did that shake out, and how did that experience....

SUPPLEE:  I think it was 2003 that I spent the month of July there, because I know I had just hung the show in <Price>, and I went there.

STEIGER:  And that happened just because that’s when those guys had space.

SUPPLEE:  Right.

STEIGER:  And that was the user-day thing.  They didn’t fill up July.  "Hey, we got some days, we can just juggle you around here."

SUPPLEE:  Right.  Exactly.

STEIGER:  And McGinnis [phonetic], I guess he’d been in there for a couple years.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  Hugh was very supportive.  He was great as far as helping me work it out.

STEIGER:  So just tell me what was it like to go down there and sit for days on end and watch the world go by, and move down the river that way?  Like how long....  Did you just do one long-ass stint through the canyon?  How did that work?

SUPPLEE:  Well, they first dropped me off at <House Rock>, and it’s really, really hot.  And at <House Rock> it shades up quick, so that was kind of neat, no big deal.  And then in the heat of the day, there’s a little cave up there, and I hung out in that cave, and the raven hung out with me.  And then I kind of figured out....

STEIGER:  What raven?

SUPPLEE:  Whatever raven there was there.

STEIGER:  He just spotted you and said, "I’ll go hang out...."  Were you feeding him?

SUPPLEE:  Uh-uh.

STEIGER:  He just came to hang?

SUPPLEE:  He came to hang.

STEIGER:  "Hey, you’re in my spot.  This is where it’s cool."

SUPPLEE:  Maybe.  "This is where it’s cool."  And then I figured it out, just follow the ravens, they know where it’s cool.  So that’s what I did.

STEIGER:  You’d watch 'em?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  Yeah, and if there were a bunch of ravens, like when I was at <Hance> and it was so blinkin’ hot, every once in a while there’d be a bunch of ravens, like kind of in the delta part, like below the beach, but before the cliff, there’s a small creek delta.  And there would be a certain time of day where all the ravens would be there.  And so I’d just go down there then, and pump on water and stuff, because it’d be nice and cool.  But I did figure out:  follow the ravens, because they knew where it was cooler.  (laughs)  I don’t know, the whole heat thing was really pretty....  I hadn’t been in really summer <Grand Canyon> heat ever before, and so it was new'ish to me.  I took a sleeping bag, but I ended up, it was in the river and on top of my tent more than it was anywhere.  So I would do that, take the whole sleeping bag down to the river and put it on top of my tent.  But then if it was so wet that water dripped through, I couldn’t paint in the tent either, because it was still dripping.  There was just a lot of stuff I had to kind of figure out.

STEIGER:  Yeah, and deal with, in its own way.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  And I can remember times where it would finally cool off, and I’d tell myself, "Okay, it’s cooler now.  Do you want to eat, or do you want to paint?"  And those were sometimes the choices, it seemed like, because I had to cook food.  Do I want to cook, or do I want to paint?  I can remember thinking that.

STEIGER:  I’m trying to remember ’03.  This is ’09, and I remember like last year it was pretty cool.  This year it hasn’t been super-duper hot.  But ’06 and ’07 were just mercilessly hot, don’t you think?  Do you remember?  I mean, I remember, God, it was just so hot.

SUPPLEE:  I usually don’t go boating in the summer anymore, but that’s changing, I guess, again.  After that July, I really haven’t gone boating in the summer.

STEIGER:  I want to stay on this trip.  How long were you out there for on that journey?

SUPPLEE:  (hums while thinking)  Twenty-six days.

STEIGER:  And you just kind of went from <House Rock>....

SUPPLEE:  Two days at <House Rock>.  And then where did I go?  Five days at <Hance>.  I think I went all the way to <Hance>.

STEIGER:  Straight from <House Rock> to <Hance>?

SUPPLEE:  To <Hance>.  Two days at <Sockdolager>.  [unclear] sure on that.  Five days at <Phantom>.  There was two days at <Horn>.  Maybe it was shorter than that.  Two days at Horn, and then I went out.  So that was only one, two ... it was only three weeks, twenty-one days.  Because I remember Bear was the boatman that picked me up, and I just went out with Bear and Roger.

STEIGER:  So you were there to paint rapids?

SUPPLEE:  I was there to paint rapids.

STEIGER:  You were there to look at the water.

SUPPLEE:  To look at the water and paint the rapids, uh-huh.  That’s what I focused on, that’s what I did.  And I didn’t get that much done.

STEIGER:  Too hot?

SUPPLEE:  It was too hot, and I don’t know, I didn’t exactly work.  And that’s why Mike and Marty made the great deal for me for my own charter.  I had, I think, a twenty, twenty-one-day trip in April.

STEIGER:  Twenty-day charter trip in April:  Serena, Roger, one other person, in a motor boat.  "Let’s get some painting done."

SUPPLEE:  "Let’s get some painting done.  Let’s take Serena where she wants to paint."

STEIGER:  And how’d that go?

SUPPLEE:  Really good.  I got a ton done.  It was awesome.

STEIGER:  And that was made possible, how’d that work?  I know we said it, but we didn’t get it in this document.

SUPPLEE:  Mike Denoyer and Marty Mathis were so generous as to trade me that trip for, they each got a big oil painting of my work.

STEIGER:  Sounds like a pretty good deal all around.

SUPPLEE:  It was a good deal all around.  Yeah.  I think they were happy doing it, and I was so happy to get to do it.

STEIGER:  Well, lookin’ at all that water for all that time, how’d that go?

SUPPLEE:  I think it’s fascinating and fun--I still do.  I’m still very much interested in painting water and big rapids.  I’ve got a new really ... drawing that’s gonna be a big oil from this last trip, from the top of <Deubendorff>.  We actually camped at Stone, but I walked all the way back up and did a big drawing of the entry of <Deubendorff>, how those waves fold into each other and create the big wave.  I’m not done--it’s just the show’s over.  (laughs)  And I actually have my next show.  And part of that whole thing, my whole vision of doing all these paintings of the river, part of it was also in this early 2000 period, I took these meditation classes, and then I started seeing this stuff, and I did these paintings.  I called them the Vision Series, which nobody was really interested in 'em but me, but it doesn’t really matter.  But one of the things that came out of all of that was looking at the river in mirroring or an analogy of a life path, where okay, yeah, you have these big things that happen to you, like a big rapid, and part of yourself folds in on yourself, and yet you just keep moving on, and you just get over it, and go on to the next thing.  And there’s other times where you’re the thin braided river, and you’ve got so many irons in the fire you can’t focus on a single one, or barely.  And so anyway, all these ideas came forth for me at that period of time, of just looking at my life, and comparing the things that happened to me as if it was a river.  So looking at myself as if I am a river.  So here you are, you’re with a river!

STEIGER:  Cool!

SUPPLEE:  (laughs)  It’s fun.  Even though they’re just thoughts and ideas, it’s still fun.

STEIGER:  Well, it’s sure beautiful work that’s coming from it.

SUPPLEE:  And my next thing--I’m already onto the next thing, to tell you the truth.  And we’re not excluding the river, and we’re not excluding those analogies or anything like that, but my idea of taking it to this whole next level is actually looking more at sanctuary.  You know, like the one painting I showed you where I had all the temples.  So this show that I’m gonna do--I don’t even know where yet--but I wrote a proposal, and they haven’t said yes or no yet, so I’m not gonna send it to another place until they say yes or no.  But the show will start off, and there’ll be these paintings of the temples in <Grand Canyon>, and stories and little poems and things about what temples mean, and getting to the point of sanctuary.  And then paintings of places that have made me, helped me find sanctuary, even if it’s you, after you swam the big drops.  You know what I mean, these people that had this whole idea that their life has changed and they’re reborn.  I mean, that’s another kind of sanctuary.  So just looking at this whole concept of all these ideas of what sanctuary is, and what makes you feel good and happy with your life.  And ultimately I think the show will just kind of come into the very end, where we all kind of create our own sanctuary.

STEIGER:  I’d have to say that piece that you showed me up there, the sculpture, if that isn’t a sanctuary right there--they’re two little chairs, and they’re all kind of nestled in there.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  See?  So I’m already on this, aren’t I?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And you know, it’s interesting, here you are, all focused on water, but there’s a rock.  Rocks are always there in your stuff too.

SUPPLEE:  Right.  Well, rocks create the interesting river.  Or does the interesting river create the rocks?  I mean, you know....

STEIGER:  Uhhhh.

SUPPLEE:  See?  I know.  I’ve already written about that one enough.  But it’s that balance, it’s that intertwining, the one without the other.  It’s the male and the female.  Or I don’t know, maybe they’re both males, maybe they’re both females--it doesn’t even really matter.  But it’s that interaction, that’s where the juice is.  (pause)  I got all philosophical and away from the river, didn’t I?

STEIGER:  Not really.  No, I thought that was good.  I don’t think you got away from the river at all.  I think everybody in our little community can relate to all that stuff that you just said.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  I made a little note to myself just about old boatmen.  I keep thinkin’ of you....  Some people swim the big drops, and that’s a big transitional moment for you.  You drag this little lady from <Texas> across the mud on a cooler because she can’t get her feet in the mud, and you decide to transition to an artist.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  But I’m thinkin’ about the old boatmen out there--of which I’m one of 'em! so I can relate.  I’m just thinkin’ of us, how do you make that leap?  And here in <Moab>, I mean surely our generation--I mean, here we are now, we’re hittin’ the wall, about to transition under this, whether we want to or not.  I’m just wantin’ to hear from you again how it is that you philosophically or spiritually make that leap.  I don’t know what I’m fishing for here, I’m just wanderin’ around.  Like have you seen, like here in <Moab>, Bego is a success story, and I’m sure there are many others.  But there’s probably people that you worked with, doin’ those one-days, that are still out here doin’ this--aren’t there?  No?  They don’t last?  It’s a young person’s game?  Can’t afford to do it?  You’re forced to go do somethin’ else sooner or later?

SUPPLEE:  Or they die.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that too.

SUPPLEE:  Seems like some of them get families and just move on.  You know, create a family and just move on.  Some of 'em die.  Bego just really got into search and rescue, and that filled his adrenalin.

STEIGER:  And yet, here you are, and you’re doin’ your art....

SUPPLEE:  I got my art.  I am so, so lucky that I’ve got a place to put all that juice.

STEIGER:  But....

SUPPLEE:  Because think about it:  most guides we know, they’re really juicy, prime people.

STEIGER:  And yet here you are....  But also, here you are, now you’re rowin’ boats for the National Park Service.

SUPPLEE:  I know!

STEIGER:  And Grand Canyon Youth.  And I meet you, and you’re down here, and you’re on this youth trip, and you got these kids.

SUPPLEE:  Black girls from <Chicago>.

STEIGER:  Black girls and boys.  There was a pretty buff-lookin’ boy.  I don’t know if he rode with you.  And they’re from inner city <Chicago>, and you’re carryin’ 'em down the <Grand Canyon>.  Now what’s up with all that?

SUPPLEE:  I don’t know.  I said yes, and so I did it.

STEIGER:  Did they ask you to go?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  "Hey, would you come...."

SUPPLEE:  "... to row a boat for this trip?"  And I said yes.

STEIGER:  So tell me a little bit about that, how’d that go?

SUPPLEE:  I thought the trip went just fine.  One of the things is they’re science trips.  These <Grand Canyon> Youth trips are science trips, and so the kids, not only in helping with the daily camp chores--we have crews, and then they have crews too--but there are these specific areas where they’re gonna pull invasive species, or just cut and trim them, whatever the case may be.  When they went off to do their plant work, so to speak, I used that time for painting.  I felt like it worked out good.

STEIGER:  So you got some paintin’ done?

SUPPLEE:  I did.

STEIGER:  And they got a huge change of the channel for themselves.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, they did.  I think they really enjoyed seeing what I was doing, too.  They loved everything--except gettin’ up in the morning.

STEIGER:  And hiking.

SUPPLEE:  And hiking.

STEIGER:  (laughs)  That cracks me up!  That’s so funny.

SUPPLEE:  It is.  But I think it was just all so new.

STEIGER:  I haven’t got to do a Grand Canyon Youth thing, but I’m really proud of those guys for gettin’ that goin’.  And I’m proud of the park for supportin’ it too.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  Yeah, it’s a good thing.  I mean, it’s got to be as big as when they send kids to <Europe>--you know what I mean?--and they see the whole new lifestyle there.  This has got to be just as big as that.

STEIGER:  Well, we’re gettin’ all philosophical here.  I’m thinkin’ we raced by all this history.  How did you hook up with Martin, and how did you end up rowin’ the raft with <Grand Canyon>....

SUPPLEE:  Bego.

STEIGER:  Bego.  "Come row the raft."

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.

STEIGER:  Got any favorite stories from that little chapter?  Or that whole thing?  Just that alone, rowin’ the raft for Martin Litton’s Grand Canyon Dories, you know, with those guys.  That’s quite a cast of characters too.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, they were amazing.

STEIGER:  You got to go down the river with Kenton, Brad, Bego....

SUPPLEE:  I did.

STEIGER:  Anything leap to mind that would be good to set down, experiences you had there?

SUPPLEE:  I was always attracted to the dories, obviously, because they were just beautiful boats and everything.  But I really, when doing that baggage boat as a role for them, I really liked it, because I was just only really in charge of the poop.  I set the pooper up, and then I got to paint.  I didn’t have to do cook chores and stuff.

STEIGER:  So you painted there too.

SUPPLEE:  I painted there too.  Actually, I don’t go unless I get to paint.

STEIGER:  That’s a caveat.  "I’m going, but...."

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  I’d better paint.  I just tell people, "If I don’t paint, I get really grumpy."  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Is that true?

SUPPLEE:  It’s kinda true, yeah.

STEIGER:  That makes sense.

SUPPLEE:  Or I’ll start just feelin’ like--that same old thing--what am I doing here?  I’m not painting, I’m not this.  I’ve got all these ideas, I need to get 'em on paper.  I’m actually one of those people who gets multiple ideas at once.  I’m a lot clearer now about which ones are really gonna happen, and which ones aren’t, but not always.  I did paintings when I was younger about seven ideas coming out of my head at once.  I felt like a regular Medusa.  (laughs)  I’m so glad to be more mature than that now.  (laughs)  It’s easier--on me and the rest of the world around me!

STEIGER:  Is that just from seein’ the results and sayin’, "No, I gotta tone this down"?

SUPPLEE:  And I think I got better ideas about what I can really accomplish and what I can’t.  Not to limit myself, but just a little more realistic about what I really can do.

	But they were great guides.  I never really understood even geology in <Grand Canyon> until I saw Brad explain it once.  He had a really good talk at that time.  I don’t know if he still does the same one or not.

STEIGER:  Draws it out in the sand with his flip-flop.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  Amazing.

STEIGER:  Great unconformity and all that.  "Here’s the schist."

SUPPLEE:  I got it the first time, and I’ve probably....  I can’t explain it exactly like Brad, but I know I’ve passed that information on to others, and that’s really cool.  And as far as Bego goes, I think he helped me with a lot of skills to become leaders of trips around here.  Kenton taught me how to feather an oar.

STEIGER:  Good thing to know how to do.

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.  So I did learn some cool stuff from those guys.  But rowin’ long and hard I learned from Brian Coons [phonetic].  When he was younger, that guy could row and row and row and row.

STEIGER:  That was up here?

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.

STEIGER:  Rowin’ those Salmons?

SUPPLEE:  Yup.

STEIGER:  Or Havasus.  But the Salmons were ...

SUPPLEE:  Big boats.

STEIGER:  ... probably harder than the Havasus, huh?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, they were heavier.  We all called 'em pig boats.  But then at that time, they were also rowin’ snouts in <Grand Canyon>, so who’s to say?

STEIGER:  You know....

SUPPLEE:  Did you row snouts in <Grand Canyon>?

STEIGER:  I did.  Two times.  I started out as a motor boatman.  And it was right at the time when they were gonna get rid of motors, which Steve Martin was in the thick of all that, and all the motor guys were all squawkin’ about that.  "Oh, God, we don’t even know how to row.  You can’t get rid of motors!" blah, blah, blah.  All the boatmen, we were fine with the idea of goin’ to rowin’, and we all bought our own.  But they said, "Geez, our boatmen don’t even know how to row!"  And the park said, "Well, you can train 'em."  So if you worked for a company, you could do training trips in rowboats.  So we all got these little boats and started runnin’ in the spring and in the fall, and we’d do thirty-day trips.  And I’d done a couple of them.  And then Sanderson was trying to get ready to transition, so they made these snout rigs, and just started sendin’ 'em down.  I got on one of those early trips, and I mean none of us, we did not know beans about how to row.  We didn’t know shit about it.  We thrashed our way down through there.  I had probably rowed this ten-man that I had bought, like two times, and then got on this snout.  We tried to downstream ferry wherever we were goin’.  Didn’t really know about tracking or any of that.  Somehow got through there.  Somehow, just by luck, we made it through without killin’ anybody or gettin’ stuck.  And then a couple of years later I get a trip with ARTA, and those guys had been runnin’ snouts for a long time, and they were like ten times better.  They had all these little tricks figured out, all these little runs, that we had no clue.  We just rowed the snouts kind of the same.  We just kind of took 'em where we motored, and tried to do it, but only rowing.  We just somehow only just made it.  But those ARTA guys had been doin’ it, and from that I started to kind of figure out just less is more.  You start goin’ with the current and not fightin’ it so much.  And some of the runs that now everybody does, I don’t think people realize:  left run in <Upset>, left run in <Walthenberg>.  I mean, there’s a whole bunch of runs that came about because those guys were rowin’ snout rigs, and they were never gonna make the....  You know, we always scouted <Upset> from the right, and whatever side you scout from down there usually you’re gonna like what’s on that side better, because you can’t see across.

SUPPLEE:  Because you can’t see the other side.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And learnin’ it was always, oh, we were tryin’ to pull across there and go right in <Upset>--and other places like that.  I mean, I’m sure I could think of a bunch more examples.  But the snout guys, man, you had to figure out that left run, because they weren’t gonna get over to the right.  So they had to go where the water was goin’ and make that work for 'em.  And now, for me, my rowing career, the more I do it, the less I do, the simpler I try to make it.  You want to go where the water’s goin’, you want to change direction as little as possible.  You want to just simplify, simplify, simplify.  But I think the big boats were the start of all that.

	Art Thevenin, who’s the manager at Grand Canyon Expeditions now, his dad, Paul Thevenin, started out with Jack Currey and then went to Henry Falany and was a pioneer in all those early days.  Art asked me to copy some old movies that his dad had given to him on a VHS tape.  And I did.  You watch these guys, and they’re rowin’ these 33s, two guys rowin’ a 33 with a floor in it.  And they’re on this horrendous river, the <Grijalva> in <Mexico>.  With all due respect to these guys, you just watch these movies of these guys, and it’s obvious they don’t have a clue about it.  They’re just rowin’ upstream.  Which I guess was all you could do, get an upstream ferry on those things, and get kind of a ferry angle so you’d get some lateral movement.

SUPPLEE:  Oh, [live?] from one way to the other.

STEIGER:  But I mean half the time I think about the old pioneers, and it goes right back to Powell and these guys.  I mean, half the time you’re just out there rowin’ up a storm, havin’ no idea what the hell you’re doin’, where that water’s goin’.  I mean, the birth of river runnin’.  It took us a long time to get here now, but it seems like the more you do, you just learn you don’t have to fight it so much, that’s all.  I don’t know if that’s been your experience.

SUPPLEE:  Oh yeah.

STEIGER:  Figurin’ out, "Hey, we can go over here."  But the whole Cataract experience, we had a couple of those high-water years in <Grand Canyon> that we’re still talkin’ about, and up here they have that shit every year, practically.

SUPPLEE:  Every decade.

STEIGER:  You get a big spring, yeah.

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.  Like this year I think it got up into the 50,000, a little bit higher.  Last year it was 65,000.  So it kind of goes in a wave.  I don’t know what next year will be, but it might be another big’ish year.  But then there’s other years where it only gets up to 30,000 or 40,000.

STEIGER:  But still, you know, compared to lately in <Grand Canyon>, say the last decade, we’re seeing the shoulder season is 6,000-12,000, and in the summer months it’s 10,000-18,000.  I mean, big water in <Grand Canyon>, for somebody that’s just started out lately, 18,000 is big water.

SUPPLEE:  I know, because this was the first summer trip I’d done in a really long time.

STEIGER:  And it was down on your trip, right?  I mean, May, that was constant 8,000 wasn’t it?  Or did we see you in June?

SUPPLEE:  No, I was in June.

STEIGER:  So it was 7,000 to 13,000 or 14, 000 or whatever that was.  Pretty mellow water stage, really.

SUPPLEE:  Right.  Really mellow.  Because I’d done some privates with the dory where it was 5,000-8,000, which is a lot trickier.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that 5,000.

SUPPLEE:  That 5,000 is something!

STEIGER:  Yeah, a lot more rocks.

SUPPLEE:  Lot more rocks.  But it shifts, too.  Because I know when we launched, they were saying 7,000-13,000 or something like that.  And then we heard somebody else say, "Oh no, they’ve shifted it, 9,000-14,000."  And so by the time we got to Phantom, it was a little more or whatever.

STEIGER:  And I wonder if they’re calibrating the <Diamond Creek> gauge right.  I’m not sure about that, because it seems awful different.  (recording paused)  I’m trying to think, I feel like I’m eddying out here.  Any time I’m sittin’ here and I’m just ramblin’, I know I’m in trouble.  (laughter)

SUPPLEE:  Maybe we covered it!

STEIGER:  Well, you think about it.  Take a deep breath.  You see.  I feel like if I get called on to do one of these things, it’s my job to try to do it justice.  And it doesn’t have to just be one session.  What I would like is for you to be happy with it in the end, as a document signifying whatever the hell it ought to.

SUPPLEE:  I guess for me I’m just tryin’ to figure out how to be in the <Grand Canyon> and not be a guide.  Or maybe I am a guide again now.  I don’t know.  It’s like I love the <Grand Canyon>, and I love rowin’ boats, but I’m really an artist, and so where does that fit in?  And so now I feel like I have this beautiful opportunity with the park service, because they know if I go I’m gonna want to paint, and we seem to have that agreement.  I guess we’ll see what happens.

STEIGER:  Do you have something against guiding?  Was it that traumatic experience that you had with that lady?  Or how do you define being a guide?

SUPPLEE:  Actually, yeah.

STEIGER:  Or is it just that when you say "not being a guide," you mean because for so many of us, that’s all we can do to be in the <Grand Canyon>?

SUPPLEE:  No, that’s not how I mean it either.  I guess I never figured out a way to get a painting done or do my drawing when I was a guide.  And maybe that’s what I never figured out.  But guiding is a very demanding job--it seems as though.  To be good, I mean, it seems everybody’s working every night.

STEIGER:  I think it comes down to we have to find our--how we define it to ourselves, what that job actually is.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, maybe that’s what it is.  I know I always feel like if I’m painting, I’m not doing the full guide job or something.

STEIGER:  But if you thought the point of it was to keep that <Texas> lady’s feet out of the mud, that’d make you crazy.

SUPPLEE:  It did make me crazy.

STEIGER:  I don’t think I could do it if I didn’t think it was about something else other than that.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I see what you mean.

STEIGER:  I mean, sometimes you gotta do a little of that.  (laughs)

SUPPLEE:  Right, sometimes you do.  I totally get it, I totally get it.  Yeah, I guess maybe I got a thought pattern goin’ on that if I’m an artist, I can’t be a guide--I can only be one or the other.  Maybe that’s what it boils down to.

STEIGER:  Because you can’t do both jobs?

SUPPLEE:  Not well, I don’t think.  And so I guess I just, to keep my love affair, or my affection, or my passion--because I’m still crazy about the <Grand Canyon>--just continuing to try to find different ways to be there and enjoy it all I can.

STEIGER:  So when it comes to the <Grand Canyon>, what’s your strategy now?  This park service stuff?  Do more park things?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I think so.  That’s what’s on the horizon.

STEIGER:  Well, I’d say good for you, and good for them!

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, that was kind of the feedback I got too, is they want me.  And I was happy doin’ it.  I only want to do one, maybe two trips a year, because I like keepin’ my scene together, I like my home scene too.

STEIGER:  Are you gonna paint 'til you drop, you think?

SUPPLEE:  I suspect so.

STEIGER:  That’d probably be the thing to do.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, don’t you think?

STEIGER:  What did Georgia O’Keefe....

SUPPLEE:  She went blind and went into pottery.

STEIGER:  Because she went blind?

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.  She didn’t quit creating art, she just went blind.  But that didn’t stop her.

STEIGER:  I wonder what one would say in retrospect with the apex of her career.  How does that work as an artist--typical painters and stuff?  Do they just keep goin’ up and up and up?  Picasso, those guys?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, fifty to seventy, that’s our time.  So I’m in my time now.  How cool is that?  (uproarious laughter)

STEIGER:  Guiding, on the other hand, oh, you should have seen me when I was twenty-five!

SUPPLEE:  See?!  I know!  It’s really funny, isn’t it?

STEIGER:  Yeah.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, your paintings were crap at twenty-five, but man, you were a good guide.  (laughter)  There was an old painter that told me that what often happens....  You know, if you’re gonna be an artist, it doesn’t matter whether you paint or sculpt--a lot of it.  Maybe not dance and acting.  But if you’re gonna be an artist, often you don’t "make it" until you’re fifty, that it takes those thirty years to develop yourself.  And that seems to be fairly true for me.

STEIGER:  But you’d better start when you’re twenty-five, workin’ at it.

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  How old were you when you had your epiphany there?  Well, ’88, so....

SUPPLEE:  Eighty-eight.  So twenty years of takin’ myself more serious, I guess.

STEIGER:  Workin’ at it.

SUPPLEE:  Workin’ at it, yeah.  So maybe it doesn’t take thirty, it only takes twenty years of workin’ at it.  There was a young artist, actually, from <San Francisco> here the other day, and she saw my work downtown, and she called and said, "Could I just come over and talk to you for a little bit?"  And I said, "Sure, come on over."  I talked to her, and I just assured her that, you know, you can have a show and nothing may even sell in that show, but that doesn’t mean those paintings aren’t gonna sell.  And you just have to trust in that, and it might take twenty years.  That’s what I told her, it might take twenty years.  And if you’re up for it, that’s great.  And if you really think you ought to go do something else, then go do something else.  And maybe that’s not everyone’s experience, because I know there’s probably other artists that haven’t done that.

STEIGER:  So when you went around and got all yours back from all those places and took 'em in, what did you do with 'em all?  Did you put 'em somewhere, did you keep 'em?

SUPPLEE:  They’re here.

STEIGER:  They’re right here, you’ve got 'em.

SUPPLEE:  I’ve got 'em--the ones I haven’t sold yet.  A lot of 'em have sold.

STEIGER:  And you’re hanging onto 'em, and you’ll put 'em back out there.  Do you keep the ones you like, or do you keep 'em all?

SUPPLEE:  No, not even really....  It’s not so much keepin’ 'em.  Like over in <Kanab>, Victor, he’s had some of my originals for a while here and there.  I actually have one in downtown <Flagstaff>, George Everback [phonetic], "The Fire on the Mountain."  He’s my friend, and he can have some of my originals.  There’s just got to be communication, and if he hasn’t sold 'em by September, I’m gonna pick 'em up.  I don’t like to leave 'em anywhere very long.  I don’t know....  And for now, this is workin’ out okay.  I have open studio here twice a year.  I’m having it Labor Day Weekend in September, and then the first weekend in December.  And if all the paintings are here, I can just put 'em everywhere.  I put 'em all out on the wall.

STEIGER:  Put 'em all around, and people can come.

SUPPLEE:  Uh-huh.  And it works pretty good.  And if somebody wants something specific, it’s gonna be here.  "Oh, I saw that one painting down in <Blanding> once."  I’m like, "Oh, which one?"  And it’s usually here, and then they get it.  I have to hunt it down or anything.  But while I’m here on this corner, I think this method will work out probably okay.  Not to say it won’t change.  You know, like if I decide to go live out in the country and be a hermit next, then I’ll go back and do the whole gallery thing, I won’t let people come out.  But for right now, I’m open for people comin’ and givin’ all I can, and helpin’ all the young artists that come by.

STEIGER:  I’m trying to think of any of your work that I’ve seen where there’s a.... I never did see any ravens in there.

SUPPLEE:  I actually have done a couple.

STEIGER:  Did you put some in there?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah, I have.

STEIGER:  Okay, good.

SUPPLEE:  And actually, I’ve got ravens that live on my land now, instead of magpies.  It’s much more entertaining.

STEIGER:  They figured they come on over.  Okay.  Magpies are from in <Iowa>?  Or do they have magpies right here?

SUPPLEE:  We have magpies right here.

STEIGER:  Ravens ran 'em off though?

SUPPLEE:  Yeah.  That might be the only way to get rid of magpies, if you somehow call in a raven, and they’ll run 'em off.  But they’re not like ravens in <Grand Canyon>, they don’t take your stuff, they don’t try to eat your food, and they don’t think Zip Locks are goodies.  These are raw ravens, I guess, I don’t know.  But they don’t mess with me.

STEIGER:  They’re not a pest.

SUPPLEE:  No, they’re not, they’re just fun to talk to.  And they talk back, which the ones in <Grand Canyon> kind of do, but kind of not.  Not like here.  They talk back here.

STEIGER:  So when you would follow these ravens, and you’d find their places, and then you’re sittin’ there painting....

SUPPLEE:  They just hang out with you.

STEIGER:  And they did.

SUPPLEE:  They did.  Yeah.  But they’re never still.  Like they’re still really hard to draw, because they never stand still, they never sit still--not that much.  I mean, I no more get my pencil and paper, "Oh, he moved.  Oh, he moved again.  Oh, he moved again."  And then another one comes in and then they have their own little dance.  You know, they don’t sit still--not as much as an egret or a heron.  I’ve drawn some of those birds.  Even bighorn sheep are stiller than the raven.  (chuckles)  [unclear] that some artist sent me just recently, and it said, "When you’re an art student you just get so sick of painting still lifes that you could just puke."  He said, "A still live is still life."  (laughs)  But ravens aren’t still life, they’re movement--which I love 'em for that, too.

STEIGER:  Well, dad burn it, I’m tryin’ to think of an intelligent question here.  You gotta help me out here.  Every time I do one of these, I’ll pack all this stuff up, and then I’ll go off and as I’m drivin’, two blocks away I’ll go, "Oh!  Why didn’t we talk about this or that?"  There’ll be somethin’.  (aside about heat)

SUPPLEE:  I think I feel good about it.  I guess one of the big things I feel about myself is I love to row boats, and I love bein’ an artist and a painter, and that’s what I want to keep doing.

STEIGER:  Okay.  Well, maybe we’ll just call this good for now, and I’ll send it off and get it back to you as quick as I can, and we’ll see what you think of it.  And if you think of something in the meantime, or I do too, I’ll make a little note of it.  If we need to add something, we can do it.

SUPPLEE:  Right, because if you drive away, and you’ve got some question....

STEIGER:  Oh, I will.  It’s not if.  It happens to me all the time.  I guarantee it, I’ll think [of something].

SUPPLEE:  Well, you can just call me.

STEIGER:  Okay.

SUPPLEE:  And do the ending on phone.  Have you ever done that?

STEIGER:  I haven’t done it yet, because I don’t have a good enough....  This is pretty good technology and it sounds really good, and I’m kind of anal about I want it to sound really good.  And I don’t have a good hook-up for over-the-phone recording, but I know those things exist.  Gees, they do radio interviews all over.  NPR, you hear all this stuff over the phone, and it’s just fine.

SUPPLEE:  They do it in <Moab>.  I’ve done it in <Moab>.

STEIGER:  I need to get that together, because logistically it’d be a lot easier--although there’s something....

SUPPLEE:  The person-to-person thing is always better.

STEIGER:  I think it is.  And I’ve noticed--and I do a lot of video stuff--but the camera corrupts things, too.  There’s something about just sittin’, talkin’.  If you don’t have a picture of somebody, you kind of yearn for that after the fact.  I certainly have--just a visual sense of the people that I’ve gotten to talk to.  I mean, there’s been so many incredible characters.

SUPPLEE:  I bet.

STEIGER:  You think of some of these old boatmen--Steve Bledsoe and these guys--is one who leaps to mind, who are just so striking.  And it’s kind of a shame to not....  I mean, sometimes I’m thinkin’, "Boy, it’s a shame that I don’t have a picture of this."  But somehow when you have the camera, then it’s weird and it’s different--something changes.

	All right, I’m gonna turn this off, and I’ll get back to you.

SUPPLEE:  Okay.



