DON BRIGGS INTERVIEW NAU.OH.53.84C River Runners Oral History Project

[BEGIN TAPE 3]

Briggs:I probably oughta go through this river conservation stuff, and get it out of the way, right?

Steiger: Yeah, I think so. OK. So now we're rollin' again. This is DAT Tape #3, the master tape of River Runners Oral History Project. I'm talkin' to Don Briggs. It's still February 6, 2003. And we're right in the middle of the campaign to save the Stanilaus. And so, yeah.

Briggs:So we lost Prop 17, and all the polls that were taken after the thing was over was one of those situations where the voters were confused by the deceptive advertising. And the polls proved before and after that the general public really wanted to save the river. So we kinda got screwed on that one. But, not to be deterred, I mean it was a pretty grim winter after what had happened in the fall I went back to <Colorado> I think. But by the time spring came and the river was startin' to flow again, we were all back there, and people kept coming up with other ideas.

Steiger: You weren't gonna just give up.

Briggs:We wouldn't give up. And they started building the dam. But every winter we'd come back and we'd try - maybe I took part of '75? -- I can't remember at all. But eventually I moved to <California>. That was it. I moved to <California>. (

Steiger: You'd been . ..)

Briggs:I'd been in <Colorado> and v basically moved to <California> for good. And was living in <Oakland> with Rob Elliot's first wife. I was renting a room out of the front of this apartment, this flat that she was renting.

Steiger: That's Jessica?

Briggs:No, this was Susan. Susan Royal. (

Steiger: Aah.)

Briggs:And, another little claim to fame, I don't know how many people know Anthea. (

Steiger: Rob's daughter.)

Briggs:Anthea Elliot, Rob's daughter, who went on to become a really incredible river guide, she was like three years old, and I would babysit Anthea in 1975.

Steiger: Oh my god. That poor little girl. She managed to overcome that.

Briggs:Yeah. Maybe she was four. But she was just this cute little kid. And Susan would want to go out at night, and so I'd hang out with Anthea. And about that time I bought my first boat. I bought a little Avon Adventurer, which I still have. I think I paid $600 for it. And flat. It was the old Adventurer which had the flat back and it had to come with smaller tubes (??) than the new ones. I don't know if they still make them. Built my own frame. Went out to the ARTA warehouse, and the guy who did a lot of the ARTA frames would help us after work at night, help the boatmen make our frames. And Melville was building a frame, and helped another guy build a frame. And Melville and I found these rocket boxes, the famous oblong rocket boxes, and we wanted some for our personal rigs. But they were up in a place in <Sacramento>, a war surplus place, and you couldn't get a good deal on 'em unless you got at least a hundred. So we convinced ARTA that they needed to have these rocket boxes,

Steiger: Those are those long ones,

Briggs: The long rocket boxes. ( Steiger; Yeah.)

Briggs: The long, flat, skinny ones. And so they said, "Oh, that's a good idea.5' So Melville and I, just so each one of us would get our six or eight boxes, we were able to get the ARTA track and trailer. And we drove up to this war surplus place to get the rocket boxes. And we were comin' back across the Yolo Causeway, and it goes off across the kind of the marshland overflow when the river floods. Kind of a flood plain. So it's this elevated freeway. It's I-80, you know, two lanes each way, elevated. Only maybe 20 feet off the ground, but there were no big shoulders on it. We were going across that on the way back, and a couple of the boxes blew out. And we kind of saw them, Melville was driving and he kinda saw them leave and we were thinking, "Oh my god." I mean all these cars speeding along at 60 miles an hour and they go to swerve that. We coulda caused this huge . . . And so we pulled off the causeway and we ran back looking for these boxes, and we never found them. We have no idea whether they went all the way over to the edge into the water, but we looked off the edge, and it was actually pretty scarey. And then we continued to do stuff for Friends of the River. And as time went by Mark Dubois - we would do all these telephone campaigns and I would go work the phones and stuff like this, but I always thought that there was something bigger that I could do other than getting people to sign petitions one at a time and talking to people on the phone. And I think that's why I came up with the banner campaign, with the sheets, along with Bruce. So at one of these endless meetings that we used to have with Friends of the River... It was an incredible group of people and tried to ran everything by consensus, which is always pretty awkward. And so Mark said, "Well, one of the pieces we have to have, is we have to have national media. We have to make this a national issue." And we said, "Well what makes an issue national?" Well, if you read about it in national publications. I said, "Well, that doesn't make sense. What's national makes that? Other than if somebody sees it. If they see something in the New York Times it makes it national?" And they said, "Yeah." I said, "Weil, I tell you what (laughs).,." And in the meantime, to backtrack a little bit, at the end of one season, I'd been working with the Winn brothers, and two of the Winn brothers were living in <New York City>. And we could never understand why they would live in <New York City> and work in the <Grand Canyon> during the summer. And also about that same time, I was getting together a pretty interesting set of photographs that I'd taken, slides I'd taken in the <Grand Canyon>. Stuff that to this day 1 can't duplicate. The photographs I took in the Grand

Canyon in the first two or three years I was there, they were just-I was operating on some other plane. The things 1 was seeing.

Steiger: So this is the creative. So when you were first workin5 on the motor trips, you were takin' pictures all the time.

Briggs:Well, whenever I could. I mean one of the best photographs I ever took was we pulled in over at Lower <Tapeats> (??), and my job as an assistant was to get off the boat and hold the boat while people went off and peed or whatever they were gonna do. And I looked down, and I saw this rock. And I had never seen a rock like that. It was just a black rock, but the way that it was in the sand with this curvey, sensual line. And 1 convinced Alan, 1 don't know how 1 did it, anyway I got my camera and I was able to take one shot of this rock. And I always meant to go back. And I look for that rock every time I go there, I've never seen it again. It was gone.

Steiger: Got that one shot though,

Briggs:And it is I think one of my best photographs. It's very simple. So I had this idea that I would take some of these slides and maybe to back to <New York City> and look around, show 'em to a few people or something. I had no idea what I was going to do. It was just something to do in the winter. So Louise at the time was having a little thing with David Winn, and so she wanted to go back to <New York>, and we were good friends. We became good friends.

Steiger: That's Louise Teal (??)

Briggs:Louise Teal, who, when I first started workin' with her was Louise Hoagland. Roger Hoagland was a stock broker that turned river guide, and I got to be pretty good friends with them. They were one of the first man-wife teams on the river. And so I got to be, you know, good friends with both of them. Then she and Roger split up, and Louise then had this thing going with Dave Winn. So we decided we were going to drive my '67 Volkswagen. We were in <Flagstaff>. For some reason we had to come back to the Bay Area, So we drove back to the Bay Area from <Flagstaff>. We were here for a coupla weeks. Then we turned around and we drove basically from the Bay Area through <Flagstaff> and all the way to <New York City>.

Steiger: Back through <Flagstaff>.

Briggs:I can't remember why wre did that, but we did. And it was an incredible adventure. We had names of people that we had taken down on trips. And we would call 'em when we'd get near, like I remember <Hollywood>, <Tennessee>, there was this guy, Chuck, who had been on this trip, and he was a complete wild man. He was there with some of his friends, and we got pictures of him covered in mud and foaming at the mouth from beer foam, and he was just completely out there. So we go visit him in <Tennessee> and he's just the cleanest cut quietest guy with this little normal life, and he was like a different guy. He was there with his wife and his little family. But it was fun. So we stayed with various people. I don't think at that point in time I'd been to <Washington DC> to help lobby for the river. We went to <New York>. And so I learned a little about <New York>, and I could kinda see, it was kind of an exciting place. And Louise and I hung out. We didn't do - I don't know if I got too far along with my photography or anything, but I

think (laughs) the funniest thing that happened in <New York> is that Michael Winn, who was just this - he was a complete kind of a con man. Well that's not exactly the right word. He was . . . I'll think of the word. But, you know, he just knew how to work the system, and he ended up doing some incredible things. I mean stuff that you wouldn't even think about doing. Like he got thrown in jail for smuggling antique silver out of <Ethiopia> and could've been in jail forever except that's when Haille Salassie got thrown out or whatever and they just opened up the jails. That's another story. So Michael had these subway tokens that were slugs. They were aluminum things the size of a subway token. And the subway ride was a buck. So if you got a handful of these, you could save yourself a dollar every time you go. So he gives Louise and I each a handful. This must have been 1974 or '75. 'Cause Louise and I were on a trip with Wesley and Roger, I think. One of the best river trips I ever did. In 1974. And on that trip was the daughter of Beverly Sills, the famous opera singer. And Muffy was this wonderful, she was about 14-years-old about then. And she was with her sister. Her sister and her husband and their three boys and Muffy, And Muffy was deaf, (

Steiger: Oh my,) I mean what a tragedy. To have your mother be one of the greatest opera singers around . .

Steiger: And never get to hear her sing.

Briggs:And have a deaf daughter. But we really had a great time.

Steiger: So you had to sign to talk to her?

Briggs:Urn, she could sort of talk, I can't remember exactly how we communicated, but you know those kinds of things are never a problem. She was deaf as well as some other learning disabilities, I guess. So Louise and I were gonna go see Muffy at Beverly Sills' place, up on the West Side. The Upper West Side, ya know? (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs:Which we did. And, you know, you could talk to her and she - you know, she wasn't like, mentally she was not retarded. I don't know. We just had such a good time with her. we wanted to go see her. We had a great time with her, her sister and that story goes on. So Louise and I went up to see Muffy. And we went up in this big, fancy, apartment building with huge grand pianos. The whole deal, A huge <New York> apartment looking out on Central Park. The whole deal We never did meet her mother. But Louise and I were going back down to 14th Street where Michael lived, and we had these subway slugs. So we're goin' in and ther're people filing through and filing through. And 1 put the slug in, and the turnstile won't open. So I'm pushin5 it and pushin' it and pushin' it. And Louise is over there next to me try in' to get in through hers. And right about that time we feel the arm of the law. These plain clothes New York cops (laughs) had us separated and up against the wall!

Steiger: Right now!

Briggs:Questioning us about where we got these slugs. And Louise doesn't like that kinda stuff. I mean she was totally - sometime she has to tell the story. She tells it different than I do. (Laughs) She says that I just put out his hands and said (very gently), "Now wait a minute. Wait a minute." (Laughs) "We're just Grand Canyon river guides. We're here, and . . ." And they said, "Well where did you get these slugs?" "From a guy in the park." That's where you get everything in <New York City> (laughing), right? Drags

Steiger: Yeah. You're not gonna give up your buddy Michael.

Briggs:"We just got 'em from...," you know. And we had to show the Ids, and of course she had a California ID. I still was driving probably with a Colorado driver's license. And, you know, it was pretty clear that we weren't any hardened criminals. I mean Louise was trembling (laughing) over in the comer. And I was just going - you know, I just figured what can they do? I mean I was a little concerned. But I kind of talked our way out of it and they let us go. (Laughs) And Louise was totally trembling. One time I was there visiting in the summer, I think, and I went out to Martha's Vineyard with Beverly Sills' family, and again, Beverly wasn't around. We went out there for two or three days. And we were actually out on the beach one day and looked over there and there was Ted Kennedy and the family sitting there. I mean it was like whoa (Steiger: Yeah!) this is how the other half lives. And this is also the time when Michael said, "Hey, you know, we gotta go down to NBC. I'm gonna be on 'To Tell the Truth' today. Do you wanna come on down? I'll get you a pass." I said, "OK." So 1 go down and sit in the audience and watched Michael be an impostor on "To Tell the Truth." And because he had gone to Dartmouth and he was a skier, 1 don't know how he found out about this, but there was this guy who skied downhill on his head, and that's who they were trying to find from these four people. Who this guy was; who was telling the truth. And Michael had skied at Dartmouth, and I can't remember how well he did, but I was talkin' to Michael and said, "Jeez, that looked like fun!" And he says, "Well why don't you call up so-and-so. You wanna be on?" I said, "I don't know. Yeah, I'll call 'em up." So 1 called up this woman and I say, "Hey, you know, this is Don, I'm visiting in town I'm a Grand Canyon river guide." She said, "Well come over, do an interview," So I go over there and they sit me down and ask me a buncha questions and then they take a polaroid of you so they have a record of what you look like. And they said, "Fill out this questionnaire. If you know anything at all about these hundred things, check it off." You know, just subjects - automechanics, astrology - all these different things. So I went through and checked it off. And at the time I had a beard, long hair - as long as it ever got - and was wearing this knit sweater with leather elbow patches on it. And I got a call the very next day, and it was this woman. (Laughs) I mean, it was really fun, because they were so into it. And she says, "Well come on down, we want you to be on the show." I'm goin', "Oh jeez," you know? I said, "Oh, yeah, well what do you want me to do?" She says, "We want you to be a sociology professor." I'm goin', "What? I didn't check that off." And she says, "Well, but you kind of have the look possibly of a college professor." And a couple other people at some point in time thought that, but I always thought it was kind of an insult. But then I thought, "Oh yeah, I remember taking a sociology course in college." And you were supposed to go every day, and I think I went once a week, 'cause it was in the spring when we were out hangin' out at the lake. I went once a week and took the test and got a "C." So I thought, "Hell, I gotta be able to do this." So i go over there. And, you know, you work with the people and I was supposed to impersonate this college professor from Brigham Young University (

Steiger: Oh my.)

Briggs: who sent 600 Christmas cards out to people he didn't know, and they were different qualities of cards and he signed thern differently, some from Dr. Phil and some from just plain Phil and did this little sociological study to study how people would react to Christmas cards. And it was a fun thing. So we went on there, and, anyway, I can't get into this story. But Kitty Carlisle and Gene Shalit and Bill Cullen and Peggy Cass were on the panel, and I fooled them all.

Steiger: They thought you were the guy.

Briggs:I got all four votes. They thought it was me

Steiger: This is the guy that would do this (both laugh). This is the guy that would do this stupid thing.

Briggs:Yeah. That's what Peggy Cass said. She says, "That number two looks like he has a good sense of humor and the kinda guy that'd do somethin' like this." So that was a claim to fame.

Steiger: So was that worth some money to ya?

Briggs:Oh they made it sound like we were gonna get $500, but we had to divide it between the four of us.

Steiger: Right, so everybody got a hundred bucks

Briggs:Well, actually got a necklace from some bottle of turtlewax. But I never went and picked it up. I mean what the hell did I need with a bottle of turtlewax. But it was fun.

Steiger: So how did <New York> relate to you belli' the media guy on the Stanislaus.

Briggs:OK, yeah, back to the reason, Well, Mark kept talking about we need to have national media. And I started thinkin' about it. Well 1 don't know that I started then, I'd already been to <New York>. And then the next summer maybe, we had done the famous Dips Trips. Which we can maybe talk about later. We took foreign diplomats down the river. And we let them off at Phantom and then we took down a whole new group of people. And in this new group of people, there was a guy that came down that was the ex-president of CBS. His name was Jack Schneider. And the only reason he could've taken this vacation is he had just been fired. It was one of those things where they fired the thing, and he had been there for years. And everybody I ever talked to said that he was the best and they never should've fired him, but it was one of those corporate things. So he was on this river trip for the lower half. So 1 get to talkin' to him a little bit, and he smoked these cigars and he drank Irish Breakfast tea. And one morning I went up to him and said, "You know, I've been just dyin' to ask you, what does the president of CBS do on a typical day?" And he kinda leaned back. He was a wonderful guy, but just think about being the head of CBS. I mean, how do you do that. And he'd take some puffs on his cigars and he says, "Well, basically you go in in the morning, you kick the machine to get it goin5." (Both laugh) And then

he went on and laid down all his grid works and board meetings and yatayatayata. And we got to be pretty good friends. And he sav me shooting some . . . I'm starting to get some of these things mixed up. He somehow knew

Steiger: That you were a photographer.

Briggs:That I was taking . . . I'm really getting mixed up on this. 'Cause he was also a key figure in getting my film career going.

Steiger: Yeah, well we gotta talk about, you know , ..

Briggs: Well, anyway, we gotta go back, right.

Steiger: Where you're makin' the leap from photography to film..

Briggs:Well, it was all integrated. (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.)

Briggs:I was going to <New York> and started to show my slides around, and oh, the other person that we visited when we there, Louise and I, was this woman that was on a river trip. Her name was Miriam Golden. And she was a wonderful woman and enjoyed the trip and really liked us. And we went to <New York> to see her. And she used to be Dashiel Hammet's secretary. (Steiger gasps.) And she was totally wonderful. And she's an old New Yorker. And so she started slipping me into all kinds of places. She knew an editor at Knopf Publishing, who happened to be Colin Fletcher's editor. And so I was off following all these little leads that people would send me on.

Steiger: Maybe do something with your photography kinda thing.

Briggs:Yeah, the idea was that I always wanted to do a book of my photography. (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.)

Briggs:And I went back and he told me - he liked the photographs -I showed him the slides and he said, yeah, he just really liked them and all of this. And he said, "Well who are the main authors besides Colin? Anybody else at the <Grand Canyon>?" And I said, "Well, there's Francois Leydet and Edward Abbey (??)." And he said, "Well, I'll get you set up to go see Colin Fletcher, and you check out the other guys, and if you get somebody- one of those guys to write the text, well do your photo book." I was goin\ "Holy cow!" (laughs) I mean this is all, almost like one of the first. . .

Steiger: This is that same trip with Louise.

Briggs:Ehh, 1 ended up going back and forth a lot (

Steiger: Uh-huh)

Briggs:in those years, and I don't know if that exactly happened then. So I set about-I had a meeting with Francois Leydet He used to live over in <Kentfield>. That was easy. And then I went down to see Colin Fletcher, which was pretty interesting (laughs).

Steiger: What was interesting about that?

Briggs:Well I called to make the appointment, and he was gonna see me because Ms editor told him to see me. So I go down and he's down in <Carmel Valley>. And I'm making arrangements to go there, and I say, "Well, what time can come down." And he says, "Let me see, at 9:071 do this, I do this at 9:11. I hit the tennis ball for 4 mintues." And he says, "Can you get here at 9:31?" I'm goin' (both laugh). Well, as it turns out, 1 mean, writers, as best 1 can tell, have to have that kind of discipline else they'll never get anything done. And he had his day timed out just like that.

Steiger: For such and such a time to such and such a time . . .

Briggs:Every single day he's got timed to the minute, to make sure that he sits down for at least probably 6-8 hours to write. Otherwise the day goes away. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: I guess. So he liked the photos, except that whenever I showed him a rubber boat, he went berserk.

Steiger: Didn't like those,

Briggs:They don't belong there! This is a travesty on the Canyon! You know. 'Cause he was the man who walked through Time (??), right?

Steiger: So he thought only dories were OK?

Briggs:I didn't have any dory shots. I was a rubber boat guy. He just thought it was absurd and it shouldn't be done. You know, it was like his Canyon.

Steiger: You should walk or not at all.

Briggs:Yeah, you should either walk or not at all. But he liked the photos. But he only wanted to talk about his new project and his book, and he didn't want to really do anything else on the <Grand Canyon>. So that was kind of a dead end. But it was kinda fun to meet him. Except later, as we all know, 1 mean how many years later, he took his own little rubber boat, right? And went all the way down, and wrote a book about it. So maybe I gave him the idea. I don't know. Anyway, so I'd spent this time in <New York>, and the great part about <New York> is that you can just about call up anybody, and if you have an idea, the New Yorkers are extremely receptive. 'Cause somebody's gonna come in there with maybe an idea, a good idea, that they're not gonna let anybody slip through without talkin' to them. They're totally open to let you come in and see 'em.

Steiger: Well and then, if they like it, the thing I noticed about it, is that shit happens. They make it happen right now. Bada-boom-bada-bing.

Briggs:Yeah, and so... yeah.

Steiger: So did your book happen?

Briggs:It was so easy to get into all the photo magazines,

Steiger: But now you had a book right? (

Briggs: No. Uh-uh.)

Steiger:Didn't happen.

Briggs:No, because what happened - and I was goin' to see all the photo magazines, you know, showin' em my stuff and showin' everybody I could think of. But then somewhere along the line, all of a sudden Blaustein's (??) book came out with Edward Abbey about that time.

Steiger: Adios, Briggs.

Briggs:Yup. I said,"Well that's it. That's over. Colin Fletcher won't do it," So that was pretty . ..

Steiger: But what happened - something happened with your photographs.

Briggs:Well I went to National Geographic and got hooked up with a woman in the book division. And so I started getting a few photographs published in National Geographic books, which came in handy later. We'll get to that, (laughs) But I learned how to work the system, and then I eventually started helping lobby for rivers in <Washington DC> I actually put together a photo exhibit called "Condemned Rivers of the Motherlode." Because there were three rivers that were in the process of being dammed.

Steiger: All in <California>.

Briggs:All right here in the foothills. The motherlode country. All in the gold country. And this was probably after the photo exhibit I did which appeared at the <Grand Canyon>. The traveling exhibit that I had there. And then I put together this one of Condemned Rivers of the Motherlode. It was the Tuolumne, the American and the Stanislaus. And a lot of them were my photographs, but then I gathered photographs from other guys and then I put together this exhibit. And I was able to get this in the Smithsonian in <Washington DC>

Steiger: Just by virtue of...

Briggs:I can't remember. I have no idea how I got there. Maybe I just called them up. So this exhibit was kind of at a, it wasn't a big exhibit space, but it was a place where it was at the top of these big stairways where there's this great big wall that they'd put things on. And that was kinda

cool. And that exhibit went in the Oakland Museum,and someplace else. But I was startin' to be able to figure out exhibits and stuff with this still photography. But I finally had to give up because I never- I always made enough money to do another exhibit, ..

Steiger: But not enough to . ..

Briggs:But not enough to make any money off of it. But I had an exhibit at the Nikon Gallery and <New York City> . . .

Steiger: So you're just bein' a river guide and you're . . .

Briggs:I'm wandering around <New York City>.

Steiger: In the winters you're tryin' to further your artistic career but (

Briggs: Yeah)

Steiger:but it's goin kinda slow,

Briggs:And then kinda doin' this stuff with Friends of the River. (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs: Then those two kinda switch places after I'd met this guy that was President of CBS television. So I got his number . . .

Steiger: Jack Schneider.

Briggs:Jack Schneider. And I'd talked to him on the river. This guy was very smart. And I said, "Oh, maybe I'll come see you some day." And he said, "Yeah, come on." You know? Gives me his number. So I go back and this is about the time we started needing some national media coverage. And I'd been approaching magazines and stuff. I'd talked to Audubon. I mean the easy stuff, the environmental things. Audubon in <New York> and well, some other magazines. But this guy was television. Hey, this is the big stuff. I mean, he's the man. So I pack up my stuff some time in the winter and I get on an airplane, and I fell into these deals. By this time I was living in a communal living situation in <Berkeley>. I had a room that cost me 90 bucks a month. And this was the showcase house of this guy who had developed this theory of cooperative living. And we were kind of the model house. And there were a coupla river runners in there from <California>. It was through Melville, a woman that Melville knew- cause Melville was stayin' with some other friends in <Oakland>, and this room came up, and I was able to get this room. But I sorta had to be part of this commune, buying food and stuff, but it was OK, you know. And I played the game with them, but it was an incredible room. I mean 90 bucks, I finally had a home, I was tired of liviri' out of my Volkswagen, Somebody told me about this deal about couriers, so I got hooked up with DHL Courier Service.

Steiger: In <New York>.

Briggs:No, here. (

Steiger: Here, uh-huh.)

Briggs:And what you do, you escort bags. They figured out if they could buy a plane ticket for somebody, you go down to the office, you go out to the airport, they check all the bags - there're documents and stuff- and you get the baggage tags and you get on the airplane and you go to <New York> for free. And do a carry on baggage.

Steiger: The courier stuff.

Briggs:No, that was all in the belly of the airplane, and all you had was the claim checks. Then you'd meet the DHL guy in <New York> and give him the claim checks and that's it.

Steiger: You're done. Go home.

Briggs:Yeah, And I didn't have any money so I learned how to ride the buses from the airports to the subway and get to Michael Winn's house. 113

Steiger: Well now, so with the courier deal, you escort the pacakge, and then are you supposed to just hop on and return? Or you're on your own? Or do you get a return token, or how the hell do you , , .

Briggs:I can't remember how I got back, but I got back the same way. And I did that off and on for a couple years. I could get from my house in <Berkeley> to Michael Winn's house in <New York City> for about ten bucks. (Both laugh)

Steiger: Can you still do that?

Briggs: No. That came to an end soon. But anyway, so I go back , . .

Steiger: And see Jack Schneider.

Briggs:To see Jack Schneider. And 1 call him up and say, "Hey, this is Don here in town." And he says, "Oh" you know, "Good. Come over and see me." And I go, "OK." So he says, "Yeah, come here at 9:30 in the morning." By then he was running Warner Amex (??), which was one of the first cable companies. This must have been the mid to late '70s. Somehow I'd been taking some movie footage, and he knew that.

Steiger: How did you go from stills to movies? What happened? What made you make that jump?

Briggs:Must a been about '78 when I was doing this. Because the other thing was that we decided at one of these Friends of the River meetings was they said, "We need a film about the Stanislaus." And I said, "Well, you know, I took a filmmaker down the river this summer." (Laughs)

Steiger: Who was that?

Briggs:Well he was a guy who worked for ATandT phonelines and he actually ran the television studio for AT7T corporate here in <San Francisco>. Wonderful guy. In fact his wife was on the boat that I flipped at <Crystal>, which we'll get to later. I said, "Oh, I know a guy." So I call him up and he says, "Well, you know, I do the television studio, but here's Doug next door," Doug happened to be a college roommate of a woman that David Halliday, one of my best river guide friends was married to, and he'd known a little bit about my still photography on some level, I can't remember what. And Lou Elliot had an old Canon Scoopit (??), a hundred foot load - it was an old news camera - a Canon Scoopit. And he loaned that to me. And I went down to this filmmaker and he gave me four rolls of film.

Steiger: So you had everything.

Briggs:Yeah. And I said, "Well, what am I supposed to do with this thing?" And he says, "Well," he says, you know, "I've seen your still work. Just look through the hole and push the button." I'm going, "Jeez, OK." Worst piece of advice I ever had. I mean it's good news/bad news. So I would pack up these four rolls of film and I would drive up to the Stanislaus in my Volkswagen and shoot 'em and took 'em back and they didn't turn out. He would process them for me on ATandT's ticket. And he'd look at 'em and say, "Oh, jeez, I forgot to tell you how to set the loop," You know, a simple thing in the camera. Clicking the two little things together. Load the thing and then when you put a lid on it opens those things up, and the loop's set. So he says, "Oh, jeez, I'm really sorry. Here's four more rolls of film." So I go back up. (Laughs) And that's how my film career started. And then I sort of started getting a little addicted to the moving image, 'cause I'd been taking these water reflection shots. In stills. And pretty soon I was looking through this and going, "Wow, this stuff is movin'." So apparently I had this camera on the trip that Jack Schneider was on. But I would shoot maybe 400 feet. On a two-week <Grand Canyon> trip I'd shoot 400 feet, which is about 8 minutes or 10 minutes worth of film.

Steiger: But you got broke in 'cause you weren't bavin' to pay for it.

Briggs:Yeah, I would take this stuff to Doug.

Steiger: Cause 400 feet is like 400 bucks, right? (

Briggs:Yeah)

Steiger: But you're not havin' to pay for it. Yeah.

Briggs:But, you know, everybody was chippin' in for this river thing on some level. I ended up making a 30 minute documentary on the Stanislaus for $5,000. Thanks to ATandT and a few other corporations.

Steiger: Now was there narration in that? Was there a story? (Briggs; Yeah.) There was.

Briggs:'Cause through Mm I met this group of filmmakers that I eventually had offices with. And when I went over to meet them, because of this other guy at ATandT, I went in and saw this guy, and he says, "Oh, you gotta come over and see Glen." You know, "he's gone down the river." I said, "Well with who?" He says, "Well, with ARTA," I'd never heard of this guy. So I go over to meet him and he says, "Oh yeah, I started a film for Lou Elliot," you know, "last year." And I was astounded that some of my river friends didn't mentioned that they had taken this filmmaker down the river. It was Boyce and somebody. I guess they never thought of it. And he says, "What are you here for?" And I said, "Well I'm trying to make a film to save the Stanislaus River." Digressing all over the place. And he says, "Well, we've got everything you need here. We've got editors. cameramen, soundmen, whatever you want."

Steiger: We'll donate it.

Briggs:I said, "Don't say that unless you mean it," And he says, "No, I mean it." And so we all chipped in and did all the work, and I traded a river trip for two down the <Grand Canyon> - Rob Elliot donated that river trip to the Stanislaus Campaign, 'cause he grew up on the Stanislaus. So my editor edited the entire thing for free in exchange for going down the <Grand Canyon> with his girlfriend.

Steiger: Good deal for all concerned.

Briggs:Good deal for all concerned. And the camermen just threw in their time 'cause it was only a little bit here and a little bit there. And I started taking them down rivers, down the Stanislaus . . .

Steiger: Well were you shooting? Or you had cameramen who would actually shoot some of it, huh?

Briggs:Well once we got to the interviews, when 1 got the concept of shooting the interviews, then Glen would go and shoot the sound sync stuff with his CP. Yeah, CP somethin'. So I started taking this camera down the <Grand Canyon> with me and maybe shooting four rolls, which I was paying for. Shoot four rolls on a trip or somethin', maybe five. So I was learning to be very selective. And so this guy Jack Schneider had seen me shooting, and he says, "Well what kind of footage do you have with you?" I said, "Oh I just got some workprint from stuff I've been shooting in the <Grand Canyon>," He says, "Well, bring it on down." And I'm goin', "What the hell is goin' on here?" So he knew, he said, "What are you doin' in <New York>?" And he already knew I was doing this river saving thing, and I said, "Well yeah, I'm trying to get some national media coverage for this river we're trying to save, and I'm tryin' to peddle some photos and stuff, and he says come see me. And I walk in the door, and I had this big old puffy down parka, it's in the winter, and I'm pretty shaggy. And he gets up from Ms desk. He has this huge desk and there's not a thing on it except a pen holder. And he comes over and he takes my coat off, brings a chair, scoots it up for me, he says, "Have a seat." And he goes around, pulls out this yellow pad and says, "Before you leave town, I want you to go see these people." And he starts down this list, and tellin' me who they are. And he knew exactly why I wanted to see him. And he listed all the contacts at every single network and who 1 should talk to. "This guy is a producer for Walter Cronkite. Jonathan Ward. He's a great guy." You know, "I'll call him. Let him know you're

comin." And I'm just goin' . . . and he pushes the pad over. All that business was totally taken care of, and he says, "Hey, how're you doin'?" You know, I didn't have to wale through that whole thing and eventually have to ask him. He knew exactly what 1 wanted to do and he just gave me the stuff. . .

Steiger: And what you wanted to do was .. .

Briggs:Was to go get national media coverage for the Stanislaus. I mean I had some articles and some printed material. So he didn't know, he wasn't quite sure what I was gonna do with this. He didn't know how serious I was about this. So man, I immediately got that list and started callin' people. And he said, "I want you to call me every day. Give me an update." So I spent a day and then I called him at the end of the next day or something. I said, "Well, jeez, this is workin' good. You know, I've got Jonathan Ward who said he'll do a piece. And I talked to Steve, and they did this," and 1 pretty much had gone through the list that he gave me.

Steiger: In one day.

Briggs:Well, or had appointments lined up. And I said, "You know anybody on 60 Minutes?" Stupid question, right? CBS, He said, "You greedy bastard." (Both laugh) That's exactly what he said. He says, "OK." So he starts givin' me other names, and he gets me in to 60 Minutes, And I eventually start meeting all these people, But the issue was, even though it was our issue, and we were all totally into it because it was our little river, the issue was an old issue.

Steiger: It was over...

Briggs:Well, no. No. We were still trying to stop the dam at this point. At some point they were continuing to build the dam, but we were still going saying you don't need to fill it. Because we had all these reasons why they didn't need to fill it. There were already thirteen dams on the river. They had enough water. They didn't know what they were gonna do with it. They just wanted to build it. That's the Army Corps. We all know that. And they could justify anything. So . ..

Steiger: Well it's interesting.

Briggs:This really is the interesting part. So I went into 60 Minutes, and the story was an old story - the Army Corps of Engineers damming a river. Come on, they've been doing it for years. That's what they do. So what's - and he told me, he says, "You gotta have a hook. You gotta make it something that makes this different, some reason why they'd want to do it." He gave me all these hints. And I did the best I could. And I got these guys kind of all set up, but there was nothing really gonna happen right away.

Steiger: Nothing distinctive about it all.

Briggs:And I went in to 60 Minutes, and he says I know this woman, Brook Janis (??) who'll get you into 60 Minutes. So I went over and I got into 60 Minutes and I was walking through and there's Morley Safer sitting there drinking a cup of coffee, and I go in and see Brook and I give

her the pitch. And she says, "Well", and they all asked really good questions to make me justify why they should do it. And I wanted to save that river so bad, I kinda wasn't listening to them. I was determined that it was important. They just couldn't see that it was important. It was just me. So she said, yeah, well we'll call you.

Steiger: Yeah, don't call us,

Briggs:(Laughs) Oh this really gets funny. Over the next two years, or maybe even the next year of 18 months,I figured out -I got into 60 Minutes two other times. I can't remember how I got in the second time. But I talked to a different person, a different producer, and kinda got the same deal, but I couldn't pass it up. I mean this kinda came outa the blue. I don't know if it was Jack -I don't think it was Jack. I don't know how the second one happened. But the third one - Echo River Trips over in <Oakland> was kind of a <California> . ..

Steiger: Dick Linford?

Briggs:Dick Linford and Joe Daly. And I started petitioning with Joe Daly on this river. The first time I met him was at the World Series trying to get signatures. And I ended up being really good friends with him. Their secretary, a young woman who worked for them - her uncle was Don Hewitt. . .

Steiger: Who was the producer of that?

Briggs:Of 60 Minutes. The head man.

Steiger: Hold on just a second. 1 gotta check one thing. . . . OK. We're rollin'. Don Hewitt.

Briggs:Don Hewitt was the head of 60 Minutes, and even though I'd been kind of told no twice at 60 Minutes, I couldn't pass it up. She says, "Oh, I can just call my uncle, and you can go see him any time you want to." I wasn't gonna pass that up. So I go in. He's a very nice man. And he listens and he's very sympathetic and so forth and so on. And again, all of these people in <New York> are just so incredibly interested and sincere, And it's not phoney. So he says, "OK, I'm gonna take you over to a producer and introduce you to a producer, and we'll see where it goes from there. Her name is Brook Janis," That was the first person that I saw. And we're walkin' down to her office and I'm goin' (

Steiger: Oh-oh.)

Briggs: "Oh, I'm gonna get busted big time." And she saw me, and he says, "This is Don Briggs, and he's got a story about a river that I want him to tell you about." And she was pretty cool. I mean she just waited until he left. (Both laugh) She said, "OK." And I say, "Thanks a lot, it was nice meeting you," and he leaves and walks down the hall and she looks at me, and she says -I can't remember exactly what she said, but, "Would you leave and not come back" (laughs) I think is what she said. And I just said, "Well," you know, "what can I say? I can't say anything. Thanks." I left. And she says, "And don't come back." I said, "OK." (Laughs)

Steiger: And that was it.

Briggs:That was it. I didn't try any more.

Steiger: So this was before Mark Dubois chained himself up down there?

Briggs:Yes, we're getting there. So this is all groundwork that got laid.

Steiger: There's no hook.

Briggs:There's no hook.

Steiger: It's a nice river, but there's no hook, nuthin else.

Briggs:So somewhere along the line -I get a little messed up on the timing - but Mark Dubois, who was really a Gandhi type character -I mean really as close as anybody could be. And when it appeared that they had built the dam and they were starting to fill it up, and we were still trying these things - we had suits in the courts to stop the Irrigation Districts and to stop this whole thing. And we had this multi-layered approach. We had attorneys that were working for free, doing all this stuff. But it wasn't looking good. So Mark Dubois decided that he was gonna go in and chain himself somewhere at an undisclosed location. And if the Army Corps was gonna fill the dam, they were gonna have to drown him. And this was an idea that was floating around for a while, no pun intended. And there were these huge discussions that he didn't want it to be a Friends of the River thing because it was a pretty radical thing to do. But it was gonna be a personal statement so Friends of the River was gonna have to be able to deny that they were a part of it. And it would be the truth. Yes, Mark Dubois is part of the Friends of the River, but this is a personal statement, and we in fact tried to talk him out of doing this, because we love Mark. So Mark had to find somebody - all along I was telling him, Mark, this is my hook. You've been tellin' me to get national media coverage and this is it. And he says, "No, I don't want it to be national media coverage. This is a personal statement." I said, "Mark, you could go on there, and if you drown and nobody knows about it, what good does it do?" I mean I was - you know, I used to say Mark was willing to die for the river, but he wouldn't lie, and 1 was the other side. I would do anything to save the river. And he used to give me lectures about no, no, you can't do it that way. And I said, "No, we want to save it, don't we? Then we do whatever we have to." He'd say, "You don't really mean that." I'd say, "Yeah, I do." It was just a different way of approaching it So Kent Erskine's mother was a friend of mine, and I got to be friends with her, and when Kent moved to <Oregon> I continued to be friends with her and stuff, and at one point in time over in Corte Madera Creek in <Kentfield>, she chained herself to a tree 'cause the Army Corps was trying to channelize this little creek, Corte Madera Creek. And I'd known that, and it had really changed her life. Like her husband, who was Kent's stepfather, I guess left, and it was a big thing for her.

Steiger: This is they'd drive a bull dozer down the creek and just muck it out, is that what it was?

Briggs:They were building a concrete ditch. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: And, you know, she and a bunch of other activists around Marin County, you know, like housewives and stuff like that, did this. So I convinced Mark to go talk to Marty. And so he did, and I took him over there. And I had all my Stanislaus tapes, I'd been recording people and stuff, and I figured this is gonna take a long time, and I was gonna sit outside and work and try to organize these tapes. He was only in there about 20 minutes (laughing) and he comes out. Cause she just basically said, "Well, are you willing to die?" And he says, "Yeah." And she says, "Well go for it!" (Laughs) I mean it was a longer conversation than that.

Steiger: You thought she'd talk him out of it.

Briggs:Well, I didn't know. No. I said, "Mark, I'm not gonna talk you out of it. But I think you oughta talk to Marty." Well she knows this old guy who was an environmental writer, Harold Gilliam (??), an older guy who had been around forever at the Chronicle. And Mark did not trust the press. That's part of the reason he didn't want the press, 'cause they were always misinterpreting what we'd do and calling us obstructionists and all this stuff. But she convinced him that Harold was a friend of hers and he would do a good job. He would actually report it for what it is. So Mark talked to this guy. And then it came time for the action. And because I was kind of always operating on the fringes of Friends of the River -I mean I was never on the staff, and 1 was always doing my own thing -I was never a joiner. But because I was try in' to do this national media stuff, he wanted me to be kind of a part of it to help him out. But he totally didn't trust me either. Because he kinda figured if I knew where he was going, I'd send the press in. (

Steiger: Mark)

Briggs: Yeah. And I said, "Naw, I won't do that." So, he had this other guy who was a river person, and they kind of signed this blood pact type deal, that this other guy was going to help Mark, and he promised Mark that he would not come in and get him or tell anybody where he was. And Mark believed him, but he didn't believe me. So it was the three of us, and we nicknamed him Deep Paddle. Every night he would paddle in to where Mark was. He was the only one who knew where Mark was. And then he would take messages in from me, and the next morning he'd bring messages and he'd call me. So I took Mark - and Mark had kind of set me up a little bit. I was the last one to deliver him - to drive him to where he was gonna go. And he had me convinced he was gonna go one way, and when we get to that point in the road, he says, "No, go that way." You know, he was covering, just to make sure because I guess he didn't trust me. So I take him to this big bridge and he walks off into the dark. It was on a Sunday night. And this article was scheduled to come out on Tuesday morning. So it was Sunday night, and he walks off, and we had this battle cry, it was "Parrot's Ferry Is the Limit." Which is if they only raise the water to Parrot's Ferry, then that would preserve the nine mile stretch that we liked that was so beautiful. It was an incredible place.

Steiger: So this Is like now . . , (

Briggs:'78, '79.)

Steiger:And the original battle was like '74? (

Briggs: or '73)

Steiger: And the vote was lost and they built the fuckin' dam and now they're fillin' ...

Briggs:No, we just kept trying everything we could.

Steiger: And you guys are just not gonna give up.

Briggs:We're just not givin' up. So, I stand up on the bridge and yell out into the dark, you know, "Parrot's Ferry is the Limit!" That's the last thing he heard. And he goes in there and he chains himself, and the water's coming up. And he sent a letter to Colonel O'Shea, head of the Army Corps of Engineers in <Sacramento>. This wonderful letter. Saying why he's going it. And it was a very pure action: otherwise it wouldn't have worked. So it's kinda at night, and I get about halfway across the central valley in my little Volkswagen, and I had to pull over to the side of the road and sleep. And I get up in the morning and I drive in to <Berkeley>, and my phone number in <Berkeley> in this room was the only contact number available to anybody. I was gonna be the media coordinator for Mark. That phone started ringing off the hook, and it didn't stop. It would go from 8:00 in the morning until 10:00 at night. Everybody calling from Friends of the River . . .

Steiger: So that was in the letter.

Briggs:The media. I don't know how they got the word that it was my phone number. And I literally was chained to the phone. I had to borrow the phone from the woman that lived next door to me in the next room so at least I had a secure number that if I had to make a call, 'cause my phone did not stop ringing. I didn't even leave that room for a day and a half. 1 mean his mother was calling, saying how could you do this, tell us where he is, I'd say, "I don't know where he is. She'd say, "Yes, you do." I'd say, "You know Mark, he wouldn't tell me." "Yes you do. He's gonna die." So 1 had his hysterical mother and I'd say, "Listen, I just got a call from CBS, and I have to take this call." So now, once the word got out.. .

Steiger: Did you have call waiting?

Briggs:No. (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs: Once the word got out, then everybody in <California> media and the people in <New York> were calling me.

Steiger: 60 Minutes now is ready to talk to you.

Briggs:Not 60 Minutes, but Walter Cronkite's guy. So I was trying to hold them off, 'cause the water was still coming up, and he was out there somewhere, I didn't know where he was. And

Deep Paddle was going in and seeing him, and they were sending out search parties, the Army Corps of Engineers. And people were trying to find him. They said, "This has gotta be easy. You just ride around the edge of the lake and look for him, right?" No way! He had found a place and put the chain around some big rocks that couldn't be undone, and then he took the key and he took it about 30 feet away, and went back and locked that thing together. I mean he was serious.

Steiger: So Deep Paddle was the only one that could've saved him.

Briggs:Deep Paddle would go in and knew where he was and he promised he wouldn't tell anybody. So I kept sending messages in at night and then he would bring messages out. So at some point in time Colonel O'Shea came out and made a statement to the press that we have stopped filling the lake, because that's as much as we were gonna put in this spring anyway. Which is totally bogus. They pretended it had nothing to do with Mr. Dubois being in there. "We were gonna stop anyway." You know. And nobody bought it for a second. So the water had stopped, and he was still in there. And we were waiting. And at that point I said, '"Mark, all these people wanna come in and see you, I think it would be a good idea. What do you think?" So I had to wait for days. So he said OK, So the first night, this might of been Wednesday night, I sent in Bill Rudd (??). He was an LA Times reporter that Mark liked. There was a local reporter at the Modesto Bee, Thome Grey (??), that was important to the campaign, and a woman from a little newspaper up at Sonora. And so then Deep Paddle had to take a boat in to get those people. And so then these people in <New York> were pissed,

Steiger: That you let those other guys in. Briggss That said, "Listen, you've told us that you want to do a national story. And you're not gonna let us do it. We're gonna come out there and you've gotta take us to him," I said, "I don't know where he is." They said, "Yes you do." They absolutely would not believe me. I said, "This is a real thing."

Steiger: This is Walter Cronkite's guy,

Briggs:Yeah. I'm saying, "Sony.'' I mean I didn't want them to slip away, but like I say, everybody in the world was calling me. And so I sent a note in with Deep Paddle that we were gonna bring in CBS. And he says, "yeah." So I said, "I'm not gonna miss this." You know, things are starti' to calm down a little bit, and so .. .

Steiger: The thing is stopped with the lake. But he's stayin' in there. He's not goin' go out right yet.

Briggs:I guess, I don't know the exact timing of everything. But I decided I wanna go in.

Steiger: Get in on this. See the action,

Briggs:With CBS, I mean, God, it was so great. It was this little clandestine operation, you know, and I had to meet the CBS guys up at the motel room and lead them down into the Canyon. And Deep Paddle had this old, unmarked bread truck, with a fully rigged boat in it. And so he backed it up on the bridge .. .

Steiger: A raft.

Briggs:Yeah. And we took it out, and we carried it down the bridge. Which was not easy, but we couldn't take it into the parking lot, 'cause, you know, everybody'd know what we were doing. Anybody who was going out in the river at night. (Both speak at once.)

Steiger: The camera crew, OK.

Briggs:Somebody wrote in one of the papers, he says, "It seems like the only thing we need to do to find Mr. Dubois is follow the film cannisters - the trail of film cannisters."

Steiger: The people are pissed!

Briggs:Oh yeah. They're not real happy about this whole thing. So we get this boat, and we take it down and we put it in the water. And the correspondent we get is Harold Dow. And Harold Dow is this black guy . ..

Steiger: Is that D-O-W?

Briggs:D-O-W. (

Steiger: Yeah.) And he might still be on. I used to see him up until a couple of years ago. (

Steiger: Uh-huh.) And there was another Dow, but he was a white guy. But Harold Dow was there in his black leather jacket, and 1 swear he'd never set foot on a piece of dirt in his life. He was a city boy, what can I say. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: And we get the boat down there, and we get the cameraman, and the cameraman will do anything. So we're on our way down there, and he's starting to get a little nervous. And off in the dark, just about maybe twenty feet out in the water there's this little hole where the water pours over the rock. But it's makin' pretty good noise, which was good. But he says, "I thought the water's gonna be flat, I thought this was gonna be flat,.. What's that noise?" (Laughs) We say, "Aah, that's OK. Don't worry about it." (Laughs) So we get him unloaded on the boat, and we go out, and we're floating along, and there was some pretty good current for a while. And once we got away from that little hole, it was quiet. I mean it was a beautiful night, and the crickets and the frogs and everything were goin' and the stars were out. And pretty soon he got into it. He says, "Wow," he says. "This is really cool." He says, "The only thing'd make this night better is if I had a joint." (Laughs) Oh man, if I woulda known that. (Steiger groans.) But, you know. So we go in, and we do the interview, and I have my 16 mm Scoopit, and 1 take about 30 seconds.

Steiger: Well, they had a video camera, right?

Briggs:They did the video camera for the news thing, and it appeared on CBS the next day.

Steiger: They didn't fuck around.

Briggs:No, they don't, at all

Steiger: Uh-uh. What happens now?

Briggs:So that was kind of the big event to keep the water from going up. So at least we had the river one more year. 'Cause this was happening when the spring water was coming up. So we saved it - or Mark saved it - for one more year, which gave us more chance to come up with more hairbrained ideas. But things were not looking good.

Steiger: So he came out after that.

Briggs:He came out after that.

Steiger: The corps announced they were stoppin' just because,,. ".. .we were gonna stop anyway."

Briggs:Yeah, and actually Jerry Brown appeared on the steps of the capita! and made a statement on TV.

Steiger: To the effect that?

Briggs:"We should save that river."

Steiger: We shouldn't do it. Briggs; We shouldn't. You know, we don't need that water. You know, Jerry Brown and Ronald Reagan as governors. (Laughs)

Steiger: Successively. Er, was that it? Did Jerry Brown come after Reagan.

Briggs:Yeah. Well, then there was Deukmajian? I can't remember. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: So, in the meantime, the Tuolumne was coming under heavy threat.

Steiger: Now before . ..

Briggs:No, I'm gonna go back.

Steiger: We're gonna come back. Because we've got to wrap up what finally happened at the Stanislaus. (

Briggs:Yeah.)

Steiger: Keep goin'.

Briggs:Well, maybe it's better to do it that way. Things were not looking good. There was one more action that took place about a year or so later. And the river was really not looking good. But there were some activists from the disabled community, from <Berkeley>. And one of the great parts about the Stan was that you could take disabled people down the river. You could drive'em right to the edge and put'em on a boat. And Mark Dubois and Fred Dennison and Ron Caldwell started this organization called "ETC," Environmental Travel Companion, totally devoted to taking physically challenged people down the river. So, you know, you could go floating by some campsite and you'd look up there In the morning they're people in wheelchairs, and they were carrying people around. And I could show you the film. I put that in the film too. I mean it was really kinda of a cheap shot, but it was true. It was absolutely true. This was one of the few rivers that they could take - they could ride right up to the road, get out right at a road and let'em out. And it's their only chance to get into the wilderness. And there were these two guys, Bob and Dennis. And Bob had had polio, and one side of his body was paralyzed, so he had one good arm and one good leg. And he couldn't row. But his good friend was Dennis, who was a strong guy, but he was blind. And so they learned how to run the river together. Bob would sit in the back and tell Dennis what to do. He would steer him by saying, "OK, two strokes on the right, two strokes on the left." (Laughs) And 1 got that story done on local television with Bill Scheckner (??). And that was pretty amazing. I just thought for sure that that- 'cause they got a little screwed up in this one rapid, and I thought for sure that video camera was going into the water. And that was a wonderful piece. And I also was able to film that. In fact I was in another boat filming them, as they were filming. If you look closely in my film, you'll see the guy in the back with the TV camera. So these guys decide about a year later to do an action, and they call me. Now this is SWAC, the Stanislaus Wilderness Action Committee. SWAC. And so they put together this deal where these people were gonna' go in ~ kinda the same deal. The lake was now rising higher, and so it wasn't quite the same situation. And they weren't gonna be quite as remote. And they wanted me to do the media. And again, this had nothing to do with Friends of the River. I said, "Oh," you know, "why not? I'm on a roll here." So they had -I can't remember - Bob and I don't think Dennis was in there with him, but Bob was in there and Michael.

Steiger: Bob was the sighted guy.

Briggs:No, Bob was the polio guy.

Steiger: He was the guy that - yeah.

Briggs:And there was a woman, and this 300-pound quadriplegic, Michael. Big guy with a big black beard and really intense eyes. I mean, he was big! And they were all in there...

Steiger: And they had been down the river and they said, ''We'll do this too."

Briggs:Yeah, they'd been down the river, and yeah, we're gonna do this too. So, well, this is pretty funny too. So I can't remember how I got the word out, but I guess it was CBS. I talked to them, and they said, "Yeah, we want to go in." Then 1 get a call from NBC. I think I called them all, and I was gonna take whoever was gonna go first. And pretty soon all of em wanted to go. And I was goin' "Aw Jeez," you know. I'd say, "Listen, I told CBS - they were the first ones to respond. They did it last time, I gotta let'em do it." And they'd say, "C'mon, you can let us go

too." And so 1 kind of hatched this plan (laughs). We could only take in one crew at a time, because we had to go through these submerged trees. So I somehow arranged this pecking order. So I had go up into Sonora, and 1 had to round up three network television crews: ABC, NBC and CBS. And I had to get them to follow me down this road. (Phone rings.) (

Steiger: Ohmy god.)

Briggs: So before you turn that on, let me tell you . . .

Steiger: I just did. Should I turn it off? Briggs; No, I'll tell it without this little sideline. I was supposed to also take some photographs, and I forgot my camera. So I called up this guy that I knew in Sonora, and it turns out his wife's father owned the local camera shop. I said, "Marty, I need a camera." And I told him and he said, "Jeez, you're doin' that again?" And I said yeah. So he says, "Come on up." And so he fixed me up with a camera. And there was this geologist who was also in my Stanislaus company. Terry Wright (??), a complete wildman. And they also gave me a little extra energy (laughs) for this night, 'cause I said, "I don't know how I'm gonna do this." And they said, "Well here, try this,"

Steiger: Three network TV - oh yes, that's a good idea!

Briggs:(Laughs) So I'm weaving down through these trees oe this dirt road with these three vans following me, I don't remember exactly what happened except that they were all -- I'd taken in one at a time. I can't remember how I decided. I think I took . . .

Steiger: CBS first, probably, huh?

Briggs:Probably. And I sent them in there; I didn't go in with them. And one of them came out, I think it might have been the second one. And they wanted to get going. They wanted to get the exclusive. They wanted to get going and get theirs on first, the next morning. And I realized, if they do that - if they beat the other two, if they get a head start, the other two might not show it. So I had this - our vehicle - we had maybe two vehicles. We had a vehicle that was blocking the road, and I went and I got the keys and I walk off into the dark.

Steiger: No, I can't let you guys do it, sorry.

Briggs:And I went up on the hill and hid. You know, I was off in the dark. I could still hear 'em. They were yellin' and screamin', "Where is that guy? We gotta get going," You know, like that. And the only thing I could think of was unless they moved that vehicle, nobody was goin' anywhere. So I waited until all three crews did their thing, and then I came walking down out of the woods pretending that I didn't know what was going on. "Oh, what's happening? Oh yeah." "We gotta move that van. We gotta get goin'!" "Oh, OK, here, I happen to have the keys. I'm sorry," you know? (Laughs) So they all left. They went screamin' out of there. And the next day ail three networks ran stories. It was one of my media coups. (

Steiger: Yeah!)

Briggs: I had some better ones though. So, eventually, then, the following winter after that, these huge rains came. And that was that. The river went away in about a week.

Steiger: (Two speak at once.)

Briggs:There was so much water everywhere, and that little river that we used to ran on 1,500 cubic feet per second was a great water level, was runnin' at about 30,000. And, of course, there's some people that went up and ran it. You'd never catch me near it. I mean, can you imagine? 30,000 goin' down a little tiny canyon like that? I've seen some photos of it, and it's like "Whoaa (laughs)." And somebody nearly drowned doin' it.

Steiger: So it just filled the thing right up.

Briggs:You know how river runners are. Yeah. That winter. So that was that. Then Mark set about still trying to get 'em to lower it, and we even came up - we had the twentieth anniversary gathering last fall, of all the people who were involved in this. And there was a guy that came up with a really great idea about how we can get the river back.

Steiger: And that is?

Briggs: Well, in the meantime, because everybody's pumpin' wells all over the place, the water table is dropping. And so all the farmers are screaming, you know, and everybody, 'cause the water's dropping. So they'd come up with these ideas to recharge the ground water, you just let out a whole bunch of water from the dam. Because the water's not being committed to any irrigation district, 'cause there's no canal to deliver it to the district that has the rights, (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.)

Briggs: So the water's just sitting there. So now, you know, we're gonna come up with this idea to get 'em to do this ground water charging. You go down on the flood plane, and you keep the water in there, you know, in the spring. And it seeps down and it recharges the aquafer all over the place. So that's our latest idea (laughs).

Steiger: So you still haven't given up twenty years later,

Briggs:But after that little deal with SWAG, the Stanislaus Wilderness Action Committee, about the same time the Tuolumne River was being threatened by the Modesto-Turlock Irrigation District, And if we didn't switch, we were gonna lose that one too. 'Cause we were ahead of the curve on that one. They just wanted to do it. They didn't have plans for the dams or anything. So it was a winnable thing,

Steiger: The Corps of Engineers?

Briggs:No, this was the local irrigation districts.

Steiger: Well now wait. You were sayin' the Corps built it, but then there were these contractors, so the Corps would use independent contractors?

Briggs:Oh yeah. That's how it works. That's how the World Bank works. That's why they built the dam in <China>. The big construction companies around the world wanna build these things.

Steiger: Money to be made.

Briggs:Not Three Gorges, but a lot of the other - like the ones in the Amazon, particularly. The Americans or European contractors. There's big money from the World Bank to go build these dams.

Steiger: To go build this shit that nobody needs.

Briggs:That nobody wants. It's really a nasty thing. So in the midst of all this other stuff, we did some World Bank protests and so on and so forth, for other things. So I bailed on the Stan thing because the Tuolumne is incredibly - it's not as beautiful a river, 'cause the Stanislaus was the only limestone canyon in the state. It was just completely unique, and just this very gentle place. And Tuolumne is a Class Four river, and you don't have time to look at the scenery. And it's really a lot of fun. It started out that only kayakers would do it, and then slowly but surely - Peter Winn actually took a snout rig down there at one time.

Steiger: High water.

Briggs:(Laughs) Well, it was in the spring. But the take-out is a nightmare. Hauling that big a boat around. So, anyway, there was a new organization that was formed, the Tuolome River Preservation Trust. And it was a group of environmentalists and river outfitters that put together this new organization. They sort of wanted to separate from Friends of the River, 'cause Friends of the River was still kind of doing this thing on the Stan, and they wanted to have a new strategy and do it more in a traditional way. 'Cause we had the time, and we just needed to get somebody in there that could tell us what to do. So they were trying to get this guy named John Aniadeo (??) to run the trust. And he had done a lot on creating the Redwoods National Park. An incredibly savvy, political guy. I mean he kinda ran the campaign to get Redwoods National Park, the big addition that they did. So he was looking for work, and he was looking at other jobs. So I (laughs), I don't know exactly how this happened, I ended up taking - he was trying to decide whether he was gonna go - and so I ended up putting together this river trip to take him down to try and convince him that he should take this on. And then there were some filmmaker friends and I was again-jeez, I didn't even talk about the Stanislaus film, Steiger:Well, we better. Shall we do that? Yeah, just do it,

Briggs:Well, I eventually got this film together on the Stanislaus, the idea being that if we couldn't take people - anybody we would take down the river would be on our side. But we obviously couldn't take all the politicians, so the only way we could do it was to take the river..,

Steiger: To them.

Briggs:To them. And the only way you could that was through a film. So that's when I took on making this film. And, you know, it was my first film. I really didn't know what I was doing. And I tried to answer every political question in this film, to counteract everything they did. So it ends up being a little too detailed on the technical stuff. But on the other side, I was there at a time when the Army Corps came in and bulldozed this guy's farmhouse where his family had lived for a hundred years. And I was there when they were bulldozing and burning his place, and he was going completely berserk, and I got him recorded yelling and screaming, mostly screaming at me, because he knew I was a white water guy. And he was just beside himself. I mean it's this old guy losing his house. And it was incredible. Bams being burned and bulldozers pushing. I mean it's really pretty dramatic stuff. And then along with Bob and Dennis going down the river, this handicapped couple. And Mark being chained. And it ended up being a pretty interesting film. So then i started doing one on the Tuolumne. So anyway, we took John Amadeo down, I always joke - did you ever see "Lunch at Clavey (??) Falls," the film I did on the Tuolumne, all those boats being turned over?

Steiger: I might have. Did you show it at a GTS or somethin' (

Briggs:Maybe.)

Steiger: I might have seen it there.

Briggs:And I was the only one that made it through?

Steiger: Aah, that was that trip.

Briggs:With John and Susan in the front? In super slow motion? My friend had a gun camera, or a rocket sled camera. The ones I used to take - you know, with the rocket sled and pull - remember those things? (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: Way before space. And he got hold of one of those. So we were shooting with that in super slow motion. I don't know how many frames the damn thing was going on. Wow. So, my friend, Big Dave Halliday had a buncha firemen with him, He eventually became a fireman after he quit running the <Grand Canyon>. He was rowing a boat, and he had Amadeo's girlfriend in the boat. And he flipped. And I always used to joke that 1 did everything I could t o - 'cause, you know, he was thinking about maybe moving with her someplace, or something like that, and I always joked that I was trying to kill his girlfriend so he'd run this campaign. But anyway, he eventually ran the campaign. And then I set about doing . . .

Steiger: He ran the campaign, and it worked.

Briggs:Eventually we won. Again, I set about doing the national media stuff, and doing fundraising trips. Taking people down to raise money. And eventually Marty Kent, the same woman that Mark went to talk to before he went to ____________________, through some New Age work that she was doing, she met Richard Chamberlain. And she said, "How would you like

to meet Richard Chamberlain? Maybe you could take him down the Tuolumne or something,'5 And I said, "Yeah, that sounds like a good idea." So we fly down to <LA>, and I take some slides-! have slides of the <Grand Canyon> and some slides of the Tuolumne. And this is for Richard's birthday party. And he's got about eight or nine close friends there. And I show the slides and stuff.,

Steiger: And he was big thee, right? What was he in, "Shogun" or something?

Briggs:"Shogun" had been done, and he had built this incredible house in <Beverly Hills>.

Steiger: So he was the "in" guy at that point in time.

Briggs:Yeah. And he had never really taken a public stand on anything, but he was one of the most recognizable guys anywhere, for years, because of Dr. Kildare and the whole deal. So when the slide show was over, they said, "We wanna go down the river with you." I'm goin', "Oh, OK." But, you know, everybody says that. But I said, "Well, when do you wanna go?" And he said, "Well, let's stay in touch." 'Cause this was kind of in the spring. And so I stayed in touch through Marty and eventually put this river trip together for them, I guess maybe the end of June. A couple months down the road. With the idea that if I could get Richard Chamberlain on our side it wouldn't hurt. This is a great story. It's one of my best. We had a lotta high water that year, and I guess the other year (??), and the Tuolumne was not kind to me. I had more scars on my body from five years, six trips a year on the Tuolumne, than from 25 years on the <Grand Canyon>. I mean it's really an ass-kicking place, and particularly when it's running at about 6,000 cubic feet per second, it is so fast you won't believe it. And the water's high enough that if people fall out they can filter through the trees and stuff. It's kind of dangerous stuff. So I put together this trip for Richard and Ms friends, and as it turns out, you know, like I say, people always wanted me to take'em down the river, but most of the time they don't follow through. But it turns out every single person in that room that night went on this river trip. (

Steiger: OK!)

Briggs:So I set it up, and I had the entire outfitting community up there. They have kind of assigned campsites, and I planned it, and whoever was gonna be camping at Indian Creek where I wanted to camp, no problem, you can have it Don. So I set up this trip, and it's like you can ran it in one day if it's a long day; if the water's high, it's a short day (laughs). But it's really nice to do three days and two nights. That way you can have two nights on the river. But you kinda gotta go slow and do some hiking to do it that way. But it's much nicer than just one overnight. So I told Richard that, and we set this thing up. And it's all ready to go. And I get a call from Richard and he says, "Don, I can't go on the river trip." And I'm goin', "What? What do you mean?" Well, he was filming "The Thornbirds," He says, "I can't get off work on Friday." And I'm just goin' "Oh, jeez," you know? So I start thinkin' real fast. And so then I try and talk him into doin' a two-day trip, Saturday/Sunday. And he says, "No, you told me that it'd be better with the three day trip." And I said, "Yeah, but. . .

Steiger: So he's thinkin' about his buddies --just let them go.

Briggs:And he says, "No, I don't want everybody else to have to go faster just 'cause of me." I mean, he's an incredibly nice person. So I'm goin' "Oh God." I said, "Well, you know..."

Steiger: You could hike in.

Briggs:There's a place where you can hike in. I said, "I've never done it, but I think it's probably OK. Let me check it out and I'll get back to you." Oh man. So I was scramblin. 'Cause this happened fairly soon before - and I can't remember if I knew what the water levels were gonna be. So I call up these people, and there's a little town on the shelf called Groveland, and again I got everybody to chip in to do this and that. So I said, "I need somebody that can pick Richard up," I had to make plane arrangements to fly him into <Modesto>, have somebody drive him up -I mean it was pretty complicated. Put him at the top of the trail and point him down at this place, which was gonna be right across the river, where a road comes down, right across from the place we were gonna camp the first night. So it was gonna be pretty simple. We get down there, we wait...

Steiger: Friday night.

Briggs:Friday night. And he comes in on Saturday. We'll just wait. We have plenty of time. We'll just wait til he comes. I said, "Whatever you do,"! says to this Kelly, I says, "Make sure yoe point out to Richard what poison oak looks like."

Steiger: Maybe Kelly should've brought him down.

Briggs: Well, you know, Richard's a fairly self-sufficient guy. So, it's all set out and we're ready to go. And then I start getting boatmen to do this trip with me. It was gonna be a three-boat trip. And I got Fred Dennis, who was one of the first guys ever to run the Tuolumne, in a raft, to kind of be the lead. And I was starting to get suspicions that it's gonna be pretty high water. But I couldn't get a third guy. And so Bill Setter finally said, "Well, you know, I've got this guy that works for me down here on the American and he's really good. He's never done the Tuolumne, but he's good. His name is Chip." And I'm goto', "Well, if that's the best I can do." So, we get down there, we get everbody loaded up and we head on down. And it's just kickin' ass. I mean there's all these rapids and you just, ooh. And there's one rapid called Rani's Head. And i just absolutely hate Ram's Head. It's just nasty. And so we stopped for lunch above Ram's Head, and by now things are startin' to relax into the trip. It's maybe only two miles down, but we're only gonna go maybe nine miles that day. And I'm talkin' to Fred, I said, "Fred, I've never figured how to do this rapid.*' And he says, "Well you know, if you go down the left wall over there" (laughs), you know there's this big, deep hole at the bottom. He says, "If you go there and kinda ran down the left side, you can slip right past that hole. There's a little slot there." And I'm savin' - and Chip is there. And he's never been there before. We had Fred go first and then Chip wfould follow him and then I would run sweep. So I said, "You know, I totally trust Fred with anything- my life. I'll try anything. I don't wanna do it the other way." (Laughs) "It just kicks butt every time." So, we go finish lunch and we go down there, and we're all in a row and pretty much committed to -I wasn't necessarily committed. It's not like a snout boat or anything where you're committed once you get on one side of the river. But I'm watchin', and Fred goes down there, you know, and he just slides on through just like nobody's business. And then Chip is down there, and Pm kinda

comin' in behind. Maybe I didn't have many options. And Chip goes in, and I don't know exactly what happened, but he got a little far - he got a little too much of the hole. And I can't remember exactly if he flipped or if it just pulled these people out. I think he did flip. And Pm goin' "Oh, no." And here I am goin' right down into the same place, my first time ever. And I lucked out and 1 slipped through. And so we rounded up everybody. Which, you gotta work really quick, 'cause the water's goin' really fast. And we had'em over in some - we didn't really get it over to the shore - it's really hard because of the downfall and stuff. But this one woman was pretty shaken up. People were -I mean, I was, and I wasn't even in the boat. (

Steiger: Yeah.)

Briggs: Well, to make a long story even longer, this woman almost didn't wanna go on this trip because she was deathly afraid of water. But she decided that this was her time to confront her fear of water.

Steiger: She's in Chip's boat

Briggs:And she's in Chip's boat. We didn't know about this, I mean if we would've known it, we would've put her in Fred's boat. (

Steiger: Mm-hmm.) But we didn't know until after. And she's freakin' out, I mean big time. So people are over there try in' to calm her down and stuff, and I'm lookin' at Fred and he's lookin' at me. And Chip is pretty shaken up also. I mean he's feelin' bad. But I don't think it was anything he did. I think it's kinda the luck of the draw in a way. I certainly don't know how I got through. Luck. So we get'em all calmed down, loaded up, and we're goin' down and we make it through <India>, which is this rapid named about India Fleming, one of the first women kayakers in <California>. And we do OK there, and then we come around and we're gonna go down through Phil's Folly. And the rapid was named after Phil Tow. 'Cause there's two rocks out there in the middle of the river, and at certain water levels it appears you can go through them. (

Steiger: But no.)

Briggs: Well, Phil tried to go through, and got stuck, and kind of did a little back end type flip deal, and it was not pleasant, so they called it Phil's Folly. But those rocks were completely covered. You could hardly - but there was big, nasty holes over it. So we're goin' down through there again... damn if Chip doesn't have another little piece of bad luck, and some more people get pulled out.

Steiger: But now this other woman is in with Fred?

Briggs:I don't think so. I think we put her back in with Chip. (

Steiger: Ooh.)

Briggs:So we do that little rescue, and by now things are getting really- I'm just goin', "Oh God, what are we gonna do?" And we're tryin' to get these people calmed down again, and I'm lookin'

at Fred. He's about 30 feet away. And he's lookin' at me. And I say, "Let's camp." So we go down to Tin Cup, which is just a little ways down. And I call up and I announce to the people, I say, "I've got some good news, and I've got some bad news. The good news is we're gonna go into camp now. We've had enough excitement for one day. We're gonna to go into camp, have a nice early dinner, try it again tomorrow. The bad news is that we're gonna have to get up really early so we can get down to meet Richard. So everybody said OK, you know, they wanted out of there. We get down to camp, and everybody gets on, and they're consoling this woman. And she's just, you know, completely losing it. And I'm just going, "Oh God," you know? So we get the dinner going and we get things kind of calmed down and so on and so forth. So we get up the next morning, and we have to go down. And I try to push everybody to get going, and get going and get going. So we finally get going, and we do pretty good from there to Clavey Falls. And Clavey Falls is a pretty nasty place. And I think a couple of people walked around Clavey.

Steiger: That woman probably.

Briggs:I can't exactly remember. But we had fairly uneventful runs. I mean they were really exciting. It's like you go over this big waterfall, and you get pushed over to the side of the river and then you gotta try and miss this big hole and all sortsa shit. But the time's getting late. And so I had this perfect plan. And I thought of every single thing, except one thing. I should have told Richard no matter what. ..

Steiger: Stay there.

Briggs:Stay there, 'cause we will be there. But I didn't tell him that. So we come down on Indian Creek, and everybody's expecting to see him sitting there on a rock. And he's not there. I'm just goin' "Ooooooh no." So I get the people from my boat into the other two boats and I said, "You guys go over there. I'm gonna go find Richard," And I tie up my boat on the other side and I start runnin' up this road. It was kind of like an old mining road.

Steiger: Did you see any tracks or anything?

Briggs:No. And I'm just goin'. "Oh God, I'm gonna have to ran - I'm gonna have to find out where he is, I'm gonna have to ran all the way out of this canyon to find out where he is," And I didn't know anything that I could do, so I just start runnin' up the trail goin', "Richard! Richard!" And he answered. He was on his way out He turned around and came back. It was that close. (

Steiger: Whew)

Briggs: So he got in the boat and I rode him across the river, and they all had this big, happy reunion, and they wanted to tell all about the exciting stuff and stuff like this. And I was just....

Steiger: A basket case.

Briggs:I just walked up on the hill and grabbed hold of a tree and just (laughing) sat there for a while. And I didn't even think about talking to Richard about anything. So we got up the next day, and we go on down and I'm still kind of- and finally Richard comes up to me sometime the

next day and says, "I understand that people wanna dam this river?" And I said, "Yeah." And he said, "Well, I'd certainly like to help." I go, "That'd be great."' He said, "What can I do?" And I said, "Well, you could go to <Washington> with us and make some statements or something," He said, "OK," Cool! So . .. to fast forward a little bit, it might have been another year by the time we got this campaign together. And we had Alan Cranston on our side. He was a US Senator. And Pete Wilson was the other senator. He was a Republican. And all our focus was on Pete Wilson, 'cause we had to get Pete Wilson, because if you have a split with senators,I mean, you're done. So we got every single person running rivers to write a letter. 1 mean we had the troops out there, getting letters - every person that went down any river in <California>, guys were getting them to write letters. And they got more letters, eventually, on this issue than anything else when he was senator. But still, that doesn't mean anything. We had to get him. The local congressman was Tony Cuelho. I don't know if you remember the name (Steiger. Yeah, but Tony was the head of the Democratic National Party, and he's the one who had all the money, and handed it out. This was his district. Big trouble, right? (

Steiger: Mm-hmrn)

Briggs: Se were gonna have to surround him.

Steiger: And Tony wanted the dam.

Briggs:Of course. He had to. (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs: So we were just gonna have to surround him. And,,, because the Tuolomne River is the river where <San Francisco> gets its water and power, and every supervisor in <San Francisco> was on our side, but we didn't have the mayor. Mayor Feinstein. And we worked on her too. We never did get her. But I mean we tried, oh man. So this went on for a couple of years, and John started getting this campaign part together.

Steiger: John .. . ?

Briggs:John Amadeo (sp??). He was running the campaign. And I'm trying to go fast here... through some of my contacts. 1 was able to get a piece on CBS Sunday Morning with Richard Chamberlain, going down the Tuolumne. Really a nice little piece. And I took them up on that. I made friends with this producer and hung out with him, and of course they had to do a little balanced story, so they were gonna have to drive into the Modesto-Turlock Irrigation District, and they just let me out at a restaurant. Went over and Interviewed them and came back and got me. And it was really a nice piece of Richard going down. And as it turns out, his grandfather used to fish on the Tuolumne, Which was a matter of luck. Maybe Richard made it up, I don't know. But he used to talk about his grandfather's tackle box. I mean he just did this little down home thing. So we took him to <Washington DC> And I was like, because he was kinda my friend - Richard came to our wedding.

Steiger: Yours and Susan's.

Briggs:Yeah, he showed up at our wedding. Because we were kinda hanging out and doin' this stuff. We took him to <Washington>, and I was gonna be kinda his aide, or just kinda be the guy (laughs).., and what we did, we did another river trip, and then after the river trip, Richard came home with Susan and myself, and we were living in a flat in <San Francisco>, and he spent the night. And then Richard and I got on a plane and went to <Washington DC> the next day. And it was just amazing. He kinda took the town by storm because, you know, you can't run Robert Redford in there anymore; he's been there too many times. Or Jane Fonda. Oh, by the way, I took Jane Fonda down the Stanislaus River. I should backtrack on that a little. And Tom Hayden when she was still married to him. It was a pretty funny story too. Um, so we come into town, and I don't know-I musta been working with somebody there, maybe Amadeo was plugged into the community enough they said hey, you know, the Washington Post wants to talk to Richard the minute he gets into town. So we do that. So the next day's the hearing, or maybe the day after. And we've been trying to get a meeting with Senator Wilson, and he won't meet with us. We come into town with Richard Chamberlain, and we have the meeting the next day. it's just the way it works, and we did it, and it makes no sense at all. But whatever works. (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs: So the next morning-or the morning of the hearing 1 guess - maybe we had a day to do this media stuff. Go meet with Senator Wilson, and then there was the hearing. And one of these mornings this big piece came out in the Washington Post style section with Richard. You know, Richard's in town, You know, it's a big thing. And so we were going over to Senator Wilson's office, and I was waikin' along next to him. And everybody knew that he was coming. And so you'd see, you know, all these heads were coming out of the doors. And all these theoretically sophisticated Washington women were all had their heads out the door and were panting and I'm just goin' "Oh god." And so we went in, and Pete Wilson was there and his wife was there. (Steiger laughs) And the whole staff, you know. And Richard is just one of the most charming people you can possibly imagine. Just nice, unpretentious. And, you know, Amadeo then got the Senator off to do the political stuff, and Richard and I just kinda sat there. And we don't know, I mean, we eventually got Wilson.

Steiger: You just sat there with Wilson's wife no doubt.

Briggs:No, I can't remember exactly what was happening, but it was kinda fun, you know, running him around. And we went into the hearing, and the hearing room was packed. And Richard had a seat up front. And he had told me that he was kinda nervous about doin' this stuff, but I kinda didn't pay attention. And I didn't even have a seat. And I was standin' back there and I was watchin' him, and he was visibly nervous. And the hearing was going on a little bit or something like that, and you know, you can - so I walk up and I go in behind -I have to get some people in one row to make room so I can walk in behind. And I go there and I tap him on the shoulder, and he looks up, and he's kinda surprised to see me. and I says, "Pretend that it's a movie." (Laughs) And he goes, "OK." So, I go back. And Simpson, from <Wyoming>, was chairing this committee. I mean, you know, we had all these conservative Republicans all the over the place. And Richard got up and he was nervous when he was giving his little spiel, and he was having a hard time getting started. And Simpson said something to help him relax. He

said, "Now this is not a big deal," or something like that. And he kind of told Richard just to not worry about it. And they kind of bonded somehow.

Steiger: So Simpson was like, just chill out, it's all right. But he's a conservative.

Briggs:Conservative Republican. (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs: And so Richard gave his deal. And then we ended up going out in behind all the committee meetings because the hallway was so packed. And Richard stopped and thanked him, and they had some words, some nice words between them. Somehow they had made this little bond, I don't know. So, you know, we went to Washington cocktail parties, and, you know, it was pretty cool actually. And I wore a coat and a tie and all that stuff. So, on the way home from that trip, we were at Dulles International Airport. And we were there about three or four days. And we're walking through the airport, and I had a garment bag -I was travelling with a garment bag and a shoulder bag. And we're walking across this big, open place in Dulles. And we kept passing people and I could see them looking and kinda giggling.

Steiger: Richard Chamberlain.

Briggs:You know. But I was kinda, oh, you know, it's Richard Chamberlain and the whole deal. But I stopped and looked back, and my garment bag was open, and my blazer and my white shirt were hanging on by the hook at the bottom, and I was just dragging this through the airport (laughs).

Steiger: Pretty suave!.

Briggs:And of course we had to buy the plane tickets and the whole deal, so I didn't have first class tickets. And so we go back and we work our way back into our seats, and everybody's going, (whispering), "It's Richard Chamberlain. Mr, Chamberlain," And so the stewardess comes back just before we take off, and she says, "Mr. Chamberlain, we'd like for you to come up into first class on us."

Steiger: And off you go, OK.

Briggs:First class, all the way back to <San Francisco>. Pretty cool.

Steiger: So you won that one.

Briggs:And we won. And some very interesting stuff, because towards the end, the one media piece I couldn't get was the Sierra Club Bulletin. Their magazine. And the Tuolumne was the birthplace of the Sierra Club. John Muir on the original fight to save Hetch Hetchy, it was the birthplace and the first battle of the Sierra Club. That's what started it.

Steiger: And they wouldn't go for it.

Briggs:And this was the Tuolumne again. We're replaying the same old story, and I couldn't get them to do an article. And I was upset. And then there were some rumors that toward the end, nobody thought we were gonna win. And the way things work in <Washington>, people don't like to be attached to a losing proposition, you know, to kinda save chips or whatever you do. And there was some word that the Sierra Club, towards the end, were not with us. And we steamrolled 'em.

Steiger: You won.

Briggs:We won. In the first term of the Reagan administration.

Steiger: James Watt and everything.

Briggs:Wild and Scenic River. We did it. 1 mean it was a great victory. And then it was - oh, I gotta backtrack a little bit. Yeah, we did this thing with Richard, and then in 1984, the Democratic Convention was in <San Francisco>. And so we put out an invitation to every senator and every congressman in the <United States> to hang around after the convention and go down the Tuolomne River with us. You know. And obviously there were a lotta people involved.

Steiger: This is before you won.

Briggs:Yeah, We didn't win until the fall or something. So, you know, everybody always, "Oh yeah, Senator So-and-so will come," And then they don't. So you never know what to expect. So the river outfitters had got this trip together, and they roughly knew how many people there were gonna be. And we had about somewhere between 12 and 16 boats rigged up, each boat having two or three people. And I don't know if we were gonna camp separately. I don't think we did. Maybe it was only 12 boats. But I was gonna row one of the boats, and then the outfitters, who were all river guides at some point in time, wanted to go on the Congressional trip, so they were there. George Wendt (??) was there, (

Steiger: Yeah)

Briggs:It was really great. And Joe Daley (??). And Dick, and Mary Mackinaw (??). I mean it was gonna be a cool trip. So all the boats are all lined up because they got all their guys to come in and pull the boats up. I didn't have to rig or anything. I mean it was great. Just come walking in and pick a boat. So I'm down there trying to get my boat together, and the bus comes pulling up. And I'm standing around scratching my head, trying to figure out this new boat, what am I gonna do, and tryin' to do this and that. And I hear this squeaky voice calling, "Don Briggs! Don Briggs!" I'm goin', you know, "Who's that?" And I look up, and this woman says. "Where's Don Briggs?" And I look up. It was Barbara Boxer. And she comes over there, and she just kinda grabs me. You know, and she says, "'Listen, 1 saw Bill Robersom (??) at a fundraising party last night, and he told me ! had to go on your boat." And I knew Bill. And I'm goin', ''Barbara, I'm not sure if that's a good idea," It's kinda the same thing (laughing) (

Steiger: Yeah!)

Briggs: I sez, "I'm inconsistent at best on this river." She says, "No, no. I gotta go with you," I mean there wasn't anything I could do, right? Weil, before she came 1 had already promised - we had this guy who was a conservative Republican fisherman, and he was our fisherman, our fishing expert. And he was with us, and he was a conservative Republican. And he had helped us a lot. And I'd promised him, because I used to fish in <Colorado>, I promised him that he could go on my boat and I'd row him around into all the holes so he could fish from the boat. You know, it was just like a big party kinda deal. So I already had him in the boat, and then I ended of getting Barbara Boxer. So here I have this conservative Republican fisherman, Barbara Boxer who had never been camping in her life, and I'm gonna row 'em down the Tuolumne.

Steiger: Totally liberal democratic senator from <California>. Briggs; The most liberal, probably, senator in the whole Congress now. (Steiger: Yeah) And so, you know, my boating was fairly reasonable. I didn't have any big disasters. It was a pretty comfortable water level and I was rowing around. And Don Moyer (??) I had him putting in to some pretty good places, and he was catching a fish now and then. One time he caught this fish, and it came off the hook and was in the bottom of the boat with 'em, up front. And she (laughs) I mean, they were hopping around trying to catch this trout to throw it back," cause he was a catch and release fisherman. And she was just - she'd never seen anybody fish before. And, you know, they were giggling up there like a buncha kids, I mean it was really pretty cool. Get down to Clavey Falls, and she decides she's not gonna go through Clavey Falls. Which is fine. So her husband, Stuart, goes with me. I've got a great photograph of me and Stuart in Clavey Falls around here. And Theodore Sorenson was on that trip. Senator Tim Worth, from <Colorado>, who happened to be -I think he was a Congressman in the area where my mother lived, and where I used to live. I think before he became a Senator. I don't know. Anyway, he was a totally wonderful guy. And various other people. Theodore Sorenson was an interesting guy.

Steiger: Was he Kennedy's speech writer or somethin'?

Briggs:Yeah, he wrote some of those books, I think. (

Steiger: Uh-huh)

Briggs:So then . . . .

