BEGIN TAPE 3, SIDE A]

Steiger: Okay this is Tape 3. This is the River Runners Oral History Project. Lew Steiger talking to Tom Moody. This is Tape 3 of an interview done on September 16, 1998, and this is now September 17, 1998. We're just gonna pick up where we left off. I had asked you.... (Moody: That leading question?) Yeah, and the leading question was, what happens if we--we were just talking about your belief that it was inevitable that we'd have to do away with these high dams, and that <Glen Canyon Dam>, you were saying it was a very short-term proposition, viable maybe just for this moment, but that its day would come. Then I said, "What if we don't change anything?" to which you launched off on this thing that got into "this is the golden age of houseboats" et cetera.

Moody: Well, the question being, "What if we don't do anything?" I think I have to rephrase the question, because I don't think that's viable as it is. We will continue to make changes to the operations of <Glen Canyon Dam>, because our society values our changing. You know, you've got to look at trends out there, and we do. But we have the tendency--because trends are unknowns--we have the tendency to believe those trends that we like, and not believe those trends we don't like. For instance, we like to believe the trends for the explosion of growth in population in Southern <Nevada> that is now at a million-and-a-half people is going to keep on going, until it's eventually, whatever, 30 million people. Well, probably won't happen. But whether it does or not, the trend in this society is toward greater appreciation and higher values over our lost riparian resources, okay? Our rivers and streams and all of our environmental resources. And as population increases, I think that it's reasonable to expect that those are going to become greater concerns, not lesser concerns. So, there are changes in values in society, and that's what we're seeing here. So, I think there'll be increasing pressure. If something's not done at <Glen Canyon>, there'll be just increasing pressure to make changes which will lower the benefits of water and power that the dam was first predicated on, and we will have a realization of increasing costs to other values that weren't factored into the equation of <Glen Canyon Dam>. And then the [specific?] question. So that's how I'd rephrase the question. I don't think we have a chance of doing nothing . It isn't going to stand still. The question is, "How will it change?" Or "What will individual components look like?" And, the question was, "Well, what about Page? How do we convince Page that <Lake Powell> is no longer viable?" Because the recreation is a big component to these lakes now, that wasn't a component, although that was part of their selling pitch. I don't think anyone really believed that it would be as big as it is now, or foresaw that. So, it is big. It's likely to get bigger here in the short term. I suggest that you could have changes, very reasonable changes in society that would have profound impacts on something like recreation at <Lake Powell>, and one of them would be a gray escalation, a tripling of the price of gas, or quadrupling the price of gas--not out of unreasonable, but simply up to where it is [in] the rest of the world, it's real cost. We're not insulated from that, because we import 80 percent of our gas, so we're not insulated from prices of gas. Well, if the price of gas is that much more, there's going to be a lot less long traveling, high petroleum use in recreation. And, a lot of people in Page will start putting their money somewhere else, because that's where the money will go. It'll make the newspaper stories and all, but it won't be a conspiracy. It will just be a hard fact of life, and people will make adjustments.

Steiger: Another thing you questioned was the ability of 'em to keep that lake full.

Moody: Well, the other side of the coin is, "What's the value of the product they have to sell?" And, this is the golden age of houseboats. They have a brimming full blue lake against a slick rock background. If we go to a drought period, which we've had this century, like others we've had this century, if the Upper Basin were to actually utilize the water that it has a legal right to, you're going to find <Lake Powell> dry more often than you're going to find it spilling. And a <Lake Powell> that has a 300-foot bathtub ring, and you've gotta drive a mile from Wauweap Lodge to get to the water, is not going to be nearly the recreational extravaganza that it is right this second. It's so easy for us to look at what we see now, and just project it ahead as if it doesn't ever change, but that will change up there just as what we saw at <Glen Canyon Dam> and its operations have changed. It will change. So I guess what I see for Page is over time--and it shouldn't happen in a five-year period, or there's gonna be a lot of people hurt really badly--but over some period of time, the value of that product there is going to decrease and the cost of utilizing that product is going increase. And the combination of those two things is gonna be just like everywhere else in this country where things have changed, you know. <Cincinnati>'s not what it once was, <Chicago>'s not what it once was. Those things are going to change. People will adapt to it, and the world will be very different thirty years from now than it is today. (laughs) Amen!

Steiger: Boy, you can't even imagine, can you?

Moody: What was it like thirty years ago? I mean, it was 1968, okay? We were just itching to get on this bandwagon.

Steiger: Yeah, you were just fixin' to go down the river.

Moody: And the whole world will look a lot different from 1968.

Steiger: I'd like to think that we could turn the corner away from this ... direction we've been going in, just in terms of development and growth, et cetera. But, I don't know, it's interesting in the river community, you know, geez the outfitters are beside themselves because in Grand Canyon River Guides there was a letter written recently that had the word "wilderness" in it. (Moody: Yeah.) They're just so threatened by that. (Moody: Yeah.) And a lot of guides too-I'd say the sentiment among the ranks of working guides seems to be seems to be--kind of four square against wilderness legislation, which is ironic.

Moody: The Wilderness Act has come to become a symbol in a polarized viewpoint that is really hard to reconcile. But, I don't think that it's the same thing. I would think of that as a signal of the lessening of a commitment toward environmental protection. I think it has certain connotations to people on both sides that creates very strong emotions, beyond what the reality of it is. As far as environmental, I am very involved now in stream restoration, in looking at ways of restore streams and riparian areas, from an engineering/techno standpoint. And I think there is more potential there, and there will be more potential over the next thirty years for people putting resources and time and commitment into that, than we've ever seen. And it will be because they care about it, because they want to do it; not because they have to because the EPA makes 'em, but because they want to. But we'll have to find ways that isn't one side wins and one side loses. It's kind of incumbent upon us to find this solution. The solution has to not have bloody losers. That's part of the wilderness problem, is that each side thinks of themselves as bloodied victims on one side of that battle. As long as that [exists (Tr.)], that's very intractable. (Steiger: Yeah.) I think there is tremendous potential, and we'll find better ways to do things. I don't mean to be too optimistic, it's not without it's hard times.

Steiger: Well, it will be interesting, this whole turn of the millennium, to see if we can squeak through there.

Moody: I think we'll learn to do things better. And part of doing better is not just making more money, it is doing it better. It's not pure yet, and maybe it never will be, I don't know. But it's better . As long as it keeps getting better....

Steiger: Okay.

Moody: Rah! rah! (Steiger laughs) Sis boom bah!

Steiger: Okay, we'll pause this right here, don't you think?

Moody: Sounds good!



