Don Paulson

November 6, 2007

4:32:14 (272:14 minutes)

Interviewed by Lew Steiger





Steiger:  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  Today is November 6, 2007, and I’m in <Page Arizona>, talking to Don Paulson, otherwise known as Wolf.  [Minute 00:32-05:00, project described, not transcribed.]  What I’ve been doin’, really, just for organization, I sort of have a standard approach that I do with everybody, is I just sit down and say, "Okay, how about if you give me a little thumbnail biography of yourself--family circumstances, background, growing up--just because it puts the river in perspective.  Before you got to the river, what was it like growing up, and how’d you get to the river?  And then it seems like the easiest way of going through it, for me, has been to just sort of say, "All right, let’s just talk about what went on chronologically," because than you can just kind of keep it in order.

Paulson:  Okay, yes, that’s fine.

Steiger:  So that would be Plan A.

Paulson:  Okay, that works with me.

Steiger:  We’re sitting here, looking at these pictures on the table, and we got some good ones.  Oh, my goodness, here’s a three-shot sequence in a magazine.

Paulson:  A German magazine, actually, of a boat flippin’ in <Lava>.

Steiger:  Oh my God, that’s a Sanderson boat.

Paulson:  Yes, it is.

Steiger:  And you were actually on this trip, weren’t you?

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  Not your boat though.

Paulson:  No.  I did three of these trips.  Three times motorboats flipped in <Lava>, and I was the trip leader on all three.  They didn’t flip for anyone else, just me, sittin’ there, so I got real paranoid at <Lava>, very much so.

Steiger:  That’s what I remember about that trip we did.  (laughs)

Paulson:  I was runnin’ left, I didn’t care.  I mean, I was gonna bounce off rocks, I didn’t care.  I was not gonna go down that right hole-- on the bottom hole.  But anyway, I just thought you might like to see some of it.

Steiger:  Yeah.  And that cemented in my mind, doing that trip with you.

Paulson:  But that’s a big deal to me, the flips down there.

Steiger:  Oh yeah!  It was a big deal to them, too, huh?

Paulson:  I’ll tell you about it a little bit.  Yeah, I will.

(microphone adjusted)

Paulson:  My brother says I talk about these flips, and they say, "what happened?" and I say, "Well, we were runnin’ <Lava> and the boat flipped and we went down, turned it back over, and went to camp."  He said, "You gotta tell more than that!"  What else?

Steiger:  Which is pretty good, too, that you got ’em back together and went to camp.

Paulson:  We did.  I know nowadays that the park service would be very--you couldn’t do that, it’s all changed.

Steiger:  I don’t know that it is the park service.

Paulson:  We didn’t have radios either.  Most of our evacs were done by signal mirrors.  We had some radios that we packed, but they were really erratic, and you had to have an airplane in sight to talk to anybody.  It just didn’t work very well.  So when these boats flipped, that was all I knew.  There’s nobody else coming, you would have had to set for another day or something before someone else came along.  There’s a lot more traffic on the river now, I think, than there was in those days.  Mostly the way it’s worked with scheduling and everybody....  And they’ve added user days too, from what we had in those days.  And there’s a lot of private trips.  We never saw very many private trips.

That’s all I knew.  I didn’t know to not turn ’em over and then just go to camp.  Every one of these were at <Lava>, so we were getting out the next day, so that’s what we did.  But anyway, I’m gettin’ way ahead of myself here on the story.

Steiger:  I’m just dinkin’ with this equipment.  Don’t mind me.  I want to just see here if there’s a way....

Paulson:  Do you want me to keep goin’?

Steiger:  Yeah, I think I can just....

Paulson:  I can tell you a little bit about how we came to be here, I guess.  My brother and I had been involved in the river since around ’71, but we grew up, up in <Redmond Utah>, which is up by <Richfield>.  It’s in South-Central <Utah>.  Our sister, who’s older than us, married a guy from <Richfield>, and his father had a shoe store up there.  And when <Page> started, the government put out contracts for businesses to move to this town.  It was a government town, and so everything like the shoe store, the grocery store, the barber, everything, that’s what you did, you made a bid on it, and then they awarded you a contract, and that’s what you moved to <Page>.  So he packed up and moved from <Richfield> to <Page> in 1958.  Well, my sister and her husband came with him, and so they came here to <Page>.  My brother and I, the first time we came to <Page> the bridge wasn’t built.  We came over the Kaibab and then around that way and up to <Page> and back, just to visit.  We were just kids, you know, but we came down here to visit.  Then anyway, it went on, and when I was getting out of high school, I came down here and worked as a dispatcher for the Page Ranger station in the summers when I was goin’ to college.  And Jerry Sanderson and Bill Diamond were both Page Rangers, which is the police force.  They were U.S. Bureau of Reclamation Rangers, and they worked for them.  And I dispatched for ’em in the summer.  They talked to me at that time about this river thing they had goin’ on in the <Grand Canyon>.  And it sounded interesting to me, but it wasn’t something that I thought, "Man, I need to go...."  What they were doing, it was more like a family vacation type thing, at the time.  It wasn’t really a business yet.  They were just starting to get a business going.  And this is like ’65, ’66, ’67.  ’67, in that era somewhere, is where they really started saying, "Wow, maybe we got somethin’ goin’ here that we can do a business."

	But anyway, I had no idea what it was to go down the river in the <Grand Canyon>, but I had heard about it through them, because Sanderson’s family had been doin’ it through his father, Rod Sanderson.  Diamond got involved through Jerry.  But I’d heard about it, but it just didn’t light my fire too much, so I wasn’t like, "Man, that’s somethin’ I gotta go do!" you know.  But anyway, my girlfriend in high school got pregnant, so I ended up getting married, and I had that to deal with too.  So I was going to college, doing whatever, <Vietnam> was goin’ on, as you know, and a lot of guys came from that.  But I got a deferment because I was married with a kid, so they gave [me] a deferment.  Anyway, I ended up gettin’ out of college, went to work for my uncle out in <Michigan> for a little while, couple of years, year and a half.  In the meantime, my wife decided to leave, and so we ended up getting a divorce.  Well, then I became available for the draft, and this is like ’69, ’70, right in that era.  When the very first lottery came out for the draft for <Vietnam>, I was available, so I went and did the physical.  I still remember my number was 209.  This is the first one they ever did.  They were going to draft up to 150 for sure--numbers.  From 150 to 250 probably.  And I thought, "Man, I’m goin’ no matter what."  So I kind of just partied all year pretty hard.  Hell, I was divorced, nothin’ to do, I was goin’ to <Vietnam>.  They ended up only takin’ up to 196, so then I didn’t get drafted, so then I didn’t know for sure what I was gonna do.

	Well, I came back to <Salt Lake>, was workin’ up there.  I actually moved back down to <Redmond>, was working a construction job.  My brother said, "I think I’m gonna go down and talk to Sanderson or Diamond about doin’ that river thing."  I went, "Oh yeah, wow, that’d be cool.  I think I might do that too."  So I came down, actually went to Bill Diamond’s house in the winter, talked to them about doing a river trip.  I remember he said, "Man, you’re big enough to hand pull a wagon," or somethin’ like that.  But he liked my size for running the river.  Left--he didn’t say, "Yes, you’re gonna be hired," or "no you won’t," or whatever--and I went back up there to <Utah>, working in the winter, never knew what was gonna happen.  Finally, like on a Friday I came home, and Pat Diamond had called my sister, who was living in <Page>, said, "Does your brother still want to do the river?"  And she said, "I don’t know, I’ll have to call him."  So she called up there on Friday, said, "Pat Diamond called and wants to know if you want to do a river trip."   I said, "Yeah, dang straight, I do!  I’m goin’!  When?"  And she said, "Monday."  I said, "Well, okay, I’m comin’, tell him I’ll be there."  So I packed up my stuff, quit my job up there, came down here, drove down on Sunday night.  I didn’t even get here to help ’em rig or nothin’.

Steiger:  How far of a drive is that?

Paulson:  It’s only about four hours from here, but....

Steiger:  It’s a drive, yeah.

Paulson:  I came down.  When I got here, they had the boats rigged.  I just went and talked to Sanderson, I think, whoever it was, talked to him, said, "I’m here," and went to orientation that night.  Had no clue what the heck was goin’ on.  Went and got in the back of the truck the next morning, drove down to <Lee's Ferry>.  We used to pack our ice and all that stuff in the back of the truck in those days.  Loaded up the boat, and went down the river, and thought, "Wow, man, what a place!"  I was just in awe of it, I couldn’t believe it was there.

	The guy I was with, was a guy named Kim Rawlins--Grub Worm.  And the second boatman on that trip was Ken Hawkins that worked at <Lee's Ferry> for years, was the maintenance guy at <Lee's Ferry>.  But anyway, I went with them.  On about the sixth day or somethin’, they said, " I think that we’ll tell Sanderson that you’re okay, that we’re gonna hire you, that you would work out for the river."  I said, "God, I hope so!  I quit [my other job].  I just thought I was already hired when I came down here.  I didn’t realize this was a test trip!"  (laughter)  I had no clue.  But anyway, that’s kind of how I started doin’ the river.  And then in those days we ran like four trips and then they said, "Here’s your boat, go get it," and away we went.  Never came close to running all the rapids before they gave you a boat.  I remember those guys telling you, "You’ll run ’em when you have your own boat.  Don’t worry about runnin’ ’em now."

Steiger:  Oh really?  "You’re not runnin’ my boat!"

Paulson:  No.  "You’re not wreckin’ this one!  Wait ’til you get your own.  Then you can wreck it."  But anyway, they gave [me] a boat, I finished out that summer.  My brother came down, started workin’ with us.  Went into the next summer.  I think Bill Sanderson was doin’ the shop work.  They called him ROM’s --river operation manager, but the guy that kind of puts the trip on, takes it off, all that kind of stuff.  Well, he quit to go somewhere, and Don Diamond took that job.  So then they needed another lead.  Then I became a lead the next summer, and then just ran lead the rest of my career, ’til I quit.  I never quit entirely.  I kept comin’ back and runnin’ a trip or two every summer.

That’s kind of how we got involved.  My brother came in, he would run some, go away for a year or two, come back.  He could just never get away from it entirely, and now he’s the downriver manager for Wilderness.  He’s been doing that for quite a few years.

Steiger:  Yeah, he’s the [ROMs].

Paulson:  Yes, exactly, he’s the main dude for the river part of it.  I did go, when Sanderson and Diamond split up, I went over with Diamond.  All my years were with Sanderson, except when Diamond first started, I went with him for two years, and then I came back to Sanderson.  And that was a money thing:  he offered to pay me more money, and at that time that’s what it was all about for me.  God, we’re the same as always, you know:  boatmen always are starvin’ in the winter and livin’ high on the hog in the summer.

Steiger:  You gotta make a living.

Paulson:  We were making, as trip leaders....  My whole career as a trip leader, for twelve years, was $55 a day, and that never changed, never went up.

Steiger:  Never, not one raise.

Paulson:  Never ever went up--until in my last years, I talked and whined and cried to Sanderson a lot--and Diamond--but Jerry offered to pay me and Wyatt Woodard and Karl McDonald and Hoss Sanderson I think were the four leads he had, and he paid us in the winter, too.  He paid us a thousand bucks in the winter.

Steiger:  A retainer.

Paulson:  Yeah.

Steiger:  That’s pretty good!

Paulson:  Yes.  And this was back in ’81, ’82, somewhere in there.

Steiger:  You could get by on a thousand bucks a month.

Paulson:  That, and then most of us were workin’ at ski areas or whatever.  I was workin’ up at Brian Head.  So between that and then your other job, you could actually make enough to survive on, which was a big deal.  And then it was a thousand bucks a month out of their pocket, but I’m sure that’s what it was.  But we got that check all winter, without even having to be here, without having to work in the shop or anything.  I remember Jimmy Hall and a couple of those guys were pretty jealous of that.

Steiger:  Oh yeah!

Paulson:  Talked to me about it.  It was.  And it was a money thing.  No river runner that I’ve ever known of has made....  You don’t do it to make a lot of money, but you still need enough to survive on, I believe.  And wages have gotten better.

Steiger:  Yeah, they have.

Paulson:  But so has everything else.  I mean, inflation’s increased tenfold.

Steiger:  All that.  Yeah, I mean relative it’s probably still pretty similar.

Paulson:  Yes, exactly.

Steiger:  Maybe it’s a little better.  But actually, that thousand a month, that’s pretty good.

Paulson:  That was a good deal back then, it was, very good.

Steiger:  We had free room and board from Fred [Burke] during the season, which was pretty good.

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  And Fred tried to get us into the money market, and he gave health insurance back then, and kept the hammer on us to think about our futures, but he didn’t give us a thousand bucks a month in the winter!

Paulson:  We had a profit-sharing thing with Sanderson, but somehow--and I know it’s through the way they do--there was never any profit much.  I’m goin’, "Yeah, right."

Steiger:  That’s a famous thing in the movie business, too--you get points on the profit, and there’s never any profit.

Paulson:  When it came time to cash it in, we’re goin’, "Wait a minute!"  There was never any profit this year.

Steiger:  We made $500 million, but never did break even.

Paulson:  Anyway, that’s brief on how I came into the river and got started on it.  Just blown away by it, couldn’t wait to do it.  I loved it, it was the best thing I ever fell into--still the best thing I ever did in my life, now, lookin’ back on it, by far.  Really enjoyed it, enjoyed bein’ there.  Had a lot of fun, some heartaches, but a lot of fun.  I just wouldn’t trade it for anything.

Steiger:  That’s me too.  Yeah, definitely.  Well, this ain’t about me.

Paulson:  It’s just a unique place.  I never had the spiritual or religious experience I think that a lot of people have had or talked about.  For me, I had a lot of fun, it was a great place to be, it was a great job, I loved every minute of doin’ it.  But it was a job, and I felt very fortunate to be there, doin’ it.  It never made me "see the light" or anything, either.  I just really enjoyed what I was doin’, a lot of fun.  A lot of work, a lot of fun, good times.

Steiger:  Now, had you gone to the edge and seen the <Grand Canyon> before you went down?

Paulson:  Yes, I had.  When I came down and was working dispatch, I drove over to the North Rim and looked down.  Actually, I’d been to the South Rim once, too, as a kid, with my family.  We were going to <California> to see some relatives, and we came through <Page>, visited our sister, and then went around the South Rim.  I’ve been like the regular tourist.  I stopped and looked off.  But as far as being in the canyon, I never had.  I had been to <Lee's Ferry> once before, too.  And we drove around through--again, comin’ with my family, comin’ from <Utah>, we drove around through Marble and Vermillion and that stuff, and looked at it.  But I didn’t know....  I can’t remember it bein’ like seein’ it on TV or anything like river runnin’.  It was just starting to come into vogue.

Steiger:  Just barely.

Paulson:  Just barely.  So I really didn’t know what it was at all--I mean what a river trip was or entailed or anything, until I got on there and went.  It was just, "Wow.  People are doin’ this, it’s really cool."  I just really liked it, and always have ever since.  One of the big things, too, for me, is the people I’ve met, and the friendships and the bonds that we’ve all got.  They never go away, ever.  I mean, the people that we worked with in our era, I still hear from some of them.  If I ever do see ’em, man, it’s old home week, and we all just bonded really tight.  The new people I’ve met, same thing.  I mean, everybody’s got this bond that’s going on from being a <Grand Canyon> boatman.  It’s a real good feeling, and a real unique experience, I think.

Steiger:  Yeah, we just went up there and scattered Fred and Carol’s ashes on top of the <Paria Plateau>.

Paulson:  I thought that’s what you said you’d done.

Steiger:  And here it was, this little bunch of people that had worked for these guys thirty years ago.  (chuckles)  How often would you see that?  That’s a little company, but you’ve stayed in touch all that time.

Paulson:  The first time I had a Super 8 video of this flip, too--Breck’s got it somewhere now.  [unclear] kind of put it into a VCR thing.

Steiger:  Oh, that’d be nice to see!

Paulson:  Yeah, it is.  They sent it to me, and then we went up to Sanderson’s office and got a projector out.  I remember Fred and Carol were there also that evening, the first time we ever actually watched it.  Jerry had said, "We’re gonna get together and watch this flip."  And Fred and Carol came up.  Fred and Carol, Diamond, Sanderson, me, whoever.  We were up there.  I’m sure we were all drinkin’ beer or doin’ somethin’, whatever the hell we were doin’, but watched this little Super 8 video, but I remember we all [said], "Ooo!  Ahh!  Wow!"  Yeah, I liked those guys.

Steiger:  I remember talking to Bill Sanderson and Bob Euler too.  I did one of these with each one of those guys, and they talked about the early Sanderson boats when those guys would go, and they had those little powerboats, hard-hulled.

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  Now, when they were talking about it, were they still using those, when you guys....?

Paulson:  No.  When I came in, they had gone to the pontoons.

Steiger:  They figured out rubber boats.

Paulson:  Through Georgie [White].

Steiger:  Just barely, huh?

Paulson:  Yeah.  My first trip was on one of these 33-[foot] surplus....

Steiger:  Yeah, ’cause they were figuring, "Let’s get a big boat, make some money!"  (laughs)

Paulson:  Right!  They had to figure out a way where you could put ten or twelve people on one of these.

Steiger:  So it would pencil out.

Paulson:  To make money, that’s what....  And they had just got goin’ into that, exactly.

Steiger:  Because those little boats, too much gas.

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  Fun, but too much gas, too hard to do.

Paulson:  Yep.  This way, they could take a lot more people and make money at it, and they did.  But no, they had stopped using that.  Dr. Euler, you know, I did a couple of trips with him, too.  He was a lot of fun to be on the river with, the way he would get up and talk.  He had that presence, and he would start talking archaeology and stuff.  He was really a fun guy to be with on the river.

Steiger:  Yeah, he knew a lot of stuff too.

Paulson:  Yeah.  In fact, the very first flip that I ever was involved with, Wyatt Woodard and I were doing a one-boat run with him and some of his family and friends, and we went through <Lava> and it hammered me pretty hard.  "Wow, man, what’s goin’ on here?!"  And then the very next trip, we had a boat turn over there, which was the first one that I’d ever seen happen.  But then again, I’m gettin’ a little ahead.

Steiger:  Well, we won’t forget it.

Paulson:  Anyway, we just got into doing the river, and....  Well, I can go to these flip things.  1974 was the first one of these I’d seen, and was runnin’ <Lava>.  Went through, pulled over on the right side, not right below the saddle rock, but--about a hundred yards down or somethin’.

Steiger:  Halfway, and a good spot for rescues.

Paulson:  Yes.  Anyway, my people got off and walked up there, and the guy runnin’ the boat was Mark White.  They called him Spooner.  Helen Diamond was with me on my boat.  Anyway, all the people got off.  Jeremiah Jett [phonetic] was a swamper on that trip, too.  I’m just sittin’ there--in fact, I’d got a beer, settin’ there havin’ a beer, waitin’ for ’em to run.  They come through, come into the third hole, the boat comes in straight forward.  I think he swamped his motor in the "V" wave.  It’s happened a hundred times, you know.  Went in straight, comes through, starts surfin’, comes into the third wave, drops down, comes up, starts surfin’ out to the left, surfin’ out to the left, and then all of a sudden just goes way up in the air sideways and boom! upside down.  I’m settin’ there and went, "Whoa, man!  What the hell was that?!  I can’t believe that just happened!"  I’m goin’, "Helen!  Helen!  God!  Push me out!  Push me out!  I gotta get out and save ’em!"  My people are still all up there, whatever with their pictures.  I had her push me out.  Mark climbed on top of his upside-down boat.  I got out to him before he got to Little <Lava>.  Man, I’m tryin’ to push him into shore, push him into shore, and I couldn’t get him into shore.  And we both end up goin’ through Little <Lava>.  And I’m still tryin’ to push him into shore, and we go around that turn past that.  And I didn’t know, I was worried about somebody bein’ under the boat.  I didn’t know what the heck was goin’ on.  The only ones there now--all the passengers are gone--me and Helen and Mark and the two boats, one upside down, and me right-side up.  And I can’t get him up.  So I said, "I’ve gotta leave ya’, I gotta go.  I’ve gotta stop and go back and get people."  So he floated off on his upside-down boat, really shook up, scared, didn’t know if he’d killed people, didn’t know what the hell had happened, you know.  I stopped on the left side, downriver on the right side, and walked back up.  As I’m walkin’ up about to that campground on the beach there at Little <Lava> on the right side as you go by, my people were just getting to there, that I’d let off.  I said, "Go on down to the boat.  Helen’s down to the boat, and she’ll take care of you, and just wait there at the boat."  Well, every person on that boat, which was the upside down boat--I think there were twelve or thirteen people--every one of them swam to shore before Little <Lava>, on the left side of the river.  And they were all on that little beach below the spring.  There’s that one little beach, right at the head of the rapid.  Every one of ’em were over there.  Every other flip I’ve had, people went through Little <Lava>.  But this first one, every person made it to shore, above Little <Lava>.

Steiger:  It must have been high water, the way you’re talkin’ about it.

Paulson:  It was high.  I’ll show you a picture.  I’m sayin’ like 20,000.

Steiger:  I betcha.  Higher!  I’ll bet 25,000, goin’ over the saddle in the black rock.

Paulson:  In through the saddle.  Whatever elevation that is, is the level.  Let me show you a picture.

Steiger:  I know that level that you’re talking about, because that’s my key.  Maybe I got that from you.  When I see water goin’ over the saddle, that’s when I’m goin’ left in my motorboat!

Paulson:  Yes, that’s exactly it!  I did, man, I’m tellin’ ya’.

Steiger:  That’s true, too.  That’s a good lookin’ dog there.

Paulson:  Oh, that’s my old dog.  I loved him.  He died eventually.  Now I got two others.  I took ’em away for this.  But see, these are pictures of the flip, but they stop before the flip.  But see the water here?

Steiger:  Oh yeah.

Paulson:  It’s goin’ through the saddle.  And that’s that water level.  Okay, whatever water level that is....  Is that 25,000 [cfs]?

Steiger:  I don’t know, I’d have to look at it.  But these pictures, these are pictures of the black rock, and the water’s goin’ steadily  through the saddle in the black rock.

Paulson:  Yes.  See, it’s pourin’ through there.

Steiger:  Yeah.  So that’s the black rock, and this is the notch between the black rock and shore, right?

Paulson:  That’s in between the black rock, and then you’ve got to jump....

Steiger:  Jump across.  Over here is where people go through, though.

Paulson:  Yeah.  Well, here.  Breck went through here in his life jacket, once.

Steiger:  He did?

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  Is there a notch in there?

Paulson:  Yeah.  Well, you can jump between that rock and this rock, and there’s a notch in there.  And the water goes through the saddle of it.  The water will go through that saddle.  Anyway, that just kind of gives you a clue of the water level.

	But anyway, getting back to that story....

Steiger:  They’re on the left, you’re on the right.

Paulson:  And I walk up there.

Steiger:  Your boat’s on the right.

Paulson:  My boat’s downstream, probably a mile now, or however far that is from where I am.  Everybody.  It’s just me on the right side of the river, and all the people on the other side.  So I hollered over at them, above the rapid.  I’m wired to the gills, too.  I’m all excited and shook up.  I asked them if everyone was okay, if they’d got everybody, if everyone was okay, and they had everybody.  "Yeah, everything’s fine, everybody’s okay."  All’s good, life’s good.  I went, "Okay.  Well, now what I need you to do is I need you to swim this rapid in your life jackets."

Steiger:  (laughs)  They’re like, "Are you out of your [expletive] mind?!"

Paulson:  They said, "What?!"  And I said, "I have to have you swim this rapid in your life jackets."  And I heard back, "No!"  (laughter)  I said, "What do you mean ‘No!’?"  This is all bein’ hollered back and forth across the river.  They said, "We’re gonna wait for another boat!"  I said, "There are no other boats!  There will be no other boats until at least tomorrow, I don’t know when.  It could be two days.  I don’t know, but there are no other boats today.  You can’t stay there overnight.  I’ve got the other boat downstream with a guy on it.  I’ve got to get you in here and go."  I finally said, "Give me two people, the bravest ones...."

Steiger:  Did you have your jacket on?

Paulson:  No, I don’t think I did.  I think I’d left mine back at the danged boat.  But I said, "Swim, and swim hard over here to the right, and then I’ll be down here on this beach, and swim to me, swim to me on this beach here."  So finally two guys said, "Okay."  And they jumped in and they didn’t swim, all they did was float, and they went right into the rapid and they went right against the wall, and I lost sight of ’em, and I went, "Oh, Jesus!  God dang, they’re gone!  I just killed two people."  Well, eventually they popped out down below, and I’m hollerin’, "Swim to me, swim to me!"  And they floated on down, out of my sight.  So I walked back up and I said, "Okay, two more come."  Finally two more got in the water, but they wouldn’t swim.  They just would float.  Once they got in, it was like....  They were so scared, and I can understand that, they just floated through.  But they made it, but man it was killin’ me.  I’d lose sight of ’em against the wall.  Anyway, I went back up and I said, "No more two at a time--all of you at once!  All of you get in the water and come through to me.  And swim to me, swim over here."  So finally they all got in and came in one bunch, and I’m yellin’, I’m runnin’ up and down that beach, "Swim!  Swim, dammit!  Swim over to me!  Swim!  Swim!  Swim!"  And most of ’em go floatin’ by.  But Jett, and one kid he had with him, managed to swim over to me.  But all the rest of ’em went on down.  I got him, all the people are gone.  At least they’re through Little <Lava>.  I had seen ’em in their life jackets now, floating on down the river.  I’m hoping they’re all okay.  Got ’em, walked down, had gathered a couple of people up.  Went down, and Helen and the rest of the people got the rest of ’em when they got to them.  Got ’em all down to the boat, got ’em safe.

Steiger:  So everybody went down and got out by Helen, by the boat.

Paulson:  Before goin’ by Helen, yes.  So it was great.  She and the rest of the people were down there, gettin’ ’em.  And then they got ’em warmed up.  There was a little bit of shock goin’ on, but not anything major.  They were all in pretty good shape.  I got ’em all in my boat, loaded ’em up, and then drove down.  I had to go find Mark on his boat.  Went clear down to....  You know where you go down, you go past that basalt rock, when you’re goin’ straight from <Lava>, you go about three miles.

Steiger:  Yeah, Hell’s Hollow or whatever.

Paulson:  That’s right, exactly.

Steiger:  You go left, the water goes left in that notch.

Paulson:  Right.  And that’s where Mark....  He was past that.

Steiger:  Was he stuck on those rocks?

Paulson:  No, he got past them, and then on that point right below that, there’s two or three rocks.  I still look at ’em, they stick out.  And he was hung on those rocks.  He went through that rock that’s sticks out in the water....

Steiger:  Went between ’em?

Paulson:  Yeah.  And then went to the next point down there.  Georgie used to have a helicopter pad there or somethin’, right there.

Steiger:  Yeah, I know the place.

Paulson:  But anyway, he was hung right there.  Anyway, we pulled in.  He had been settin’ there for whatever long it had been--two or three hours, just stressin’ out, because he didn’t know what had happened to people.  He’s just settin’ on his upside down boat by himself, nobody around, thinking all these disaster things.  Got down there, got to him.  First thing I said, "I’ve got everybody, everybody’s okay, it’s all gonna be all right."  Then we all set around there and probably had a beer for a minute.  "What the hell was that all about?!"  Tied some ropes across the top of the upside-down boat, got some people to hold it down against a side tube for a pivot point.  Got everybody pullin’, we got it goin’ just a little bit at a time, little bit at a time.  Finally got it up in the air and was able to flop it on over.

Steiger:  With the tubes still on it?

Paulson:  Tubes still on, yes.  I didn’t take the tubes off, they were still on it.  We flopped it over.  Every one I turned over, I never did take the tubes off.  Once I did one, I knew I could do it without.  I didn’t have any extra help, it was just the people we had, and we were able to turn it over.  The only thing different about this boat and the second boat that flipped, where they were what we called ice chest units, frames.

Steiger:  And they were shorties.

Paulson:  They were not a full frame.  Three-quarters of the boat was just rubber and people.  We didn’t have basket frames, we had what we called the center section, that went down the center.

Steiger:  Right, with a tube in the middle.  So there wasn’t a lot of weight up front.

Paulson:  They were kind of snaky, you know.  There was no frame, no solid bracing up towards the front of the boat.  So I think that had some influence on why they were able to go over.

Steiger:  They didn’t punch through.

Paulson:  Right, they just got up and kind of surfed that wave.

Steiger:  And then got sideways enough where the upstream edge--where the current got a bite on that upstream tube, and then it wouldn’t matter.

Paulson:  Once the current got that tube....  That’s what happens, is it more shoves them over, more than....

Steiger:  Yeah, it doesn’t throw ’em over, it just catches that upstream edge.

Paulson:  And then starts pushes it, and it pushes ’em over.  Exactly what happened.  But we got up and went down to camp, lost stuff, lost some bags, probably some ammo cans.  I had the food on my boat, so we were okay that way.  Cooking stuff was all on my boat--most of it.

Steiger:  So probably the standard thing was you would give the shortie to the junior person.

Paulson:  That’s what it was.

Steiger:  And don’t put too much stuff on this guy, ’cause they’re learnin’, and they might as well have a lighter boat and less stuff.

Paulson:  They were.  And that was the thing.  We didn’t have a spare motor on that boat.  We used to put big oars along the side, those thirteen-foot oak oars, and that was your spare means of propulsion.

Steiger:  So you had two spares on the other one?

Paulson:  I had one spare with me.

Steiger:  So you’d go with three motors?

Paulson:  Yes, that’s what we ran with for years--we just ran with one spare for two boats.  And we had those oars on there.  But I tired oarin’ those boats, and they didn’t oar very well.  But you know that.  They were just too heavy, you couldn’t maneuver ’em.

Steiger:  At all.

Paulson:  At all.  I remember watchin’ Hatch do it, where they would run left at <Lava> with their tail draggers.  And they’d helicopter their people out, and they would come in and tilt the motor out of the water and then kind of row through the left side of <Lava> there somehow.

Steiger:  So they’d chopper everybody out, above?

Paulson:  Yes.  Ted didn’t want them to run--that’s the story I always got, anyway--didn’t want ’em to run <Lava>.  Yeah, right above, there’s a little camp there, and then you walk up on that hill.  Yes, exactly.  They would helicopter ’em out there.  And I had remembered watchin’ ’em run through there.  After these flips--I had one in ’74, ’75, and ’76--and after that I was pretty paranoid.

Steiger:  (laughs)  I can’t imagine why!

Paulson:  So I said, "I’m gonna run left.  I don’t care."  But I’ve seen Hatch boats bounce through there one way or another, I know it can be done.  It’d have to be really low for me to go right.  Now I’m back to doin’ right.  But the boats have changed too, and I think <Lava> somehow has changed a little bit.  But it’s just the water level, I think, is not as high.  Most of the time, we’re not as high as we were then.  Because we had those great fluctuations where we would get....

Steiger:  Thirty [30,000 cfs] to three [3,000 cfs].

Paulson:  Yes, every day.

Steiger:  I remember.  Somewhere in there, the early seventies, like 30,000 wasn’t that unusual.

Paulson:  It wasn’t uncommon.

Steiger:  You were seein’ it a lot.

Paulson:  And I had ran <Lava>, higher water, where the rock’s completely covered.  Or in a lot lower water where the rocks that make the ledge hole were out of the water.  You know, those two extremes.

Steiger:  So it’s not like <Lava>, the higher it gets, the worse it is.

Paulson:  Not for that.  Not for me on those flips, it wasn’t.  We’d all run it on higher water, and every time it was that same water level.  And every time I came past Cove Canyon and that big rock bar at Cove Canyon... when these boats flipped, every time that rock bar was just barely covered.  That big rock.  You know, the whole rock bar there at Cove.

Steiger:  Yeah, out there, that shoal.

Paulson:  There’s like one or two little rock heads that were stickin’ out every time.  And I happened to notice that.  I don’t know why, but I did.  So every time I would go by there, that was my big indicator too--that, and the water goin’ through the saddle, of what kind of water level we had at <Lava>, you know.

Steiger:  I’ll be darned.

Paulson:  But the second one I just showed you the pictures of here, that’s Jett, too, also.  That’s Jerry Sanderson and Joe Richards, that was the sheriff of <Coconino County> for a long time.  They were on that boat.  And Sanderson was givin’ Jett a checkout ride on that one.  And we got down....  I remember stoppin’ at <Lava>.  We scouted <Lava> from the left side in those days.  We were lookin’ at it, and I remember Sanderson sayin’, "Eh, piece of cake."  I didn’t know.  I mean, we’d had a flip, but it had to be something real weird and unusual.  Once again, I go down, run it, got hammered pretty good, but stopped, pulled in.  Jett comes through, that’s the pictures you’re lookin’ at, just kind of comes up, surfs, rolls over, boom!, upside down again.  I’m goin’, "Good God Almighty!"  But I’m wiser this time.  I let ’em all go by, everybody, and then I get my people back on my boat before I ever leave, then I go start picking people up from that point down.

Steiger:  And you’re not worryin’ about the boat, you’re gonna get the people.

Paulson:  The boat’s gone, I can get it in.  I’ve tried that program, it didn’t work.  I can’t get him into shore.  I’ll catch him wherever I catch him.  And I started just gatherin’ people from the rear end, down.  I remember Jerry and a few other people too swam above Little <Lava>.  I remember there was like an eighty-year-old guy.

Steiger:  Did they start to go left above <Lava>?  Did they swim out to the left or to the right?

Paulson:  Everybody went to the left.  Nobody ever made it to....  Well, the very last one, a guy got to the right, over by me, and I was parked there, and I was yellin’ at the people, because they were all still around the boat, and they were gonna go through Little <Lava>, and I’m yellin’ at ’em, "Stay away from the boat!  Stay away from the boat!" because I didn’t want ...

Steiger:  Them to get pinched.

Paulson:  ... in between the wall there, because you knew the boat was gonna hit the wall--it did every time.  And I didn’t want them to be hangin’ on the boat or....  So I’m yellin’, "Stay away from the boat!  Stay away from the boat!"  And finally I heard, "Wolf!"  And I go, "What?"  He goes, "You mean me?"  And I look down, and this guy had swam over to me, and I said, "No, not you!  For God’s sakes, you ...."  (laughs)

Steiger:  "Get in this boat!"

Paulson:  But that trip, when he flipped, was the trip you might have heard about, when Whale did like an endo at <Lava> in the Wilderness World boat.

Steiger:  Yeah, there’s a picture of that.

Paulson:  Same day.  Same day.

Steiger:  So were those guys there then?

Paulson:  They were camped ... oh man, at that camp above the anvil there.  One of those camps right above the anvil.  They were camped when we went by that morning.  This is how I remember it.  But anyway, I think we ran first that day.  I’m pretty sure we did.  Anyway, got down there and had flipped and were down below, trying to get our boat back organized.  And then they--Wilderness--Mark Jensen, Whale, all those guys, came down.  And Whale had flipped that same day in <Lava> too.  There’s a picture of it.  Where did you say there’s a picture of Whale’s?

Steiger:  Oh there was this magazine, Bush League or something like that.  Or maybe it was....  I don’t know, there was some magazine where that shot got on there.  Well now that was the third flip, or the second?

Paulson:  That was the second one.

Steiger:  Okay, so this time you actually did follow everybody, and everybody got out.

Paulson:  Yes.  Sanderson and like a seventy-, eighty-year-old guy had swam to shore actually above that little beach, and then they had crawled up into those....

Steiger:  That travertine and all that saw grass or whatever that stuff is.

Paulson:  Through all that saw grass, God, yeah.  And they did, they got down to....  They had actually made it down to that little beach by....  See, it took me probably whatever it takes to get all my people back.  And Sanderson, I was watchin’ ’em all, they crawled up into that grass stuff and crawled through that, and then down to that beach.  And I pulled in there, picked them up, went down, got most of the rest of the people, I think--yeah, I did.  The boat had went farther, than the people that went through.  I remember one guy was hangin’ on rocks....  I picked one guy up that was hangin’ on a lava rock where he could have let go and went about another ten feet and he could have walked out on shore.  They just didn’t know, they were scared.

	One guy, when I went around there, was settin’ on the shore hollering, screaming that he’d lost his wife.  He’d tried to hang onto her, he couldn’t keep her, he’d lost his wife, he’d lost his wife, go help his wife!  So I just kept goin’ past him, went a little bit farther, found his wife, she was okay.  I mean, shook up, but okay.  Got back up, got on the shore, went walking back upstream, and I could hear this guy just yellin’ to no one, there was no one there, "I’ve lost my wife!  My wife’s gone!  Ahhhh!" carryin’ on and on.  I thought, "Oh man, I got a problem here," and went up and tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Hey, man, I’ve got your wife, she’s okay," and he goes (calmly), "Oh, thanks man."  That was it!

Steiger:  Yeah, he got ahold of himself.  Okay.

Paulson:  What the hell?!  But we got him, and I know we were all there together, with Whale and all those guys turnin’ that boat over.  Got it turned over, and the same thing, went on down.  I think we camped at Pumpkin.

Steiger:  I wonder if Bart Henderson--he was probably on that too.

Paulson:  Probably.  I can’t remember who-all was there.  I remember Mark and Whale.  I don’t know which of ’em were there.  And I can’t remember, I’m pretty sure we ran first that day.  But I can’t remember exactly.  I could have that screwed up, it’s been a long time ago.

Steiger:  So where did that boat end up at?

Paulson:  That was way above the other one.  It was just probably, oh, a mile or so below Little <Lava>.

Steiger:  Was he still floatin’?

Paulson:  I think they’d got it into shore.  It was just in like a little eddy thing, hung up.

Steiger:  And somebody grabbed a line and went to shore with it?

Paulson:  Somebody, I think Jett, climbed back on top of his boat that time.

Steiger:  Because that was his boat and he was the swamper the first time.

Paulson:  He was a swamper the first time, yes.  And he had somehow got it dogged off the shore there, on a little sand beach.  And so we were able to get in, get it turned over, and go on down and camp again, and tell stories.

Steiger:  Nobody was hurt too bad?

Paulson:  Nobody was hurt.  The third one, to me, other than the shock of seeing these other two, was Hoss Sanderson and Shane Jones were on the boat.  With me was Joann Nissen and Kenny Wright.  They were the old-time river runners from <California>.  Kenny was actually on the boat that flipped.  Joann was with me.  I had actually had another trip scheduled, and they had a charter goin’.  All these people lived over in the <Big Sur> area of <California>.  We were friends.  So I swapped with the guy, whoever was gonna take this trip, and I took the trip they were on.  But it was me and Hoss Sanderson.  But on this trip we had a regular big frame.

Steiger:  So you’re thinkin’, this ain’t gonna happen, we’re gonna be all right here.

Paulson:  This time I pulled in right....  Oh, actually, we went up and scouted it.  "Ok, it’s that level again."  I come walkin’ back.  Hoss only went up to where....  I went down to Boatman Rock on the right side.  Now we’ve moved to the right side for scouting.  I looked at it and said, "Oh man, I’m goin’ left."  I come walkin’ back, Hoss is standing where you very first walk up, where you can see the rapid there from the right side.  He’s just standin’ there, and I come walkin’ back and he says, "What are you doin’?"  I said, "Man, I’m goin’ left.  It’s too big for me today.  I’m gonna bounce my way left somehow."  He said, "Well, I’m goin’ right."  And I said, "Yeah, I figured you would, but that’s your call.  If I were you, I’d stay as far left of the right as I dare run," or somethin’ like that.  But anyway, I bounced through on the left side, and I actually was able to get right behind the rock, basically, real close to the black rock, real close to the rapid.  And my people got up and we’re sitting there, and here comes Hoss through.  Okay, he comes into the third hole, motor goin’, powerin’, dead on.

Steiger:  Straight?

Paulson:  Angles a little bit like that.  Yeah, he’s on it, dead on.  The boat goes to the right....

Steiger:  Goes over toward...?  How could that be?

Paulson:  The front of the boat comes down and hits the rock--BOOM!  Man, I’m settin’ right....

Steiger:  It flips onto the black rock?

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  How in the hell could it....  You’re kiddin’ me!

Paulson:  No, I’m not.  It hit the rock.  I don’t know how.  This is a picture of it.

Steiger:  Oh yeah, well, that’s how.  It just got ahold of his right tube.

Paulson:  Yup, and it went off and up and way over.  See, he’s still drivin’.  He don’t know.

Steiger:  Not only is he drivin’, that boat is bent in an "L."

Paulson:  People are startin’ to fall off.

Steiger:  That’s goin’ into a 90-degree angle.

Paulson:  Yeah, they’re startin’ to fall.  You can see ’em startin’ to fall off, because the boat’s so on an angle.  This guy’s standin’ on the rock, so you can see where it’s comin’.

Steiger:  Wow.  I’m glad I never knew that, because I always said, "Yeah, you can flip these big boats, but usually it’s the soft front ends.  They’ve never flipped a two-frame boat over!"  (laughs)

Paulson:  Well, this actually had a center section, too, but just a shorter one.

Steiger:  But it was a big unit.

Paulson:  Yes.  The frame went halfway up the boat at least.  And even with this one, this one turned over, and then came down.  So I think what actually hit hard on that was this tube right here, the front of this tube.  Because I thought, "Man, as hard as that hit, goddang there’s gotta be people hurt his time--bad hurt."  You know, all up there in the bathtub and stuff.

Steiger:  Oh, man!

Paulson:  And some people were scraped up a little bit before they came off the rock.

Steiger:  Boy, those guys goin’ over, those guys on the high side had quite a ride, didn’t they?

Paulson:  Yup, you know it!  These guys are already gone.  These bathtub people are startin’ to go now.  He’s still drivin’.  You would still be drivin’.  You see his head there, but he’s still drivin’.

Steiger:  Boy, that’s a wild picture.

Paulson:  And anyway, came up and came down and hit the rock, and I went, "Oh! God Almighty!  Not again!  I cannot believe this is happening again."  Anyway, start the drill, started pickin’ ’em up, gatherin’ ’em, goin’ on down.  I remember Hoss, when he was under the boat, or him and Shane, they had to actually dive and get somebody out from under this boat, which they did.

Steiger:  Somebody was stuck under there.

Paulson:  They seen ’em somehow, and they couldn’t quite get out, and they were able to get under.  They still have life jackets on, but they were able to get under and pull this person out somehow, some way.  And they got ’em, we got down.  This was the trip where more people got banged up on this one than any of the others.

Steiger:  You can see where it’s just a weird....  To turn over that way.

Paulson:  Yeah, it is.

Steiger:  A lot more violent.  The other one would have been a lot softer.

Paulson:  The angle of the waves, everything is out to the left side.  To turn over on that angle was really weird, really strange.

Steiger:  I can see it just kicked him up, it got his upstream tube.  But there again, he was at just enough of an angle.

Paulson:  Yes.  One of these trips, the park service was there with that....  Remember when they ran that like thirty-seven-foot motor boat?

Steiger:  Yeah, Tom Doar [phonetic].

Paulson:  Yes, that’s who.  And they actually were there and helped us turn it back over.  Or they didn’t see the flip, but they came by and we were upside down, and they helped us turn it back over.

Steiger:  That came in handy.

Paulson:  Yeah.  Can’t remember which one.  But anyway....  Every one of these I was involved with, of course, that was a lifetime thing for them.  I mean, it was no more like a Disneyland ride.  They’d been involved in something major, which they had.  The camps at night were just incredible with all the stories people telling about where they had been, what they had felt, the experience of the boat goin over--not even knowin’, and then all of a sudden they’re in the water.  Because they were so used to--you know, they’ve got water on ’em--but all of a sudden this water is like something isn’t right here.

Steiger:  This ain’t the way.

Paulson:  And to realize that they’re upside down, and to get out.  Just had some great stories.

Steiger:  Just on the big boat.  I mean, on the little boats, you kind of talk about it, and you kind of really get into even....  Sometimes you do the standard orientation about, "Well, here’s what we do if we go upside down--swim here, swim there," all the time.  But I’ve never done that on a motorboat.

Paulson:  I didn’t either.  Even after these flips, I didn’t, because I’m not gonna sit there and tell ’em....  Although, okay, I thought, well, this is gonna be pretty cool.  I’ll take those pictures you looked at, of Jett flippin’, and I’ll set ’em out like the night before.  (ppfftt!)  That don’t work, that just scares ’em to death.  Then they don’t want to get on your boat, they don’t want to run it.  I had to stop doin’ that program, goin’, "Well, I thought this would be kinda fun to set these out and then tell some <Lava> stories before they run it, you know."

Steiger:  Bad idea.

Paulson:  Well, that didn’t... bad, bad move.  Then they’re like, "We don’t want to run.  What can we do?  Can we walk it?"  I’m goin’, "You’re gonna be okay, you’re gonna be okay."  But I had to stop putting those pictures out.

	This one, we actually lost all our cooking stuff, and food.  Hoss had all that.  Yes, he did, he had it all.  So we went down and camped.  Of course in these days, we were cooking on wood and stuff, too.  So we went down and made a fire.  We used to carry what we called a panic bag that had like Dinty Moore beef stew in it, and stuff like that, and we broke that out.  And we had enough cups and stuff, we were able to give ’em enough to get by.  But they weren’t all that concerned about eatin’ anyway.

Steiger:  You had some beer left, I hope.

Paulson:  We had beer.  They wanted to drink beer and tell stories.

Steiger:  Never mind dinner right now--gimmee another beer!

Paulson:  Every one of ’em had lost some--people’s personal gear, like some bags.  Because all we did, we just took their bags, put ’em on that center section, put a bungee cord over ’em.  They weren’t tied in.  We never rigged for flips at all.  We lost stuff, you know.

Steiger:  On all of ’em?

Paulson:  Every one, we lost some stuff.  A lot of stuff we were able to save.  I was able to pick up, we found a lot of bags floatin’ as we went down, that we were able to get.  We always lost some personal ammo cans, some things like that.  We lost all our kitchen gear, the porta-potty.  I don’t know, we lost stuff.  You never saved everything, because we weren’t rigged for that, to turn over.

	My last thing on those, though, after that flip, like I’ve said, I was really nervous about <Lava>.  So I would run <Lava>, and then I would get pulled in wherever down below.  When the next boat came through, I would never watch ’em.  I would face downstream.  I didn’t want to see it, I didn’t want to....  That’s how shook up I was about it.  I would not watch ’em run.  I could tell by the reaction of people close to me--you know, you’d hear ’em go, "Ooo! Oh! Ow!"  You know, whatever, and then it was all okay, and then I’d turn back around.  But I stopped watchin’ ’em run.  That’s how shook up it had me there.  And it still bothers me.  I still get, to this day, I run a couple of trips a year ago, and I was like ... "<Lava>, man."

Steiger:  Lookin’ at the shoal there.

Paulson:  My brother’s goin’, "It’s okay, it’s okay."  Now we’ve got these radios, and he said, "Well, I’m just gonna run.  You pull in...."  Because my people wanted to take pictures.  Anyway, we did a Discovery Channel thing--it’s supposed to be on TV this winter sometime on the Discovery Channel....

Steiger:  Oh, no kiddin’!  I’ll have to keep an eye....

Paulson:  It’s supposed to be the "Planet Earth" stuff, where they’re goin’ to--they were here at <Grand Canyon>, and then they’re goin’ to the Sahara Desert, all over.  There’s like seven places they’re goin’.  And we took this crew from England on the trip.  And then they would go set up and film us comin’ through the rapids, and then talk about the canyon, just whatever.  The Discovery Channel was gonna have like one-hour shows of <Grand Canyon>, of the desert, of, I don’t know, several places.  Anyway, last summer we took a bunch of them down.  So I remember him runnin’ <Lava>, and then he had all the camera people with him, and then they had to go get set up down below.  And I’m settin’ up there (pacing) "I wanna go!  I wanna go!  I wanna go!"  And I know it’s nothin’, it’s no big deal.  We’ve got bigger boats, things are different, the frames are different...."

Steiger:  And different water, huh?

Paulson:  Littler water, lot littler water.  I know I’m all right, but I had to wait up there for an hour and a half or somethin’ for them to get their cameras set up, and my belly’s churnin’ the whole time.  And this is all these years later.  He calls me on the radio--we had radios--he says, "You know the good thing about what we’re doin’ here?"  And I go, "No, what?"  And he said, "I’m sittin’ down below, and you’re still up above."  (laughter)

Steiger:  "Let me assure you!"  (laughter)

Paulson:  But anyway, of course we bounced through, no problem, nothin’.  That’s the <Lava> stuff for me.

Steiger:  Where would we be without our brothers?

Paulson:  Exactly.  Exactly.  But that’s kind of the flip stories, Lew.

Steiger:  You know, those were the last motorboats that went over, weren’t they?

Paulson:  They are.  Well, Mark Winham [phonetic] flipped one in <Nankoweap>.

Steiger:  Yeah, and there’s a bunch of ’em in <Crystal>, but as far as <Lava> flips....

Paulson:  Yes, no more that I know of--never been.

Steiger:  And that last one with Hoss was when?

Paulson:  In ’76.  And I don’t remember of another one happenin’ after that, ever.  And I thought for sure there had to be some.  I mean, if these keep happening to me, there’s gotta be somethin’ happenin’ to somebody else somehow, some way, I thought for sure.  And they didn’t change the way they ran.  I talked some of the boatmen into goin’ left there for awhile, and man, they hated it over there.  You know, you can’t see nothin’, it’s gnarly.

Steiger:  It’s not as much of a ride.

Paulson:  I mean, you go over that pour-over rock.  There’s no ride.  You’re just bouncin’ off rocks.  I remember Henry Falany was there one time, and I’d seen him up at <Havasu>, and he said, "Oh yeah, you’re the guy that’s doin’ these left-hand runs down there."  And I said, "Yeah."  And he said, "I’d really like to see that."  And I said, "Okay."  So he went down and ran.  Remember that big Confederate flag he had on those boats, with Denoyer and those guys?  I can’t remember who-all was there.  But I remember he was the one that said, "I’d like to see that left run."  I said, "Okay."  So he goes down there and sets up, and I come, and man, I was tryin’ to cheat so far to the right that I actually dropped part of the ledge hole.  When I dropped the ledge hole, it spun me like this, spun me around, not quite completely around, but almost, so I tried to straighten out, comin’ back left.  So I’m in that dead water below, powerin’ and powerin’.  Well, I ended up drivin’ myself sideways, clear over to right behind the "V" wave.  I went sideways through the third hole, facing the shore.  Out of that, Henry’s over there, lookin’ at me, just shakin’ his head.  I finally come over, he says, "I don’t think I’ll try that."  And I said, "Well, that’s not really what I had in mind."  It was one of the most ugly runs I ever made there, and it was the day I was tryin’ to show off to somebody.  Oh man, terrible.

Steiger:  I’ve done that the other way, tryin’ to run the slot in a dory.

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  And hooked that thing and go straight across to the far left, where it’s linin’ you up on the domer rock.

Paulson:  Yeah.  Let me tell you one more quick little <Lava> story here.  My brother and we’re all runnin’, we’re all still, I don’t know....  But when Diamonds got Harris boats--and I’ve got some pictures of us runnin’ these Harris boats....

Steiger:  Those were pretty nice boats, I thought.

Paulson:  They were.  I liked runnin’ ’em.  What’s funny is, I’ve got a couple of pictures here, and they’ve got Diamond frame with the Harris side tube.  Now, I don’t know why we did that, but we do.  But anyway, he’s runnin’ the regular ol’ Harris boat, and they had a piece of like three-quarter-inch plywood in the motor well that you stand on.  And he didn’t have it tied down.  Well, he was runnin’ <Lava> and he dropped the bubbles in the hump there.  When the boat came out of the water, I remember they had a beaver board in the front, and the beaver board blows out of water, or just breaks it, and it flies up, and then he goes over and he does the hard, like the ass end kicked way in the air, hard.  Well, he’s standin’ on that piece of plywood, it just elevated him out of the motor well about--and I’m not exaggerating--I’d say fifteen to twenty feet in the air.  We’ve got a video of that too.

Steiger:  It launched him.

Paulson:  Launched him!  Launched him!  He came down, hit the right side tube and then was in the water.  This is at the top, okay?  The boat went on through.  The people had no idea he was gone, the boat bounced through.

Steiger:  So he did that over that little domer rock?

Paulson:  Yeah, what we called the hump.  If you stay straight on those bubbles.

Steiger:  This is going left?

Paulson:  [Going] right, right side.  If you’re going on those bubbles, then you drop that hump.  You know, the bubbles go straight.  It’s hard to stay there, because everything in your body, you want to be on the right run.

Steiger:  Yeah, you’re looking for what used to be the old bubble line.  You’re on the burbles, you’re next to the ledge....

Paulson:  You’re comin’ right next to....  Yeah, the old bubble line.  And you’re right next to the ledge, and it’s hard to make yourself stay there, because it looks terrible, horrible.  If you do make it and you stay straight, you’re in great shape for the "V" wave, for the rest of the rapid.  Well, the boat went through, he came through the "V" wave, got to the third hole, comes in the third hole, and comes to almost come out, and it won’t let him out.  It recirculates him back in.  Comes out, he goes around the third hole about three times in his life jacket.  He’s goin, "Man, I’m in big trouble here, I gotta get out of here!"  So the next time he comes around, he grabbed ahold of the rock.  And again, there’s water goin’ through that saddle part of it, and it sucks him around, and he shot through that in his life jacket.  And this is in the days we more those Mae Wests.

Steiger:  So he was goin’ around in the eddy above the black rock?

Paulson:  He was in the hole, in the hole.

Steiger:  In the hole, not in the eddy.

Paulson:  Not in the eddy, in the hole, exactly.  For some reason, it wouldn’t spit him out.  When he came around the top, he finally kind of grabbed the rock.  He was right at the top of it, and it sucked him to the right, and then he went through that "V" slot in one of those Mae West life jackets, that could have got hung up easy.  But anyway, shook him up pretty bad, but he made it through.

Steiger:  Boy!

Paulson:  I don’t know why that popped in my head, but I wanted to tell you....  Oh ,he said he remembered people standing there taking pictures of him.  "Stop taking pictures and help me!" you know.

Steiger:  "Gimmee a hand, would ya’?!"

Paulson:  But there was not much that they could do.  Anyway, that’s kind of those <Lava> stories.

Steiger:  That’s a scary spot.  I had that in my mind.  I remember that there was not really....  For me it wasn’t really this notch, if that’s what we’re lookin’ at.

Paulson:  It’s hard to tell from these pictures.

Steiger:  There’s a little dip in that rock.

Paulson:  There is.

Steiger:  And when I see water surgin’ up over the black rock....

Paulson:  Yes, and that’s like right in here.

Steiger:  When I see water splashin’ up over that, then I go....

Paulson:  Right in that [saddle].  Yeah, that’s the saddle.

Steiger:  Even if it’s surgin’ up over it, I’m like....  That’s the notch.

Paulson:  Okay, this is....  You’re right, it is.  That’s the one.  See, I think it was surging through there.  You know how that wave surges and then drops back down.

Steiger:  Oh yeah.

Paulson:  It was steady, as you can see, goin’ through the "V."  Between these two rocks, it was steadily goin’ between there.  Pretty amazing.

Steiger:  Really amazing.

Paulson:  And the Hoss one, hittin’ the rock with the upside-down boat.  That one was really amazing.

Steiger:  That picture’s scary.  I mean, you can see where that was a really violent thing for those people.

Paulson:  It was.

Steiger:  But nobody ever had to be evacuated?

Paulson:  No, I didn’t ever have to evacuate.  We had some cuts and scrapes and that kind of thing.  Some shock.  And I don’t think we were as quick to evacuate in those days, as we might be now.  It was just a lot harder thing to do.  But basically they were okay.  Kenny was pretty hurt.  I think he went into kind of a shock thing, and he was kind of sick and shaky.

Steiger:  Ken?

Paulson:  Ken Wright.  He was hurtin’ pretty good.  I remember him being quite shook up.

Steiger:  He was a swamper?

Paulson:  Yeah.

Steiger:  With Hoss?

Paulson:  Yes.  Yeah, I think he was swampin’ it, yeah.  They still come back and run trips.  Joann’s here doing a <San Juan> trip right now.

Steiger:  And that’s who I talked to on the phone?

Paulson:  Yeah, exactly, Joann Nissen.  She’s been doing it since the sixties, somewhere, running these rivers.

Steiger:  Yeah, my plan right now is to do it as long as I can, ’til they won’t let me do it anymore, just cause it’s...

Paulson:  That’s mine.  I plan on being involved somehow, some way, whatever, with the river thing from now on, ’til, like you say, I’m done.  That’s it.  I had to go, I went to work to the plant for a while.  Well, for twenty-three years.  But you know, that job kind of fell into me.  Wyatt Woodard was out there workin’, and I wasn’t sure....  Diamonds and Sanderson were....  Well, they had split already.  Sandersons were talkin’ about sellin’, which they did, eventually, to Del Webb Corporation.  I didn’t know how I was going to fit into this whole program, of going from a family-owned company to a business thing, and I didn’t know....  Anyway, Wyatt ended up being able to get me a job out to the power plant, so I went out there.  And I knew my health was failing some, and I needed some--like my back, I’ve had to have it all fused and operated on and all that stuff, and my knees were shot.  So I was able to go get a job that gave me some benefits, and I was able to get that stuff taken care of.

Steiger:  Healthcare?

Paulson:  Healthcare.  And it worked out all right for me.  It let me live in a place I wanted to live at, I’m pretty happy with.  I go up to Southern <Utah> all the time, and I like that.  It worked out fine, it did.

But I’ll tell you a little bit about--I’m kind of bouncing around--but when we first....  We talked about....  Because you and I have done oar trips together in those snouts.  We were all a motor company when I first came here, like Arizona River Runners and Hatch and a lot of us were.  But a lot of us wanted to row.  We talked to Jerry and Bill about it quite a bit, and we said we’d like to try to row, you know.  They didn’t have row boats.  They had one ten-man raft that I heard that they had won from Georgie White in a poker game.  That’s the story I always got.  But that’s the only real ten-man we had.  But we had seen ARTA rowin’ snouts.  We said, "Well, we’ve got the rubber for snouts, we just need a frame.  We can put together a frame, and we’ll row that.  We’ll row snouts," not even knowing how big and clumsy and awkward they were.  We just wanted to row.  So we, in the winter, came up with a frame for a snout, and in March--and I don’t remember what year--but in March of the year we did it, Derald Diamond and myself, and Breck, and Bill Gillenwater [phonetic]--Giant--remember him?

Steiger:  Yeah.

Paulson:  And Roger Nises [phonetic].  It was in early March.  We went down to the ferry, loaded that ten-man raft, and that snout, and took off on a ten-day to Diamond.  So we left the ferry on a Saturday, and bein’ boatmen, we should have been wise.  We weren’t wise.  I don’t know what it was, there was no water--no water.  Got to <Badger>, couldn’t run it.  Sat at <Badger> until Monday afternoon, before the water finally came up high enough to run it.  Then we took off for <Diamond Creek> from there, rowin’ these two boats.

Steiger:  Two days behind.

Paulson:  Yeah.  Of course we didn’t stop at any of the attractions or anything, we just rowed all day, and we made it.  It’s no kind of record or anything.  Like you said earlier, we didn’t know how to row....  We’d run motorboats and had an idea about current, but as far as rowin’, we didn’t have any experience.  And that was kind of the thing on this trip, is they said, "Go row, go train yourself, and then if it works okay, we’ll schedule some row trips."  So we took off and we pretty well banged....  We didn’t do... slick hardly much of anything that I remember.  Both boats got to <Granite Falls> and we didn’t scout it, we were just gonna run it.  And for some reason, we were both so far right....  Breck and Giant and Roger were all in the snout, and they hit the wall down where that little point comes out.

Steiger:  Oh yeah, I know the one.

Paulson:  So Derald and I are in the next boat, and this ten-man had two oar seats.

Steiger:  You were in a ten-man?  So you had a snout boat and a ten-man.

Paulson:  Ten-man.  It had two oar seats and two sets of oars.  Yeah, it did.  Wood frame, no floor.

Steiger:  Do you have any pictures of that?

Paulson:  (regretfully) No.  If you stood up, it sunk, because you didn’t have a floor.

Steiger:  It was just the rubber floor?

Paulson:  Yeah, just the rubber floor, no floor board.  Yes, exactly.

Steiger:  And if you got water in it, that floor would just stretch, and you’d have a thousand gallons of water in there.

Paulson:  Exactly.

Steiger:  I had one of them.

Paulson:  But anyway, Derald and I go through.  And then we hit the wall too.  And we had to be so far right, and I have no idea why we were entering that far right.  But we hit the wall at the bottom of <Granite>, and Derald smacked into my back--he was behind me--and then went off into the river.  I’m pinned against the wall there, and I set back and take a dig on my oars, and Derald’s hangin’ out here on my right-hand oar.  "What the hell?!"  And he goes, "You ain’t gonna believe it, Wolf, I hung onto the oar!"  I go, "Get in the boat!  Man, I broke both my legs!"  When we hit the wall, I was somehow standin’ up and it had thrown me so far with such force I thought I’d actually broke both femurs.  It turned out just to be bone bruise, but man, at the time, I was like, "Ah man, I broke my legs."

Steiger:  Derald was all proud of himself?

Paulson:  Oh yeah!

Steiger:  "I hung onto the oar!"

Paulson:  [unclear]  I remember runnin’ <Crystal>, and then I couldn’t walk, my legs were so beat up.  And I thought, "God, somehow just get through <Crystal>, don’t turn over or anything, ’cause I’m in big trouble here."  I can’t remember who rowed it--I think Giant--but then I rode on the snout, and I remember bein’ real thankful to get through <Crystal>.  This was the Maytag <Crystal> days, you know.

Steiger:  Boy, that was, too.  Seemed like you would try to get just right of the old hole.

Paulson:  That’s what we did, too.

Steiger:  And made it, thank God.

Paulson:  Yeah.  And we had never rowed it before.  But they did, and we went on through.  I remember my other thing was, once again, back to <Lava>.  But we got to <Lava>, now my legs are healed enough, and I’m back in the ten-man with Breck.  And we were above that, and we put on two little, like, construction worker hardhats.  (laughter)  Yeah, we did!  I remember sitting there and there’s nobody around.

Steiger:  You brought ’em just in case, yeah.

Paulson:  The snout went through, they went down the right side, but Breck and I, we’re gonna row this thing left, ok?

Steiger:  So you waited until they went, and then you put on your hardhats!

Paulson:  Yes.  We did. [laughter]  And I don’t know what we thought they would do for us, but we did.  We rowed up to the edge of it.  With both of us, we could hold ourselves right there.  So we were just kind of settin’ there, holding, and goin’ "No way!"

Steiger:  On the left.

Paulson:  On the far left, far left.  We were so far left.  I mean, we were in-the-rocks left.  Left of everything.  We went so far left.  We finally let the current take us enough to bounce down through there, and that’s what we did, was bounce, literally.  We were on rocks, but we stuck it through.  Anyway, got back to <Page>, and they said, "How’d it go?"  "Great, no problem, let’s go rowin’!"

Steiger:  Oh yeah, "We can do this commercially!" [laughter]

Paulson:  "Let’s go rowin’!"  And we did, and away we went.  That’s how we kind of got the snout thing goin’.  I was glad.  I was very happy to be rowin’ anything, you know.

Steiger:  So that was from the crew up, it wasn’t an executive decision.

Paulson:  I’m sure they were considering doing it.

Steiger:  I guess you could see the writin’ on the....  Seemed like everybody thought they’d better hedge their bets if they did get rid of motors.

Paulson:  Yeah, I think so too.  And that was the big controversy at that time, was motor versus oar, and there was a lot of  --"Yeah, it could go this way, it could."  And so we did take off rowin’, and that’s when like you came along and rowed the snout.

Steiger:  So that was pretty early-on in the program.

Paulson:  Yeah, it was.  And I can’t remember....

Steiger:  I remember it was me and you and....  I’m tryin’ to think who was on that trip.  I know Felicia was.  Was she rowin’ a boat?

Paulson:  No.  She just would have been with.

Steiger:  She was kind of runnin’ the kitchen.  Kalohi.

Paulson:  Kalohi, yeah, exactly.

Steiger:  And who the hell else?  I wonder if Stick was on that.

Paulson:  Could have been, could have been.  I probably ran more trips....

Steiger:  Schmedley [phonetic], could he have been?

Paulson:  Yes.  Exactly.  Could have been.  Stick came into the company like in ’74 or somethin’ like that, so I’m sure that he could have been there.

Steiger:  I don’t think it was Schmed, but it was like four boats, the one we did.

Paulson:  Yeah, exactly.  I think that’s what we normally ran, was like four boats, trying again, to take as many people as you could with whatever.  Twenty people, four boats?  Twenty-four people?  I think we could put six people on one of those snouts, right?--if they were booked up, if they had it booked.  And every one of those trips were twelve-day to Diamond, too--I remember that--the snout trips.

Steiger:  Yeah, which was actually not too bad.

Paulson:  No.  We were able to do it, but water levels....  Of course, again, we had to fight the low water, too.  When I first ran with the company, too, we used to do twelve-day motor trips to Diamond.  They called ’em hiker specials.

Steiger:  No kiddin’?

Paulson:  Yeah, we did, twelve-day motors.  I remember doin’....  My thing on those was--one of the things I’d do is lay over at <Deer Creek>, straight across from the waterfall there, and then motor over and then hike <Deer Creek>--<Surprise> over to <Thunder>, and back.  To <Tapeats>, up and over.

Steiger:  Come around on the river.

Paulson:  No, we’d come back out the same, back over the plateau up there.

Steiger:  Go to <Thunder> and then just come back across <Surprise>, not down pats.

Paulson:  Not down <Tapeats>.  Never did go down....

Steiger:  Oh, that’s a good hike.

Paulson:  Yeah, that’s a good hike.  But that’s what we did.  We had all day, and the camp was already set up.  But it was a pretty good hike.  But that was one of the ones that I would do on that twelve-day thing.

Steiger:  Nice way to spend a day.

Paulson:  Yeah, we did twelve days to Diamond with motorboats.  The shortest we would do were nine days, anyway.

Steiger:  To <Diamond>?

Paulson:  Yes, to <Diamond>.  That was our shortest trip in those days.  We ran out to the lake a lot too, and all that stuff.  Actually took passengers to Temple Bar when I was first runnin’ there.  I remember motorin’ out across the lake with people sittin’ there, and the sun beatin’ down on you.  Oh man, hard way to go.

Steiger:  Was that the standard deal?

Paulson:  No, they changed right after that.  Then we took out at <Diamond Creek> for quite a while.  Then Sandersons got a jet boat, that they would run up and pick up the people with the jet boat.  They called it the Separation Connection, and they would run the jet boat up, and we’d give ’em the people and then we would go to Pearce Ferry.  We did that for quite a while.  And then it was always, just like now....  I mean, we were always....  Then we’d bounce back to <Diamond Creek> and do that for a while, ’til the road got so rough, and vehicles got so beat up.

Steiger:  Or the Indians raised their prices, the Hualapais.

Paulson:  Then we’d go back to the lake for a while again.  All the oar trips, though, would come out at <Diamond>.

Steiger:  I remember Fred....  We were supposed to take out at <Diamond Creek>, but he’d get mad at the Hualapais.  "No!  To hell with you then!  We’ll go to the lake!"  (laughs)

Paulson:  Today, this year, same thing.

Steiger:  They raised the prices again, everybody’s all bent out of shape.

Paulson:  I don’t know, but I mean, everybody’s still, "Do somethin’ with this damned road!  You know, you’re chargin’ all this money for it and there’s no improvement."  Now all their equipment’s over workin’ on the Buck ’n’ Doe Road [phonetic] or somethin’.

Steiger:  Oh, so they don’t have enough to ...

Paulson:  ... cover both areas.  So they kind of let the river part of it go.

Steiger:  Gotta keep her a-goin’ over there at the <Grand Canyon>... thing.

Paulson:  Yes, exactly, for the Skywalk.  Exactly.  That’s what they told me anyway.  I said, "God, why don’t you do somethin’ with this road?"  "Well, our equipment’s over on the Buck ’n’ Doe Road," or over [unclear] Meadview," you know.

Steiger:  But it’s harder for the big-boat trailers.

Paulson:  Yes, very hard, hard deal.  Beats ’em up.

Steiger:  You’re gettin’ ’em in though?

Paulson:  Yeah, I got stuck once this summer down there.  They actually had a front-end loader down there that was able to pull me out--right down in <Diamond Creek> itself, not the <Peach Springs> part itself.  Yeah, exactly.

Steiger:  I know that area.

Paulson:  But man, they were able to pull me out of there, which we were lucky to get out.  It was that real fine, gravely stuff, just gets so soft.

Steiger:  Wasn’t in August or nothin’?

Paulson:  Yeah, same time as ever.  And then it was startin’ to rain again, and I’m stuck, and I’m goin’, "Oh, man, I gotta get outta here!  This isn’t good!"

Steiger:  Yeah.

Paulson:  Actually Brian Dierker was down there that day, him and Scotty Davis, and they were doing the celebrity thing.

Steiger:  Sean Penn deal, yeah.

Paulson:  Yeah.  And he came over--Dierker--and I talked to him for a few minutes, and he said, "You know, I’ve got Sean Penn and that rock guy over there."  I said, "I haven’t got time to ogle your celebrities, man.  I gotta git outta here!"  (laughter)  "G’bye."  (laughter)  "We are done.  I’ll talk to you some other day."

Steiger:  That worked out.  Do you know how that turned out?

Paulson:  Uh-uh.

Steiger:  Brian became a star in that movie.  He had a big role.  He’s on the credits up in front of Hal Holbrook.  I gotta go see that.

Paulson:  He is?!

Steiger:  Yeah!  He’s an actor now--<Hollywood>.

Paulson:  Well, there’s always been some <Hollywood> in him.

Steiger:  Totally!  I mean, you think about it, it’s like, "Well, what took them so long?!"  (laughter)  ... for him to get discovered by <Hollywood>.

Paulson:  He’s known it for years!  They just had to find him.

Steiger:  It’s classic.

Paulson:  Yeah, it is, exactly.

Steiger:  There was that time when they lost the OARS truck and that Outdoors Unlimited truck.

Paulson:  Oh geez, it can happen so easy.  Now, you know, I noticed this year also, there’s tons of vans going down there with tourists out of <Sedona> and wherever.  It’s just a disaster waiting to happen.  And cars, like people have rental cars driving down there.  One of these days somebody’s going to get....  I mean, I’m hoping not, but it sure don’t look good to me.

Steiger:  Yeah, they kind of need to put a sign up there or somethin’, just to keep ’em out during the monsoon, just during August.

Paulson:  I know, at that time.  I know regular time, in the spring or even in October, it don’t matter so much.

Steiger:  Rainy season.

Paulson:  Man, that August down there is just a bad place to be.  Because it can happen so....  Like we all know, it can be up on the rim, it don’t have to be there.

Steiger:  Fred had this theory if you’d go in the morning--you had to get out before noon.

Paulson:  Right.

Steiger:  And if you could do that, you’d be all right.  But you’d better not be in there after noon.

Paulson:  Bad.  But see, now the Hualapais got a thing that you can’t do anything from seven to nine, or some danged thing.  And so then, once ten o’clock hits, man, that beach is so--it’s hard to get everybody in there and get ’em out, you know.  We try to, but....  I don’t know.  And the lake, the way it’s dropped, goin’ around to <South Cove>.  Now there’s a Pearce Ferry rapid, I hear.  Have you seen that?  I haven’t seen that.  I hear it’s gonna get worse.

Steiger:  Oh yeah.  Oh, it’s a rapid.  I mean, right now, if you saw it in the <Grand Canyon>, you’d definitely sit up, pay attention, real rapid, here we go!  And there’s a little moves, it’s not that hard to make, but there is a big-ass pour-over rock in there that you gotta get around.  You’ve gotta go one side or the other of it, and either way there’s little things involved.  And if you don’t, you’re gonna get stuck or take a beatin’.

Paulson:  Yup.

Steiger:  I could see it.  I think we might see these lakes dry up.

Paulson:  Yeah, I know it.

Steiger:  And that become an issue on the river now.  It’s conceivable to me.  I mean, we’re already seein’ it with <South Cove>.

Paulson:  Oh yes, I know, it’s goin’ down so fast there.  It could be.  I can see it bein’ too.  This lake out here, same thing.

Steiger:  And Powell up here same thing.  If it gets to where they just don’t even have enough to meet the contract.

Paulson:  No, they don’t.

Steiger:  Sorry, <California>.

Paulson:  I know, and that’s what it’s comin’ to.

Steiger:  But <California> gets first dibs, though, don’t they?

Paulson:  Well, I don’t know how that all....  I know they always have had, but I think <Utah> and <Colorado> and some of those states are startin’ to claim more of their share, which is startin’ to limit what they’re gonna let go down here.  A lot of our water here comes out of the Green River, the <Flaming Gorge>, which a lot of that’s going over to <Colorado>.  If they can get more, they’re gonna take it.  They’re even talking about running a pipeline from here to <St. George>, which I can’t see is feasible, for water.

Steiger:  Yeah, here to <St. George>, and also they’re talkin’ about it in Flag.  You see these guys talkin’ on the news, "Well, we’ll just get it out of the river."  Yeah, right.

Paulson:  The river’s goin’ away, it is.  The whole thing with the Southwest is we just keep getting so many more people, and the water is such a big issue.  Somehow, some way, somethin’s gonna crash.  If we don’t get more rain, more snow pack, more everything, and we continue to get more people, somethin’s gonna happen.

Steiger:  Well, it seems like we’re in for an extended dry spell.

Paulson:  Oh, I think so too.  Hey, the Anasazi had to leave--or that’s one of the reasons, because of the huge drought.

Steiger:  I can’t remember....  So you started, what was the year?

Paulson:  ’71 ’til ’82.   And then I would do probably a couple trips a year after that--one or two trips--up ’til....  I did some for Diamonds, and some for Wilderness, always--just those two.  When I ran full time, I ran some Fort Lee trips too, for Tony Sparks.  They were good, I liked that.

Steiger:  Yeah, similar set-up.

Paulson:  Similar deal.  They were all pretty close.  The only thing with Tony was he didn’t have a kitchen set-up, per se, like the other guys did.  So when you ran a trip for him, you had to go buy all your food and everything.

(break, at about Min. 82:54)

Steiger:  All right, we’re rollin’ again.  We were just lookin’ in the scrapbook again, and here’s a four-picture sequence, that leads up to this picture of Kevin Sanderson’s big flip down there where he went left over right onto the black rock, and you can see that it’s just huge, as he goes down in there.  And he’s straight, he’s lookin’ good.  He’s actually even pointin’ a little bit right.  He’s really squared up for it all, and it just gets him and torques his nose around.

Paulson:  Yeah, he comes through the "V" wave straight, and then goes into the third hole, and it just....

Steiger:  And he’s pointin’ kind of straight downstream, and it just nails him.  Just twists that whole front end over.  A lot of meat on there.

Paulson:  Yeah, I know it.  Pretty amazing.

Steiger:  Well, maybe we ought to just talk about how they....  God, there’s a bunch of pretty girls in bikinis in this scrapbook.  Those were the days.

Paulson:  Those were the days.

Steiger:  So when you first started, they had already figured out side tubes.  Sanderson never did.  Oh yeah, here’s a picture....

Paulson:  Wyatt, Hoss, Kalohi, Jodi Sanderson.

Steiger:  Oh, yeah.  Oh, and that’s Roger.

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  We’re looking at a picture.  Wolf, what was his last name?

Paulson:  Roger Nises, Wyatt Woodard, Kevin, and Jodi.

Steiger:  And Kalohi.

Paulson:  And Kalohi.

Steiger:  God, we were pretty young then.

Paulson:  Yes, exactly.  Exactly.

Steiger:  Is that Felicia right there?

Paulson:  Yeah, Felicia.  I’ve got lots of her in here.

Steiger:  Pretty fun time.

Paulson:  I had that picture....  I wanted to show you the one with the Harris boat here.  I looked at it earlier.

Steiger:  I saw one, where there’s a Harris tube and a ...

Paulson:  ... Diamond frame, yeah.  Okay, you’ve already seen it.

Steiger:  I did.  It is right in there.  Merc 20s.  We should talk maybe a little bit about the equipment.

Paulson:  Oh yeah!

Steiger:  When Sanderson got rubber boats, they never did....  I guess they kind of evolved with everybody else, didn’t they?  They ran a single-rig and I know they ran a double-rig.  I know they did at least once, because my grandparents went on a trip with ’em.

Paulson:  With a double-rig, yeah.

Steiger:  Jerry and Bill Diamond.

Paulson:  Yeah.  But I never did run one of those.

Steiger:  So by the time you got in there, they’d figured out the "S" rig.

Paulson:  Yeah, which it is still today.

Steiger:  Was that named after those guys?

Paulson:  Yeah.

Steiger:  "We’ll put a 33 up here, and two side tubes."

Paulson:  Right, two side tubes.  That way....  That’s the configuration of the boat, the frame and that.  But yeah, with just the two side tubes with the horn out there.  The way they rigged it was the "S" rig.

Steiger:  Oh, and the horn.  Well, did they have a middle horn?

Paulson:  No, no middle horn.  They just had a center section in there, but that middle horn had been cut off.  Same thing, only they just modified it where the bladder stuck out, you know.

Steiger:  Do you remember, did you ever know Crazy Al, Allen Wilson?  He ran for ARTA.

Paulson:  I don’t think so.

Steiger:  He quit in about ’76.  I was over talkin’ to him, and he has these pictures of runnin’ an ARTA motorboat.  And they had a little bitty frame in the back, and a side tube with a snout in the middle, and two on the sides.

Paulson:  I think that snout in the middle, too, I think that’s on the picture of the boat flippin’ in <Lava>.

Steiger:  Yeah, I know, ’cause he was there!  It wasn’t his boat.

Paulson:  Exactly.  Yeah, but he was there, yeah.  Exactly.

Steiger:  He was saying the guy took the picture wrong:  he needed to move the frame over a little bit to the left, and Allen would have been in it, with his jaw down to his knees.

Paulson:  Yup, exactly.  But yeah, the equipment, for years that’s what we ran, was those twenty-horse Mercs [Mercury outboard motors].

Steiger:  Are those same units still goin’, or they got new ones?  No, the back ones are still on and goin’.

Paulson:  Some of them are still there, and I think Diamond still runs that one Hoss flip rig once in a while.  Yeah, they still run ’em.  They’ve made some new ones, but it’s a similar set-up, they’ve made ’em a little better.

Steiger:  They put a little more weight up front.

Paulson:  Yup.  They’ve made baskets.  There’s no more center section.

Steiger:  There’s a basket frame, everything’s down low.

Paulson:  Which we should have thought of.  I don’t know why we were so dumb not to think about it.

Steiger:  Just to get that weight low on the end.

Paulson:  Yeah, weight low.  And also, God, just for all that extra storage.  Man, you can put all your pop, and in those days, you know, we carried at least forty cases of beer every trip.  We supplied that.

Steiger:  And some for the people too!

Paulson:  Yeah, and some for the people, Lew!  (laughter)

Steiger:  We were talkin’ about that last night.  Boy, when they said that you couldn’t bring company beer, that was a huge blow.

Paulson:  Big deal.  Part of the orientation after you’d get the people on the boat and leave and start floating, before you got to the bridge, was, you got a pop and a beer bag on each side, the beer bag always on the left side here where I sit.  And anytime you get a beer, get me one too.

Steiger:  That was the orientation!

Paulson:  Yeah, that was orientation!  That was, that was just part of it.  That part’s changed a lot, as we know.

Steiger:  Oh my God.

Paulson:  Big time.  It was more of a party thing.  At Sanderson we never had--I don’t remember any real training, like geology training.  They gave us some books to read, or we bought some books on our own to read, because people asked, so you want to have some knowledge of it.  But it wasn’t a big thing.  It was like:  go down there, give ’em a good time, make sure they’re smilin’ when they get off, and however you do it, just go do it.  There was not a lot of training.  Of course the park got in it.  Of course <Grand Canyon>-- this organization, the river guides [GCRG], boatmen have a lot more material available to learn from for even human history and geology and all that stuff.  That’s a good thing, because they have that knowledge that they can study up on it and be able to tell people stuff.  But we were kind of "let’s go have a party.  Let’s go down the river and drink some beer and have a good time.

Steiger:  Yeah, and you guys got pretty good at it--we all did!

Paulson:  We learned it well, too well.  Yeah, exactly too well, we did.  I agree, that’s what it was.

Steiger:  No, but as I remember, it was....

Paulson:  You know, we worked in the shop, but you did too.  You could take your break, and they didn’t care if you had a beer or a cup of coffee or whatever.  That’s how it was, you know.

Steiger:  You guys actually, I guess, punched a clock--or did you?  You had to clock in at the shop?

Paulson:  Yeah, we did.  They had a clock, yeah, they did.

Steiger:  Workin’ for Fred, we never did.

Paulson:  They had a clock, danged straight.  Yeah, they did.

Steiger:  I think we would just write down our hours or whatever.

Paulson:  None of us wanted to be in the shop anyway, you know.  We all wanted to be on the river, but you had so much time you had to do, and the pay was nothin’.  You had to get your trips ready and that.  And that was all they really wanted you to do, was come in and get your trip ready and go.  But we also....  You know, a lot of times we didn’t have drivers that would just drive.  People would take turns going to pick up trips.  [unclear]

Steiger:  Yeah, just to keep everybody busy.

Paulson:  Yeah give ’em some work when they’re off the river, and go pick up a trip and that kind of stuff.  We rigged and de-rigged every time, too, like what you did too.  Now they....

Steiger:  I wonder, did Canyoneers even have a trailer?  I’m not sure if they even did when I started.  But I remember for years nobody had trailers except for them.  They got the first one, because they were goin’ so fast and so tight.

Paulson:  Yes, they were, exactly.  Didn’t have time to do all their rig and de-riggin’ stuff.

Steiger:  I don’t remember who else got the next one.

Paulson:  I can remember Breck--Wilderness--was one of the first ones I seen.  They got one of those Landahls.  They put one boat on the bottom and one on the top.

Steiger:  Yeah. ARR got those before Wilderness.

Paulson:  They still run one, I think.  I’ve seen one sometime.  I think he has it this summer.  I’ve seen it the past one a couple of times.

Steiger:  They got the double-decker deal.

Paulson:  Yeah, that’s what I’m talkin’ about.

Steiger:  Those guys use ’em for sure.

Paulson:  But that’s made things much easier, just being able to rig your boat in the shop, put all your stuff away without having to rig it at the Ferry, and then pack it all at the Ferry.

Steiger:  And then to de-rig, too.

Paulson:  De-rig is tough, they were.  Yeah, tough deal.

Steiger:  That’s a lot of work.  I wonder, those early years, so when you first started....  Maybe we ought to talk a little bit just about who was on the scene, just the early crews and stuff, like in ’71.

Paulson:  When I came to work for ’em, there was a guy, Kim Rawlins, that I ran my first trip with.  They called him Grub Worm.  Dave Bledsoe was here runnin’ some trips for Sanderson.  I think Giant was here.  Larry Zurker was one of the boatmen.  Don Diamond.  A guy named Hugh Scott.  Moose Jaw Mason.

Steiger:  Was he kind of a real big, sandy-haired guy?

Paulson:  Yeah.  Big ol’ moustache.  Yes, exactly.

Steiger:  Moose Jaw Mason.

Paulson:  John Cooley, they called him Cool Cat Cooley, John Cooley [phonetic].  They were all runnin’.  Dick Buck, Buckaroo.  David Warner was runnin’ some trips.

Steiger:  Yeah, I ran a trip with him.  I swamped a trip for him and Schmedley.

Paulson:  Yeah, exactly, Schmed.  Now Schmed and myself.  I’m sure I started a little before they did, but then Schmed and ... oh heck ... Jett.  Of course then that’s when Butch and Wyatt Woodard and all those guys came in too.  Tim Kazan [phonetic].  Karen, you know, Catfish and Karen.

Steiger:  Yeah.

Paulson:  They were all workin’ there--we all were at the same time, through my era.  All those other guys, like Buckaroo and David and Zurker, Dave Bledsoe....  A guy named Dave Stitt was there also.  They had all moved on or whatever.  They didn’t stay a long time after when I first started.  It just happened to be one of those changeover times, I guess.  A lot of those guys left, and then it was me... Carl McDonald was around.  Bill Gillenwater--Giant.  Oh!  Frenchy!  God, I’m forgettin’ Frenchy!  Frenchy was there.  Frenchy was great, loved him.

Steiger:  Derald Diamond?

Paulson:  Derald Diamond, yes.

Steiger:  I remember he used to be so much fun.

Paulson:  He was so great.  He was so full of life and so ...

Steiger:  So sparkly.

Paulson:  Yes!  Just fun to be around.

Steiger:  Always, always upbeat.

Paulson:  Always.  Never down.  Always got some good story goin’.  I really loved the guy, a lot of fun to be around.

Steiger:  Yeah, and everything was fun.

Paulson:  Yeah, him and....  Now Don and Derald and Bill, Lori Diamond--they’re all gone.  Schmed and Tim and Catfish and Karen.  Schmed’s thing, I was there when he went down on the river, too.

Steiger:  You were on that trip?

Paulson:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Maybe we should tell that story.

Paulson:  Yeah, I’ll talk about it a little bit.  Just to have it.  Wyatt Woodard, myself....

Steiger:  Maybe we ought to talk about Schmedley a little bit.

Paulson:  Schmed was great.

Steiger:  This trip that I did with him.  Well, you go ahead.

Paulson:  Little short guy, muscular, wiry, strong, able to do anything--thought he could do anything, too.  In fact, some boats used to run through <Lava>....

Steiger:  He did that on this trip that I was on.

Paulson:  He did, with you?

Steiger:  Yeah.

Paulson:  He would get on the rock, when the boat came through the third hole, he’d bail from the rock onto the boat.

Steiger:  I’m swampin’ on this trip with Schmedley and Fred Warner, who’s runnin’....  I guess Schmedley was runnin’ the lead boat, ’cause he went in, he ran it first.  And he didn’t say nothin’ about it....

Paulson:  Yeah, just came up and climbed out on the rock.

Steiger:  He’s out there, so we come through, and he’s out there standin’ on the black rock, whoopin’ and hollerin’.

Paulson:  Yes.

Steiger:  And we go by and he jumps on the boat.  I was like, "Holy shit!  Are you kiddin’ me?!"

Paulson:  I’m with ya’ too.  I couldn’t believe he was doin’ that.  I couldn’t believe it.  But when I first worked for Sanderson, we ran every hole on the river, on purpose.

Steiger:  That was the idea.

Paulson:  That was the idea.  They told me, "Give ’em a ride, hit every hole."  You know, every hole, including Maytag in <Crystal>, left at <House Rock>, <Grapevine>, <Sockdolager>, any hole, hit it, hit it!"  Until we started turning some boats over.  And then I wanted to...  start to say, "Man, I’m gonna stop hittin’ these things every time.  Somehow this ain’t workin’ for me.  It might work for you guys."  But I can remember, even after we’d had three boats flip at <Lava>, man, I’m runnin’ with Schmed down at <Crystal>, and Maytag’s still just kickin’ ass that day.  Man, I’m gonna miss it right, which I did.  But he came dead center--dead center of that hole, smacked it.

(change audio files, at about Min. 97:03)

Steiger:  Okay, here we go, we’re continuing this deal.  This is the third file of this interview.  River Runners Oral History, November 6, 2007.  We were runnin’ <Crystal>.

Paulson:  Yeah, we were talkin’ about Don Safely, Schmed.

Steiger:  Don Safely was his last....

Paulson:  Don Safely, yes, exactly.

Steiger:  S-A-F-E-L-E-Y?

Paulson:  L-Y.  I don’t think there was an "E."

Steiger:  I wonder how he got nicknamed Schmedley.

Paulson:  You know, I’d heard something about the Marine Corps or somethin’, and they had like a go-fer guy.  Now, I don’t know this for a fact, and that’s what they would call him, and somehow he ended up with that name or somethin’--I don’t know.  And I really don’t know that for a fact.  When I came to know him, he was called Schmed.  That’s what they called him.  But he was not afraid.  He would just bomb every hole.  And it cost him his life eventually, I guess.  He had this little, like, 1947 or ’8, Luscombe--I think it was called a Luscombe--two-seater airplane.  He flew a lot of other planes, too, he would, like, shuttle planes to <Alaska> for people, and do whatever.  But he had this little plane that he would fly down in the river, and he would buzz people, buzz us.

Steiger:  And he was just fearless.

Paulson:  Fearless, totally fearless.  He would put his wheels on the water type stuff.

Steiger:  I remember we were down there paintin’ boats at ARR at <Vermilion Cliffs>, and this little plane comes down and circles and circles, and gets down really low.  And he turns off the engine!--it’s Schmedley--so we can hear him--and he sticks his head out, opens the door, turns off the engine, he’s glidin’ around, he yells down, "Hey, get to work down there!" and then starts it up and goes on, you know.

Paulson:  Goes off wherever he was goin’, yeah.  Exactly.

Steiger:  Just invincible, he was fearless.

Paulson:  He was.  We all flew with him at one time or another, and we would go out and do loops and whatever he felt like doin’ that day--under <Navajo Bridge>, always just out dinkin’ around.

Steiger:  Another guy, very excited about life.  And fun, just always 110 percent, right?  Ready to go.

Paulson:  Yeah.  But we were doin’ this private trip, and I talked to him the day or two before we left, and he said, "Where you gonna be?"  And I said, "I’m plannin’ on 19½  on the left there, above North Canyon.  I’ll camp there the first night.  And he said, "Okay, I’m gonna drop you a note," which he did all the time.  He would fly by and just throw a note out that says, "Have a good trip, be safe," or whatever.  Just stuff.

Steiger:  Be safe!  (laughs)

Paulson:  He would, he would say somethin’ like that.  And so we were setting there, and Wyatt Woodard, me, Shane... Stacy Woodard was on that trip too.  That’s probably about it--and then some passenger-type people.  I could have missed somebody.

Steiger:  And you guys were just goin’ for fun.

Paulson:  Yeah, this was a private.  He came by, goin’ upstream, and not on the water, up a ways, a hundred or two hundred....

Steiger:  High for him.

Paulson:  High for him.  Not on the water--high.  But he had that big shit-eatin’ grin--you couldn’t miss him a mile away.  You know, he’d come by, and you could see him, and he had somebody with him that we didn’t know who it was, but he went by going upstream.  And he went up and just started climbin’ out of the canyon, climbin’ out of the canyon, got up, from our view, like almost out of the canyon, and then made a left-hand turn, and I’ve heard it called like a box canyon turn or something.  But anyway, turned, and then the plane just turned and then started--fell left hard.  From our view, God, it looked like it was goin’ straight down, but I’m sure it probably had some angle.  But we’re lookin’ at it like this.  Comin’ down, and he full powered--power, power, comin’, comin’, startin’ to straighten out, but just that prop goin’, everything goin’ full power.  Got about 100 or 200 yards from us, boom! just buried it in the river.

Steiger:  Just couldn’t get it up.

Paulson:  Couldn’t get it up.  I don’t know, something happened on that turn, I think.  We’ve wondered since, because he would have been on the left side when he made that hard turn.  Maybe his son....  It turned out to be his son that was with him.  Maybe he kind of fell on him or something, because it was a hard turn he made.  And his seat belt might not have been tight, or who knows what.  Somethin’ occurred in that turn, when he made the hard turn up at the top there.  Came back, but then he knew he was in trouble, and he was tryin’ to pull it back out.  It’s not like he lost power, he had full power, everything.  And then boom! buried it in the river.  Wyatt and I went and jumped on boats, rowed out.  We were rowin’ and held our spot in the river, and there was no debris, no nothin’.  Nothin’.  No oil slick, no anything.  Just when the airplane hit the water, there was a big splash and a noise like a ka-boom noise, and it was gone, river smoothed over, just gone like mad.  It was hard to believe, even if you really just saw that.

Steiger:  And he hit the river right there between you guys and North Canyon?

Paulson:  No, above us, upstream from us.  Here’s that camp on the left, as you’re looking upstream on the left-hand side.  There’s a little protrusion, a little point that comes out there, and it has actually a couple of rocks that just stick out in the river.  Right there.  It’s not very far above that camp, pretty close.

Steiger:  Yeah, I know the place, I think.

Paulson:  The plane’s still there, actually.  That’s what I’ve been old.

Steiger:   Under there.  Boy.

Paulson:  But it hit--gone--nothin’.  Nothin’ we could do.  Sad.  A lot of "What the hell happened?!"  Knew he was gone.  Knew.  That was it, there was nothin’ to be done.  Didn’t know who was with him, didn’t know if it was one of our family, or....  Didn’t have a clue.  People flew with him all the time.  We didn’t know who the other person was.  We knew they were both gone, whoever the hell it was.  It was just before dark, just in the evening.  So we set there all night.  The next morning we put life jackets on the beach, signal mirrors, waited.  After first light, we could hear planes flyin’ around.  We assumed they were probably looking for a missing aircraft.  Finally either park service or one of the airplanes flew kind of down the canyon, and they had like a loudspeaker on the plane, like they do, and they said, "If you have a medical emergency, we’ve dispatched a helicopter from the South Rim.  So we waited there for them to get there.  When they landed, we went over and told them that we’d seen this.  That Schmed had just crashed there that night before.  They immediately took off, went back up above the rim where they had radio communication, and said that they had located where the missing plane was, and came back down.  Then we all gave them interview type things about what we’d seen and what happened.  Then that was it.  Then they sat there for a while.  We left.  They set up a big search thing there on that beach, and [quadranted?] the river.  They could never find him.  It was muddy, it was in August, like August 17.

Steiger:  So they didn’t turn the river off then?

Paulson:  Yeah, they did.  They turned it down real low, to nothing.  In fact, I’ve run into some people before that were talking about the lowest water they’d ever seen was because of that.  Yeah, they backed it off, but they still couldn’t locate him somehow.  They had like sonar type equipment goin’, and they thought they might have something, but they never did.  This was in August.  Finally like late October or the first of November....  When the plane hit, it cracked open like this.  Tom Workman told me, like an eggshell cracked open.  Finally the son floated out and floated down to South Canyon, and some fishermen people spotted him and got him up on shore, but didn’t get him high enough.  The water came up, floated him off again.  He went down to <Nankoweap> before they got him.  Then in November sometime, Tom and some other park people went down to where we told ’em the plane had went in, and dove, and Schmed was still in the plane.  Got him out, and that’s it.

	But yeah, a lot of fun, and a good guy to be around.  I enjoyed him very much, hated to see that happen.  It was a sad day.  I still think about it sometimes, still.  Tough deal, tough go.

Steiger:  Been a lot of those in our line of work.  I can’t imagine that.  Like you were tickin’ off all those names of people that we ran around with there, that aren’t here anymore.

Paulson:  Yeah, they’re all gone.

Steiger:  There’s a lot of ’em.

Paulson:  There are.  There are.  There are.

Steiger:  That’s the trouble with bein’ an old-timer.  (laughs)

Paulson:  There were are, exactly.  Exactly.  Yup.

Steiger:  Everybody starts to get the graphic deal, where it’s driven home that not everybody gets to stay forever.  Or nobody does.  I remember those days, it was such a colorful time, and everybody had so much fun, and everybody did party--not just the crew.  It was all of our customers, everybody was ready to go.

Paulson:  It was.  It was very seldom that people didn’t.  And I can remember very few, if any, kind of letters back talking about ...

Steiger:  ... they partied too much.

Paulson:  It never happened.  It was like, God, it was great, enjoyed ’em.  They partied just right.  I mean, all type stuff.  It was a party, that’s what we all did.  Hey, you couldn’t go past another crew without--the first thing you always did was offer beers to everybody.  Right there.  It was no big deal.  After <Lava> we’d break out Schnapps or whatever we’d have down there.

Steiger:  Yeah, we had to take champagne.

Paulson:  Champaign, yeah.

Steiger:  That was the company thing, we had to remember the champagne, and get that out below <Lava>.

Paulson:  We had a thing called "rapido juice" for the last night.  Remember?  They would put wine and vodka.  I mean, it was sent by the company and you’d mix it in a cooler and have it all up there for people for the Rat-pin night.  Yeah, exactly.

	The other thing I was gonna just touch on a little bit about that, because we used to, when you said about equipment...  We were always burnin’ wood, that’s how we cooked.  Everything was on wood.  We started running out of wood, but the one thing with that, with the party thing, too, was we always had campfires, because we were always burning wood.  I know you can still take those Dura-logs or whatever, and have a fire.  But every night we had a big ol’ campfire.

Steiger:  It was pretty fun to sit around ’em.

Paulson:  Get a lot of people around.  That’s what it was.  So it kind of contributed to that party thing, where now a lot of times it gets dark, and people drift off and go down to the boats, whatever.  I’m not condemning that, I think it’s good.  But that campfire every night kind of brought people in, I think.

Steiger:  Imagine if we’d have had chairs then!  (laughs)

Paulson:  Yeah.  And no chairs.  We all just sat around on the ground.  Yes, exactly.

Steiger:  Never thought twice about it.  But boy....

Paulson:  I remember Henry Falaney, Whitewater--Denoyer, Rocky and them, down... because they did that super deluxe or whatever it was called, which they had a bartender and a musician and a chef, I think--all of that stuff.

Steiger:  And everybody put on their vests and their white shirts...

Paulson:  And I couldn’t wait to double camp with them at National or somewhere, and head up there, because I mean that’s where the party was goin’ on, you know.  A lot of fun, a lot of fun.

Steiger:  Yeah, that was a lot of fun too.

Paulson:  We were doin’ that, and the park came out....  For a long time the porta-potty system....  Even the campfires.  (Bouncin’ all over the place.)  The porta-potties, I mean, God, that cleaned that area, the beaches, up a lot.  The campfires, when we went from burnin’ wood to burnin’ propane, man, that really cleaned the beaches up, because I can remember pulling into like <Nankoweap> or Upper <Granite>, some of these places that were just terrible with debris from campfires.  Cleaned ’em up, and it really made it a lot better.  And we went to the fire pans, and I made a terrible mistake with them.  I didn’t want propane.  That seemed like carrying a bomb to me, on the boat, until the first time you fired it up and the pots and pans weren’t dirty, and everything was great.  "Man, this is beautiful!"

	Before propane, we were still burnin’ wood, and then we went to those fire pans.  All you did then was cook in the fire pan and then drag your ashes to the river and put ’em in the river.  So we were camped, Derald Diamond and I, and I don’t know who else, but after everything was done, the last thing you’d do is go get the fire pan.  Well, I went and got the fire pan, drug it down to the river, and dumped it.  Well, some lady came by and stepped in that sand where the fire pan had been all night.  I didn’t even think about....  And she burned herself bad, bad, terrible bad, both feet, bad, way high on her calves.  God dang.  Terrible.  But just one of the mistakes you make.

Steiger:  I don’t know that you would have thought about it, until you heard about it, and then it’s like, oh, you’ve got to guard this spot.

Paulson:  Exactly.  And then from that point on never would I....  We were just settin’ ’em even down in the sand, or just put a couple of rocks to level it.  But not thinkin’ about having it high, so the sand don’t heat up, or any of that.  Didn’t cross my mind.  Man, we burned her bad.  I’ve always felt real bad.  And that was totally my fault.  I just didn’t think about marking that area or doing anything.  I just drug it off.  Everybody at that point was basically down to the boat, but she came through and got right in it, and God dang, fried herself.  Took me two days to get her out, too.

Steiger:  Oh boy.

Paulson:  Her feet and legs blistered up, huge ol’ blisters.  Man!  I couldn’t get her out.  That was up around <Granite>.

Steiger:  Well, I’ll tell you what, if they blistered up, that’s good.

Paulson:  Yeah, exactly.

Steiger:  That means second degree, not third.

Paulson:  Right, so it helped.

Steiger:  A lot.  A lot, a lot.  But terrible pain still.

Paulson:  I still think the bottom of her feet were probably third, though, I don’t know.  It was so bad.  I had to pack her everywhere--like pack her to the bathroom, pack her wherever she wanted to go, because she couldn’t walk, she couldn’t walk.

Steiger:  No way.  So you had signal mirrors?

Paulson:  Yeah, and life panels, signal panels or life jackets, yeah.

Steiger:  But no radio.

Paulson:  I think we might have had a radio.  Our radios were so feeble that it had to be line-of-sight type stuff.  And even then, you couldn’t get ’em every time.  You know, you tried.  That happened up in the gorge, around <Granite> somewhere.

Steiger:  Below <Phantom>, couldn’t just run to <Phantom>.

Paulson:  Uh-uh, that was below.  I ended up goin’ down to <Deer Creek>, because <Thunder River>-<Deer Creek>, they’re always flyin’ over there.  So I ended up goin’ down there and settin’ up, just because I knew I could get people there.  But that happened that day.  I might have got her out the next afternoon, I can’t remember--probably did.  Yeah, but anyway, two full days, basically, to get her out.

Steiger:  That’s a change for the better.  Now we have these sat-phones, and they’re great.

Paulson:  Satellite radios, oh man, much better, much better.

Steiger:  But yeah, like you were sayin’, when you had that flip, it was a whole different deal.  It was kind of like you were on your own.

Paulson:  Yeah, and never thought about callin’ the park or tryin’ to get anybody in there.

Steiger:  "Gotta do what we gotta do."

Paulson:  Just go do what you gotta do, and go on down, and still make schedule, just come on out.  Again, nobody was hurt real bad, so we survived it.  And like I say, the people thought they’d been on some kind of real adventure then--and they had.  But I don’t know, I’m sure I’ve forgotten a lot of names here of people I should have said something about.  That’s what happens:  got old, can’t remember.

Steiger:  I meet new people on the river now, and I can’t remember ’em.  Then I’ll see ’em next trip, and I can’t remember their name.  You know, guys that are workin’ and stuff.  It’s just ridiculous.  Or I’m on the river and somebody goes by me and [yells], "Hey Lew, how’s it goin’?"  And I’m like, "It’s goin’ good.  But I have no idea who you are, you’re gonna have to come a lot closer so I can see you."  (laughs)  "And even then I don’t know if I’ll remember your name."

Paulson:  Exactly.  Me too.  I’m terrible, I am.

Steiger:  Yeah, I know, it’s pathetic.

Paulson:  I enjoy now, still see, runnin’ into the old guys and talkin’ to ’em.  The new people are great too, but I really like runnin’ into some of the old people--you, anybody.  It’s a real good thing, I like seein’ everybody.

Steiger:  Well, I’ve tried to retire about four times, or cut back to where I was just doin’ a trip a year, thinkin’ that I couldn’t afford to be a boatman still.  But now I look back on it, I probably would have been better off if I’d have just put my head down and kept goin’.  (laughs)

Paulson:  Kept, goin’, yeah.  And I thought that too.  Believe me, when I went up there.  Back when I was runnin’ with you.  I’ve thought about a lot, too.  And I think if I’d have just said, "Okay, this is what I’m gonna do" and do it....

Steiger:  And just get serious and work at it.

Paulson:  I would have been okay.  It would have worked out some way, one way or another.  I really believe that.

Steiger:  I think so.

Paulson:  We all go through that stretch, after you’ve been there ten or more years, where you’re goin’, "Man, I don’t know if I....  Where am I gonna go with this?  Can this be a career?"  You know, when we’re young, goin’, "I would like it to be, but I don’t know if it can be."  Everybody goes through that, I think.  Most of us do, anyway.

Steiger:  We have to be frugal and have some kind of other ace up our sleeve.

Paulson:  Well, somehow, some way, you’ve got to make a living somehow, whatever it is.  And just bein’ a boatman for....  And also, when you get older, the physical part of bein’ a boatman wears you down so much, when you get older.  And it’s kind of the Whale thing, when your body starts breakin’ down a little bit.  And then what if nobody wants you anymore?  And then it’s like what the hell happens to you then?

Steiger:  Well, I’m runnin’ into that right now, which is a big reason why I’m rowin’.  After doin’ a trip or two a year, I finally....  I was rowin’ dories, you know, and I got so rusty, one time I thought, "God, you know, I gotta do this more, because I’m gonna get so rusty, if I hit a rock...."  I’d probably just hit a rock or somethin’.  "If I go down here and break a boat every time I come, I’m not gonna get to come that much more.  So I gotta do it more."  And that’s helped.

Paulson:  Who are you runnin’ for?

Steiger:  I’ve been runnin’ for Mike Denoyer, GCE, and a little bit of GCD too.  But I was a regular at OARS and Dories for a long time.

Paulson:  Yeah, I knew you were.

Steiger:  And then I kind of gave that up because I didn’t think I could afford to do it.  And I would just make these guest appearances, and I sort of lost my spot.  I mean, I’d get a trip or two a year, but they’ve got all this....  There’s a crew.  I mean, they’ve got all the regulars they need.  And also, I had really liked what I saw at GCE, a lot of aspects of that program.  At first we snickered that they needed a motorized support raft, but then I’d watch those guys go by and think, "Look at that.  There they are, it’s Day 2 of that trip, and those boats have already got their bow and stern posts out of the water."  Which makes ’em handle a lot better!  That looks pretty good.  And then the fact that they don’t do exchanges.  And it’s a really good crew over there too.  So finally I got to buggin’ Denoyer, or I just said, "Hey, if you ever need somebody, let me know."  And then Derald [Stewart] died.  He was the guy who built all those boats for ’em.  So a slot opened up.  So I’ve been doin’ that.  And my new plan is just to stay down there as long as I can--knowing that the days are numbered.  But the rowin’, anymore....  I used to exercise all the time.  Now it’s harder, I gotta make myself go do it when I’m not workin’.  But when I’m workin’, that’s when I feel the best.  There’s a big difference between rowin’ a little bitty dory and a big ol’ snout rig.

Paulson:  Oh yes!  I know that.  Even rowin’ a Maravia, whatever type boat, they’re all better than the snouts.

Steiger:  Well, I guess they are, or we’d be seein’ people still rowin’ ’em, and you don’t really see that anymore.

Paulson:  You could carry so much stuff!

Steiger:  No offense to you-- or to us, we did our snout trip, and it was ’75 or ’76, something like that, and then a couple years later I did a snout trip with ARTA.  And those guys had all these little tricks to those...

Paulson:  Well, they had been doin’ it, that’s where we got the idea from.

Steiger:  Yeah, they figured it out.  And this guy who I just talked to, Allen Wilson, Crazy Al, he invented it--he thinks.

Paulson:  Probably.

Steiger:  And it was like you said, why he did it was....

Paulson:  We seen them rowin’ ’em, is why we....

Steiger:  And the way he did it was, he saw Dick McCallum....

Paulson:  Oh, with the Grand Canyon Youth ones?

Steiger:  Yeah, but they had four guys, one guy on each oar, and a guy runnin’ the sweep.  But Allen saw that and said, "Well, they can row that way."  He wanted a boat, because he wanted to row.

Paulson:  So it was his fault!  (laughs)

Steiger:  It was!  Him and his brother, and they said, "Well, we got all these tubes.  If Grand Canyon Youth can do it, I’ll betcha one guy could do it."  And so they built this frame, and sure enough, he went and did it.  And it was like you were sayin’, pretty much it was just line it up and go down the middle.

Paulson:  That’s all it was.

Steiger:  But when I did that trip that we did, I didn’t understand tracking.  I was trying to upstream ferry, or downstream ferry to get wherever I wanted to go, and I didn’t know.  What I know now is....  I mean, if I was rowin’ that boat now, I would be pushin’ all the time.

Paulson:  You would?

Steiger:  Oh yeah.  And I’d be pointin’ it where I wanted to go, because if you’re goin’ faster than the water, if you’ve got that thing goin’ just a little bit faster than the water--doesn’t have to be much--but if you’ve got the water goin’ this way on your hull, that’s the way you’re gonna go.  And if you’re doin’ this, if it’s goin’ this way on your hull....  You know.

Paulson:  Yeah.  You’re tellin’ me stuff that I still didn’t know until right now.

Steiger:  Well, the dories make you figure that shit out, because you’ve got so much hull in the water, it’s so much more pronounced.  But you look at that, and you go, "Oh, yeah, that’s what it’s all about."  If you’re dead still, if you’re goin’ the same speed of the water, that’s a whole different thing.  If you’re goin’ a little bit faster, you’re gonna go where you’re pointin’.  And that whole "How do you get into the wall at <Granite>?"  The way you get into the wall at <Granite> is you’re goin’ down there, and you face up to one of those big waves, or whatever.  You come off of one of them, pointin’ at the wall, and if you got a little head of steam....  And maybe you’re pointin’ at it, and you’re thinkin’ you’re gonna pull off of it or somethin’.  Uh-uh, you’re gonna go right there.

Paulson:  Smacks it.

Steiger:  Yeah.  And I had that....  Actually, I don’t think it was on our trip.  I just did one ARTA trip in a snout, and it was big water, and everybody was startin’ far left in <Granite>.  I started far left, and then I was gonna upstream ferry all the way down.

Paulson:  Which is what I thought we did.  I mean, I would have thought that, yeah.

Steiger:  That’s what I was gonna do, and I went like a rocket below that point, but right into the eddy (laughs) at the top, right into the eddy, just buried the boat into that big eddy, Forever Eddy.  And it was just like, "Oh, [expletive me]!"

Paulson:  Oh, yeah, it is, it’s tough.  Yeah, "Here I am."

Steiger:  And I’m not sure if I....  I can’t remember how the hell we ever got out of there.

Paulson:  Oh, you just [row?] your butt off, because I’ve been in there too.  Finally you get out.  You might make who knows how many rounds.

Steiger:  Well, to this day, it’s not all that hard to get boiled in there in a dory; and there’s a water stage where you can’t go around the other side, but you’re in there, and it’s really hard to get out.

Paulson:  One of the few I remember really just kind of pushing into is <Upset>, where we would come and go against those laterals comin’ off the wall.

Steiger:  And go far left.

Paulson:  Yeah, and push into them, actually.  That worked good.  It’d straighten you out, and down the left you’d go...

Steiger:  Pretty much for me, like in a dory now--or any boat that I’d be rowin’, I try to just push it as much as I can.  Not that you’re overpowerin’ it, but just that if you’ve got water goin’ that way, then you go that way, and just keep it as simple as you can.

Paulson:  Right.  That’s good.  I like that, I do.

Steiger:  And don’t change direction, don’t get heroic.

Paulson:  Right.

Steiger:  Don’t get cute, just keep it as simple as you possibly can.

Paulson:  I think that was one of my problems, rowing anytime, is I always kind of thought I could muscle my way through something, and sometimes it would eat me.  But I know sometimes I could, but not all the time.

Steiger:  We did the snout trip, and I remember on our trip we went left in Hance.  We were seein’ three to thirty [3,000 cfs to 30,000 cfs] I guess.  We had big water, because I remember doin’ that left run.  But we did this thing....

Paulson:  We came and kind of did the spin.

Steiger:  Behind the rock.

Paulson:  Yeah, you kind of do that spin behind the rock.

Steiger:  There’s a big red rock, and you ...

Paulson:  Drop your butt there.

Steiger:  ... and you drop in there, yeah.  And we did that.  And somehow we did that, we made it work.  I mean, we might have scraped over a few of those little rocks on down there.  (laughs)

Paulson:  I’m sure we did, but we made it work.  I know we did.

Steiger:  But then when I did my ARTA trip, those guys had a little slot to the right of that rock, so you didn’t have to do that big move.  You’d just line it up.

Paulson:  Yeah, and they could come in....

Steiger:  Just straight.

Paulson:  We did the spin around that rock thing.

Steiger:  And how we did it, just as far as bein’ hard on your body, that’s the thing.  I mean, rowin’ those boats.  And the guys that were rowin’ those boats....  You said you were having back problems and stuff....

Paulson:  Oh, I did, I had to go get operated on.

Steiger:  Well, the ARTA guys too, there were a lot of people that rowed those snouts, but they didn’t row ’em forever.  I mean, the people that rowed those snouts, that was definitely hard on you physically.

Paulson:  It was.

Steiger:  You definitely could hurt yourself.  Now if we’d known then what we know now, you probably could have made it easier on yourself.

Paulson:  Oh, I think so too, just like what you’re talking about, the technique of rowin’ ’em.  We kind of just got in there and muscled ’em--or tried to.  But I know littler guys than me, a lot littler, whatever, could--Schmed, you, a lot of guys could.

Steiger:  Well, Schmed had muscles.

Paulson:  Well, yeah, but could handle ’em.  Karen.  Of course she was all buff too.  Karen Kazan [phonetic], Karen Byerly.  But they could....

