Allen Wilson

29 October 2007

Sound file:  "Allen Wilson 4.mp3" 50:12 min.

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



STEIGER:  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is Lew Steiger, and I’m still sittin’ here with Allen Wilson in <Gold Beach Oregon>.  Now it’s October 29, 2007.  This is original videotape #4 of we still don’t know how many.  We left off rollin’ last night, and then we had a little equipment malfunction, and now here we’re back rollin’.  But it’s been so traumatic and so long that we can’t remember where we were.  Can you?

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  That was brutal.  So we’re gonna pick up God only knows where.  So let’s just do that.  We’ve been talkin’ about stories that we missed in our little chronology, so we should just go from there.  Actually.... weren’t we talkin’ about the geological trips with Don Elston?

WILSON:  Oh yeah!  Okay.

STEIGER:  And where we shut the tape off is you were talkin’ about he was drillin’ those cores in the red rocks, and he’d been talked out of doin’ it up in <Deer Creek>, so he went down and did it at instead.  Isn’t that it?

WILSON:  That’s probably right, yeah.  That was about the end, wasn’t it?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I think so...So I don’t know if you want to go back there, or....  But you have these other stories that are on your mind, so let’s do all the things.

WILSON:  Okay, so there’s a number of USGS stories that are really pretty good, and I did eleven trips with them.  So a chunk of my life on the river is associated with the U.S. Geological Survey--boring trips.  They weren’t boring, but we were boring holes, and it was pretty cool.  The trips were cool, but the boring the holes sometimes, in areas that were more public, I wasn’t as enthusiastic about.  So I’d like to kind of talk about the first trip I did with them, and I don???t know how much we covered about that in the beginning, where John Hendricks introduced me to Don.

STEIGER:  I don’t remember much about that either, and also I think maybe just as a historical document, we probably ought to say a little bit just about what boring those holes was all about, what was the question, what were the goals there?  Let’s just go with whatever you wanted to start with.

WILSON:  Okay, well, I can do that first.  We may have already covered some of this earlier in the tape.

STEIGER:  The magnetic part.  Yeah, we did, you talked about the cross-sections and stuff.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And the red rocks, because of the magnetic particles in 'em--there’s iron--and the black rocks, which are lava flows.  But anything else they didn’t bore.  But there’s a lot of 'em, and especially in those pre-Cambrian sedimentary rocks there’s a tremendous amount of footage, just huge numbers of vertical feet of red rocks.  And in some cases, we bored every foot up through that stuff.  And I’m sure a lot of those holes are well eroded away, because they’re very crumbly, shaley, sandy stuff.  But Mike Ikea, who is Navajo Indian, he and I would carry water, and we’d put five gallons of water on our backs--he’d have five, I’d have five--and we’d start goin’ up through these little side canyons and up these cliffs, and tryin’ to figure out the fastest way to get to where they were borin’ the holes in the rock to cool the drill bit.  And then when we weren’t haulin’ water, we’d be boring holes, or we’d be orienting.  Sometimes we’d orient the cores and stuff like that.  But primarily our two jobs was boring the holes--especially when there’s a big team on the slopes--there’d be a whole bunch of Cal Tech students orienting and taking notes, and there’d be Mike and I who were the lowly, uneducated blokes that were able to get around pretty agilely on those slippery slopes with the water bottles.  But we liked to tease the Cal Tech’ers, and one of the things we would do is figure out where we could bore a hole they couldn’t get to, to orient.  And finally, after a lot of attempts at making it difficult for 'em, I stood on Mike’s shoulders, held the drill, and bored a hole about ten feet up on the cliff, and then we flagged it with a long flag, so they certainly wouldn’t miss it.  And they were so doggedly into getting every core, that they went through this horrible operation to do it.  It was just one of those little things that we would do all the time to them, if at all possible.

	The first USGS trip I did, I had gone to the university, NAU, and talked to the geology students there about doin’ somethin’ in the <Grand Canyon> so I could learn about geology.  And it turned out nobody had the time to be able to do it, though they all wanted to.  Well, John Hendricks was one of the guys.  I don’t know if you ever met John Hendricks or not.

STEIGER:  Nope.

WILSON:  Well, John graduated from NAU and went to work for the USGS in <Flagstaff>, and he did quite a few river trips.  The first trip that I did, though, John was on it.  But what was interesting was I talked to him at NAU, then later on that summer he was doin’ his thesis down in the <Grand Canyon> on part of the Bass Formation, and I’d run into him every trip I was doing.  So I got to haul a little bit of food and beer and stuff, and as time went by, he disappeared.  And then that fall, and actually the first part of September, I went in to El Rancho kind of late one night, and John’s in there.  He goes, "Hey, I got the geologist for ya’!"  And I said, "Oh, fantastic!"  He said, "If you want to meet him, we can meet tomorrow morning, I’m sure."  So I guess he just called Don that night, and we went over to Don’s house.  By the end of October....  Let’s see, when was it?  They just say October, but it was probably towards the end of October we went and did a three-week trip, which was the first one I had done with them, and it was with the snout boat that I built for my two private trips earlier that summer.  And so I’d finally, after those two trips, kinda learned to row, because I’d been running motors, and I just simply didn’t know anything about rowing before that.  And actually, I got caught in Forever Eddy for a couple of hours.  You know, I could not get out of that damned thing, and I just would go from one side of the river to the other, back and forth, and for some reason I could not get it in my head to just put the brakes on and stop when I came to the little bit of current.  But we successfully made it all the way down to <Havasu>, where there was an ARTA rowing trip, and I got to talking to those guys, and they got to laughin’, "You know, you gotta put the brakes on, you gotta stop the boat!"

STEIGER:  Now, Forever Eddy, where the hell is that?

WILSON:  Oh, what is that, just below the Little Colorado a little ways.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I know the one.  Right where the salt is, above the salt mine, one little click up above the salt mine.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And it’s just that ugly little thing.  But anyway, I was having trouble with eddies.  Those guys taught me a lesson, and it really made it so I could actually row the boat after that.

STEIGER:  You just gotta stop rowing?  I don’t get....  When you say "stop the boat," I don’t get what you’re....  Because you were rowin’ downstream all the time?

WILSON:  Well, no, I’d be tryin’ to row out of the eddy, and I’d be going across the river, tryin’ to come to the current, and when I’d hit the current, I’d just row right on through it.  And in that area, there wasn’t enough current to really follow well....  You had to really be payin’ attention.  The momentum of the boat would drag you through the current and into the next eddie....  The boat I had rigged up was a snout boat....  Well, to give you this picture, it was a snout boat, had a deck board up on the front so I could basically pile their duffle bags on the front.  I had two frames, and there was a gap between the frames of about eight or ten inches.  And I had a plywood box built that was about eighteen inches x eighteen inches, the full width of the boat, about eight feet long, I guess it was.  That was our lunch box, so it was accessible during the day, and then everything else was stowed down on the floorboards of the boat.  And I had eight people on board, including myself.

STEIGER:  Oh my God!  Yeah, that might have had something to do with your troubles.

WILSON:  But anyway, once I learned about that, bein’ able to bring the boat up to a slow stop when I got to the current, I got a little bit better at it.

WILSON:  So I met Don and his wife Shirley at their house, and we struck up a deal just in a day or two, and basically went and did that trip.  So I told 'em I was gonna buy all the food and provide all the waterproof duffle bags and everything, and we’d meet 'em at <Lee's Ferry>.  I went up and put the boat together up there and got everything pretty well set up.  I have to give you the names of the people who were on that trip--some you may know.  Don and Shirley; Ted McKee, who was Edwin McKee’s son; Sherman Gomet; Ivo Lucchita; and then Barbara, his wife, came in at <Phantom Ranch>--let’s see here--John Hendricks, who was the guy that got me hooked up with him; and then Nancy Veronda who was a gal that was Don’s secretary at the lab.  And so those people are the ones that went down.  And so to make a long story short, we started out with the eight of us, and we went to <Phantom>, where we met Barbara, and we went on down from there with her--Ivo’s wife--so we had nine people on board.  And I remember we had a fairly low flow, because in <Horn Creek> we just stood on end in there.  But I attribute the fact that we were stayin’ right-side-up all the time just to the heavy load that we had in the boat.  And it was so crowded.  Ted McKee would come back, and on the back end of my boat I had a hanging motor mount that stuck out about a foot and a half.  And he would sit back on the back tube and put his feet on that little frame, and just hang on back there.

STEIGER:  Just to get out of the way?

WILSON:  Just to get away from all the people.  And since I’m diabetic, I have a lot of food back there, stashed away.  And so he’d come back, and usually he’d get out my jar of peanut butter and just start dippin’ into it, and then hand it to me, and so we’d eat....  And then he was an incredible naturalist.  He knew something about almost everything.  And he’d sit back there and just talk to me about it.  Well, I learned a heck of a lot of stuff from him, which was good for me and my commercial trips later on in life there.  But anyway, that was a three-week trip, and we went down to <South Cove> and took out there.  I had a little ten-horse motor that I motored across the lake with.  And so that was the very first trip I did with him.  Some of the other things I have to say now, continuing on, have to do with some of those river trips.

	I wanted to ask you, did you ever meet Ivo Lucchita and do any trips with him?

STEIGER:  I never got to do any trips with him, but I think I was at a function or two where he spoke, it seems like.  And I certainly heard his name a lot, obviously.

WILSON:  He’s a real neat guy.  Well, we were doin’ a USGS trip, there was a guy by the name of Walt Fahey who was a machinist for the USGS, and he built the other snout boat that Don used for his research trip.  So there was the two boats I had, and then the other snout boat that Walt built.  So he started comin’ on some of these trips.  Well, he liked to drink, and he loved to hike.  I’d say he was about fifty at that time, and so he was an old guy compared to me, and he was an old guy compared to all these Cal Tech students.  So there was a group of Cal Tech students that were on that trip, and there was one fellow who was interesting--nobody could really figure him out.  This trip we had scheduled with some horse packers to carry our drills and water jugs and stuff up <Bright Angel Creek> several miles where there were some red beds they wanted to drill.

STEIGER:  Okay, so we’re back rollin’.

WILSON:  Okay.  So Walt showed up with a friend of his, a really, really close friend of his, on this trip.  When we got to <Phantom Ranch>--they had run out of their three or four quarts of Jim Beam, which is what they liked to drink.  So they were gonna hike out and grab a few more bottles, and hike down with the Elston’s daughters, a couple of high school girls, twins.  So they went up and met the twins, and hiked back down again.  Well, this one Cal Tech guy, he goes over to Don and he says, "You know, Don, those are old men, they’re not gonna be able to make it up there and come back in the same day--it’ll kill 'em!"  And Don’s goin’, "You know, they’re grown men, they can do whatever they want."  "You can’t let 'em go.  You just can’t let 'em go."  Well anyway, Walt and Earl took off and hiked up the Bright Angel Trail and met the girls and came back down.  We took off and hiked up <Bright Angel Creek>.  Well, the guy who was tellin’ 'em that they were gonna die en route, he got a blister on his foot, and he had to come back.  Turns out that he would hobble around when anybody was lookin’, and when nobody was lookin’, he was just walkin’ normal.  And so there was somethin’ the matter with this fellow.  But the end of the story was that Walt and Earl came back, after drinking their way down the trail, hiked way up <Bright Angel Creek> and were fishin’ for trout by mid afternoon, so they were pretty fast hikers, and a couple of real characters too.

	Another very interesting trip that centered around Walt the machinist was on one trip Don actually just tripped over the bow rope and fell down and broke his kneecap, which caused him a lot of pain.  We just took him on down to <Phantom Ranch> and flew him and Shirley out in the helicopter.  Of course that was sort of the....  There was a bunch of Cal Tech students on the trip, and now Don wasn’t there to ramrod the show.  Well, the trip kind of fell apart in terms of the geological survey part of it, but everybody had a good time.  Well, we had to leave the Giant Arthropod, which was the name of the boat they had for their snout boat.

STEIGER:  That was the G.S. boat?

WILSON:  The G.S. boat, yeah.

STEIGER:  Because Don rowed that?

WILSON:  Don rowed that, yeah.  And so we had to leave that, and we parked it in that big eddy up above <Phantom Ranch> on the left side of the river.  And so we went on downriver, and by this time Marilyn was workin’ with me, and so she was rowin’ the other snout boat.  We took out and went back and visited Don in the hospital.  I knew that it was gonna be Marilyn’s and my job to hike down and grab that boat and go on downriver with it.

STEIGER:  Dirty job, but somebody had to do it.

WILSON:  Dirty job, somebody had to do it--exactly!  So I’m in talkin’ to Don, and he’s saying, "Well, you know, how much stuff is it gonna take to do this?"  And I said, "Well, you know, I don’t know.  Walt’s interested in goin’."  He said, "Well, that’d be all right."  So Walt got together and found some young girl to go with him.  Marilyn and I go to the machine shop, and he says, "God, we gotta have a lot of beer for this."  (laughter)  And we’re goin’, "Yeah, yeah, and we’re gonna have to have some good food."  So we bought a bunch of steaks and a lot of stuff.  There’s no way we could backpack that down there.  So we go to Don, we’re sayin’, "We got a little too much stuff here.  We’re gonna have to get maybe a helicopter to fly it in."  So Don calls the park, and they said, "Well, yeah, if you can get up here tomorrow at nine o’clock, they have a flight goin’ down to <Phantom Ranch>, and we’ll just throw that stuff on."  And Don was tellin’ him it was just a little bit of stuff.  So we go up there in a government vehicle to the helicopter pad and we back right up to the helicopter and we start unloadin’ the stuff, and the pilot comes out, "What in the hell are you guys doing?!  Get that thing away from this helicopter!"  And we go, "Well, we’re unloadin’ the stuff that you’re gonna fly down for us."  He said, "Well, how much is there?"  And we’re goin’, "Well, it’s in here."  We had the back of the truck half full.  "He said it was gonna be just a little bit!"  We’re goin’, "Well, you know, we had to have the beer, and all this stuff."  So Walt says, "Well, let me call Don."  So he called Don and it wound up Don had to pay for a separate helicopter flight, and they slung it in a big net underneath.

STEIGER:  They weren’t gonna put that inside the helicopter!

WILSON:  So we hiked down, then we hiked just a little cross-country over the ridge there, and dropped down into where the boat was parked and took the trip on down.  But the first part, the helicopter part, was the best there on that story.  It was a good trip with Walt, and actually we picked up some people who got disgusted with a private trip that they were on, and they just said, "Let us off the boat."  And they got off with their stuff, and we came along and picked 'em up.

STEIGER:  They just got off?!  How were they gonna get out?

WILSON:  Well, they figured they’d figure out something.  They just said, "Screw it, we can’t stand to be with you people anymore!"  And so they got off, and we picked 'em up and took 'em on down to <Diamond Creek>.  But that was about it for that trip.

	Then there was, let’s see here....

STEIGER:  I’ve got a question--not to spin you out.

WILSON:  No, that’s all right.

STEIGER:  So the work of those trips, the core samples and the spectro-magnetic work--or what’s....

WILSON:  Now you’ve thrown me off with that.  Paleo-magnetism.

STEIGER:  What was the point of all that?  What were they tryin’ to figure out?  How could you take that data and make use of it?

WILSON:  Well, they were drilling unknown beds for dating purposes.  So they could drill these red beds and get specific points where the pole was at a particular time in history--ancient history--and with that information, and drilling around the world in the same beds, same type of beds in different parts of the world, they were able to help conceive--when you bore rock and you see this particular magnetic pattern in that rock, you can pinpoint the age of that particular rock, by having all this other data to work with.

STEIGER:  I’m not quite grasping it.  So you know about where the rock was when it was being deposited, and they were using that information relative to other places for dating, or could they actually carbon date that stuff?  Were they actually doing....

WILSON:  That was one of the things that Ted McKee did, was help date the rocks.  So if there was a series of rocks....

STEIGER:  So they were doing carbon dating, and also the locating?

WILSON:  Right.

STEIGER:  Okay.

WILSON:  I don’t remember exactly how all that worked.  And then his work evolved as time went by, and I don’t remember exactly how it evolved, really, because I got less interested in that part of it, and just kind of tuned into the canyon--it was fun goin’ out on the slopes and packin’ the water and doin’ all that stuff.  The work was fun, so I didn’t pay as much attention to it--though one interesting thing we did, one winter....  We’d been drilling in 60 Mile Canyon, which is just a little tiny short canyon.  And we’d camped there and we’d spent several days drillin’ the lower part of it, but we couldn’t go any further, because it right away turned into a great big old slide fall, a pretty impassable area to get up above it.  So we flew into Upper 60 Mile and there’s a whole section of red beds up there, and Don and I flew in there one winter, and that was pretty interesting, because I didn’t have much helicopter time, and we hauled in all these folded-up plastic five-gallon water jugs, and so we went in and dumped all our supplies off, and then flew down to the river on a sandbar.  I didn’t have any idea, but he brought that helicopter in to just a screeching halt, and he just buried it in the sand.  We’re goin’, "God! What are you doing?!"  He said, "You know, if I just land normal on this sand, it could collapse, and it’d tip the helicopter over, and we’d be done."  We go, "Ohhhh."  So we made several trips hauling water to our campsite, so we had drinking water and drilling water and all that stuff.  And we spent a little over a week there, boring.  And that was actually quite interesting, doing stuff like that.

	Then let’s see here....  I did work in Don’s lab for a while, the first year I lived out on the forest service property where they were.  He taught me to run their magnetometer and measure the samples and do that, so it was actually kind of interesting--but not something I wanted to do a second winter.

And of course there was a lot of things, lots of interesting little escapades, like Don was rowin’ one of the snout rigs one day and flipped on Bedrock, and that created quite a little catastrophe and excitement--more drinking later.

STEIGER:  Well, yeah!

WILSON:  Let’s see....  I thoroughly enjoyed working with him.  Some of the other things that happened, not USGS-wise, was....  Let’s see....  I was involved in the river survey that was taking place through the University of Oregon, or Oregon State.  I can’t remember which....  And the guy’s name that was the head of the survey is right on the tip of my tongue.  It was through the University, and different people would come down, and ARTA participated in this, where we had a three-boat oar trip that would meet halfway down the river with a one-boat motor trip, and we’d change passengers.  So I did one with myself and Louise and David Lowry.  We got this group of people that were just really good, and really got tuned into the hiking, and they were really tuned into the river.  We just let 'em do a lot of stuff.  And David and Louise and I were pretty outlandish to be with, and they kind of got into that, too.  The interchange was supposed to take place at--it was somewhere below <Phantom Ranch>.  Well, the day of <Phantom Ranch>, and Dennis Prescott was running the motor half....  ARTA was contracting out their trips to RELCO, and Dennis was the boatman on this trip, and one of the owners of RELCO.  And Dennis, to his credit, was very meticulous, and very laid-out as to how things went:  nobody could ride on the motor box, and things like that.  And he was really, really careful with his people, and made sure that nobody got hurt.  Well, we were sort of the opposite, because we were letting people row and all that kind of stuff.  So Dennis shows up a day early at <Phantom Ranch>, and we’re goin’, "Uh-oh, we can’t really make this interchange yet.  It’s not gonna work out for us to be able to do this."  So we wound up makin?? a deal where they would just camp downstream, and then we would go on down and meet 'em at <Elves Chasm> the next day--which we did.  But in the process of that, that morning I had been telling David about this really neat little canyon, upstream of the campsite that’s above <Elves> on the right.  I can’t remember.  What is the mileage in there?  116?

STEIGER:  <Garnet Canyon>?

WILSON:  It’s above <Garnet Canyon>, upstream of <Garnet>.  Actually, the river makes a bend and you come around that bend and you go into the little canyon there where the campsite is.  And just after the bend, this little creek comes out, and it’s a fluted area there, it’s really kind of pretty.  And I kept telling him, "You know, that’s really a neat little canyon up there, and we should consider hiking up," because I’d been up there one time on one of my private trips.  So we pull in.  The pull-in was kind of hard, but we got in.  We strung these ropes out, up the cliff, and up this waterfall thing.  If you had the right Converse tennis shoes on, you could walk up there.  But we went up and strung ropes, and we had all of these people hangin’ off of these ropes.  There were several of 'em, and it’s a big wide area.  And Dennis goes by with his group, that we’re gonna meet in a couple of hours, and here’s all these people hangin’ off this cliff.  Dennis told us later the old ladies... God, those people just freaked out.  "We cannot go with them!  That’s dangerous!"  They really freaked out on him.  And so then a little later we went down, and about lunchtime the people in our boat went up to <Elves Chasm>, and Louise and I stayed back at the boat and got the lunch prepared.  So we’re standin’ around, Louise goes, "Let’s go over and see these two women that are on Dennis’ boat and see how they’re doin’."  So we walk on the boat and we just say hi to 'em, and we just act like we own the thing, and we went back to the motor box.  As we walk by the women, Louise says, "You think you can get that thing started?"  I said, "Well, yeah, I might be able to."  So we got back and Louise goes, "Do you think you can drive it?"  I go, "I don’t know, I’ve never run one before, but maybe we could probably get it going."  And those women are going, "You know, Dennis won’t let anybody in the back of the boat.  You guys get out of there."  And Louise said, "He doesn’t care, he’d be happy with us bein’ back here."  "No!  No!  You can’t be in there!"  And finally we pretty much ran out of smart-ass comments and stuff, and we said, "Ah, you know, maybe we’d better go finish our lunch."  In the meantime, people start comin’ back, and Dennis didn’t know about any of that.  The two groups ate lunch, and then the interchange took place.  His people came over reluctantly to us, and our people were leaving reluctantly and going with Dennis.  So as Dennis was backing his boat out, all the people on his boat jumped off and swam back to shore.  EVERYBODY.  Everybody did!  There was not a person on the front of the boat, and he’s, "Oh my God!"

STEIGER:  Just to [mess] with him?

WILSON:  Just to [mess] with him.   And so our new people are just goin’, "Oh my God!"  (laughs)  I mean, they were just horrified, totally horrified.  And so anyway, by the time we got to the end of that trip, we had them converted too--but it took a day of bein’ with us to learn that there’s another way to run the river.  And of course, you know, who do you think got the best points on that trip?  The survey was overwhelmingly oar powered versus motor powered.

STEIGER:  So it was you guys’ [unclear].

WILSON:  It was us.  But you know, I always thought that was a lopsided way.  It’s not a fair survey, because it depends on the personality of the boatmen, really, as to whether you like one or the other, in a lot of ways.  Obviously oar power is certainly a heck of a lot nicer way to travel the river, but motor powered works really well too, but Dennis was just a little bit too straight-laced to deal with idiots like the three of us.

STEIGER:  I think it also depends on the personality of....

WILSON:  Of the people?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Was it Pewe?  Was that the guy?  No.  I remember that thing you were talkin’ about, that survey.

WILSON:  Yeah, he had an interesting name.

STEIGER:  Or did it start with an "S"?

WILSON:  Well, I thought it was "S."  I can’t think.  That name’s been in my mind for years.  It was Bo Shelby, Oregon State University.

STEIGER:  I remember, because I remember Fred and Carol and the motor guys were cussin’, "This is a bunch of bullshit!"

WILSON:  I suppose they were!  (laughs)  But anyway, that was one story.  And that was one of those things where we had the upper hand on Dennis--the poor guy.  That’s the way it goes.

	Oh! another USGS story.  Let’s see here....  Well, one of the first people I took on a private trip was Dr. Bob Rabkin [phonetic] and his wife, Joanna.  Joanna had escaped <Poland>, with her parents, from World War II ....  I mean, they escaped with their lives out of <Poland>.

STEIGER:  Not unlike Vladimir.

WILSON:  Exactly, yeah.  And so Joanna was a very interesting character, and I got to be really good friends with them after I took them on this private trip.  But what happened in the long and the short of it, was the two Elston twins, they were really cute.  They’re still incredibly short.  These really short little girls with the most incredible bosoms you would ever imagine.  And they were causing them to be stoop-shouldered and they were not even out of high school yet.  And they were comin’ on these <Grand Canyon> trips, and on one of the trips....  And I used to go over to dinner at their house all the time, and sometime in the process of all this, I got to thinkin’ about Rabkin and I said, "You know, you guys should talk to this friend of mine and see if he can find you a surgeon to cut those things down.  You need to get rid of a bunch of that."  (laughs)  I could talk to 'em like that.  And I suggested that maybe they take Bob on a river trip and work out a deal with him--which they did.  He got 'em a surgeon and they eventually had the breast reductions and were forever just incredibly happy about it.

	Dick Laidley was on this particular Elston trip that Rabkin was on.  Dick was a NASA test pilot and a very close friend of Don and Shirley Elston’s....  And just to briefly deviate from the story, Don Elston--during the Apollo Program where they were training the astronauts--Don and Dick worked with the astronauts who were the orbiters, the ones that orbited the moon, while the other guys are down there walkin’ around on it.  Don would take 'em and walk 'em on the ground, mostly in <Arizona>, and show 'em what the geology was like on the ground.  Then he took 'em up in a small plane, up to around 10,000 feet, and flew 'em around, showin’ 'em what that same geology looked like.  Then Dick Laidley would take 'em up in a--I think they were those little sport planes, those G-36’s--take 'em up in those to 30,000 feet and show 'em what the geology looked like [from] up there.  So they had this overall picture of what the fault lines were, and volcanic action, and all that stuff, what the characteristics were, so when they were orbiting the moon, that would be one of the things that they would pay attention to.  So Dick started comin’ on an occasional river trip.

	So this particular trip, there was Dick; and Mike Akeah, who is another character; myself; Bob Rabkin; Shirley and Don; and several other geologists.  So the last night, down around 220, we had camp.  In that time frame we’d always have five of these instant cheesecake pies.  So Rabkin was just goin’ on and on.  He was getting drunker and drunker and going on and on about, "I’m gettin’ one cheesecake just for myself.  One for myself."  Mike and Dick were puttin’ the cakes together, they took 'em down into a little cool spot on a rock down by the river, and they were all lined up neatly.  And those two were back up there at the table laughin’ and cacklin’ a lot, so I knew somethin’ was goin’ on, but I was layin’ on the sand, talkin’ to people.  All of a sudden the announcement was made, "The pies are ready!"  So Bob storms down there, and he grabs a pie, but Dick ran right down there beside him.  And what he was doing, he was manipulatin’ Bob, and got him lined up with the correct pie.  And so Bob comes up and he’s just goin’ on and on about how great it is, and he scoops in a big ol’ spoon, and he comes out with nothin’ but a donkey turd, and he shovels it into his mouth, and he’s still talkin’, and he gets this turd in his mouth, and he goes, (yelling), "Oh shit!  That’s a donkey turd!  You bastards!"  (laughter)  And he throws the pie in the air and he runs down to the river, and he says, (yelling), "You cocksuckers!  You little bastards!"  (laughs)  "Somebody get me my toothbrush!"  (laughs)  "I need some soap!"

STEIGER:  So it was probably a fresh one, it sounds like.

WILSON:  So that was the end of that story.  (laughs)  Oh God.

	Then, let’s see there was....  There’s a lot of those.  We also worked on those trips real hard, too--just to let you know we didn’t drink during the day.

STEIGER:  Yeah, seems like most of those--I’ve done a bunch of science trips and they’re more work than anything else.  There’s not a lot of layin??? around.

WILSON:  Oh man!  And you know, when we were done with that job, we were haulin’ rocks out too.  I mean, we were haulin’ core samples, but they were also taking rock samples, and man, the load was heavy!

STEIGER:  Oh yeah, especially in a bunch of snout rigs.

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s right.

STEIGER:  Now why, on those trips, would they want to go with snout rigs?  Why didn’t they just get a motorboat?

WILSON:  Well, the first trips that Don did, he went with Fred Burke.  They did one or two trips that way.  But Don was more interested in trying to set it up so he could do his own trips.  He wanted to learn to row, he liked the idea of rowing.  So it developed that way.

STEIGER:  It was sort of like they wanted to do the work, but he would just as soon run his own boat, and rowin’ was kind of what he wanted to do?

WILSON:  Yeah, it was.  Given the situation, he could have actually put a motor rig together if he wanted to, but he went more with this.  And we carried ten-horse motors in our boats, because one of the things we did do, because of the urgency....  If you go spend five days in one place, and you spend three days in another, and you spend two or three days at another spot, you burn up a lot of time, and before long you’ve got a trip that requires that you kick the boat into high speed to get through the long flatwater stretches.  So we would put a motor on and motor a lot of the flatwater stuff--not so much in the upper canyon, but we did once we got ...

STEIGER:  Right below <Lava>.

WILSON:  ... right below <Lava>.  And then we also did some motoring in other stretches of the river--especially if we needed to get from one drilling site to another, and we had this schedule that was gonna take us....  Then we’d try to make up as much time in between as we could.

STEIGER:  If the wind happened to maybe be blowin’.

WILSON:  Yeah, the wind.  (laughter)  So that is what we did, yeah.  On the other commercial trips, I worked with Mike Castelli, (the guy who’s making it possible for us to do this today.)  We had an interesting experience.  We did a trip, a two-boat trip.  We knew ahead of time that we had another trip to do three days later, at the end of this one.  And so in order for us to pull that off--because we still had to buy the food, and get the trip completely put together--we had to get off the river early.  So Jim Elliott was going to drive out to <Whitmore> and pick us up and drive back, and get us to <Flagstaff> so we could start gettin’ this thing together.  But what happened was, is that Jim got out there, and that was before they had the roads in very good shape, and he kind of got lost, and he got the pickup stuck for like twelve hours, and he wound up not being able to make it.  He just gave up and turned around and went back.  So Mike and I, we hike up there to the top of <Whitmore>, and we have these two boats down below there at the campsite with the assistant boatmen in charge of the trip, because we got there late in the day, and we hiked up that night.  We took enough water so we could survive for about twelve hours or so, and we carried our ammo cans, and what we were using for waterproof bags back then, which were those radio bags that would roll up, and with the flap, you know.

STEIGER:  Yeah, the square with the backpack straps on it.

WILSON:  And they had the straps on, yeah.  Man, I never hurt so bad after carrying one of those up that trail!

STEIGER:  I never heard it called a radio bag.  Did they put radios in 'em?

WILSON:  Well, I thought that they had radios in those--I thought.  Maybe I’m wrong.

STEIGER:  I never knew.

WILSON:  It seems like that’s what they were, but maybe not.  So that’s what we were using back in those days for our waterproof bags.  So we carried all that crap up there and camped the night, and ran out of water.  We had our buck knifes and went to work and cut a barrel cactus open, and we chewed the pulp inside there.  Actually, there’s a tremendous amount of water in one of those things.  It’s just the moisture in the pulp inside.

STEIGER:  You just cut the top off and dig it out?

WILSON:  No, we cut the side of it out.  We should have probably cut the top off, but I don’t know, it worked good.

STEIGER:  Didn’t have a blade long enough to just cut the top off?

WILSON:  No, we didn't.  It was a regular buck knife.  You had to be pretty careful, because those spines stuck out quite a ways.  And so we carefully cut a chunk out of the middle, and then we were able to get in there and root out the pulp.  So that was one of those little things, a side trip there.  And, you know, by the time the next morning showed up, we’re thinking, "God, Jim’s not here, and it was supposed to have been yesterday when we saw him, and still no Jim!"  And so we’re lookin’ the situation over, and we’re lookin’ down there, and we can see our party.  "We’d better get outta here."  So we took off and ran down the trail.  The brush between that trailhead and where the camp was, was so thick that it took us an hour to get through that goddamned brush, goin’ up.  What we did was, we just jumped in the river and swam down.  Got to the boats as they were untyin’ 'em, so it was a close call.  So we got there, got on the boats, went on downriver, and Mike had a girlfriend that was meeting him at <Bitter Springs>, up towards Page.  And she was gonna come in there on a bus at like 11:30 at night.  And he just goes, "God, I can’t not meet her.  She’s just gonna panic."  And so he went out, he caught a ride out with an Indian out of <Diamond Creek> to <Peach Springs>, got on a Greyhound.  He was going to <Flagstaff>, to go get her.  Then in the meantime, I’m still on the river.  And the whole reason for this trip--I forgot to mention that, the reason why we were going out--was because the Wall Street Journal was sending a reporter to come and do a trip with us on the <Grand Canyon>, and they wanted to have the two best boatmen--quote "two best boatmen"--Mike and Allen, go do that trip.  Well, what they didn’t think about was by the time they got us to <Lee's Ferry> we were so tired we didn’t give a shit anymore.  (laughs)  Lou got panic stricken because he found out that Jim never got there to pick us up, so he rents a helicopter and they start flyin’ the river lookin’ for us.  Well, it turns out that this helicopter had a leaky hydraulic hose (laughs) so they wound up having to--I forget where they landed, they landed somewhere and screwed around with it for a few hours and got the hose fixed--and then Lou started off flyin’ again.  And so we were camped there at that little campsite on the left, upstream from Separation Canyon.  There used to be a pretty decent camp in there on the left side.

STEIGER:  Oh yeah, <Bridge Canyon>?

WILSON:  <Bridge Canyon>, yeah.

STEIGER:  Bridge City, where there was a little foundation up there.

WILSON:  That’s right, yeah, there was.  And we were camped there.  Luckily, there happened to be a little flat spot of sand that that helicopter could land on.  Well, it was just dusk.  I mean, it was just dusk when that thing landed.  I threw my waterproof bag....  Lou gets out and he says, "You gotta go quick!  You gotta go quick!  Get your stuff!"  And so I ran down to the boat and got my ammo can and my black bag and I ran and jumped in the helicopter, waved goodbye, and flew off.

	And so we fly up to the <Peach Springs> Airport, which is a little gravel strip, and there’s an airplane sittin’ there waitin’ for us.  And so the first thing that....  I take back part of my original story:  Mike didn’t go on to <Peach Springs>.  He wound up being at <Peach Springs>, and Lou landed on the main street of <Peach Springs>, looking for some information on these boatmen, and there’s Mike.  And Mike’s standing over at the bus station, and he sees this helicopter land, and Lou get out of it, and Mike goes, "Aw, shit!"  (laughs)  So Mike goes over and talks to him and Lou finds out where we are down the river.  I’m sorry, it’s been a long time since I’ve told this story.  So Lou gets back in the helicopter and flies down and picks me up.  And then Mike gets over to the airport, and I land at the airport.  Well by this time it’s dark, and so we have to put our stuff in the airplane, and it’s like a Cessna 182 or something.  Then it turns out it was a new pilot to the area, had only flown from <Grand Canyon Village> to <Peach Springs Airport>, and he’d never done any other flying.  So he didn’t even know the lay of the land there.  So I’m sitting up front with him....

Well, first off, the helicopter pilot was there, and he’s going, "You know, I’m wondering if you can actually get this thing off the runway here with these two guys and all their shit.  And they’re going, "Well, we don’t know," and "how much is it going to weigh?" and all this stuff.  So they drained a bunch of gas out of the tanks--there’s these wing tanks.  So they push these little buttons to let the gas out, and they just started dumpin’ gas.  And so they finally made the decision that they’d gotten rid of enough weight to put us in the airplane.  Now, by this time, it’s just black out.  So they drove two cars down to the end of the runway.  Actually, what they did is, they drove down to the spot where he needed to be airborne, and shined the lights across the runway.  And we got airborne by the time we hit the headlights, and we took off and we were heading back to the east, and he’s trying to get this radio signal so he can kind of home-in on <Grand Canyon Village>, and it wasn’t workin’, and he said, "I’m not even sure where to set it to get this!"  And we’re goin’, "Well, shit!"

STEIGER:  It’s dark, you don’t have all that much gas, can’t fly around 'til mornin’.

WILSON:  That’s right!  And Mike and I just came up with the bright idea, "Well, why don’t we just find the highway and follow the highway, and go to <Williams>, and then turn left at <Williams> and fly up to <Grand Canyon Village>?" which is what we did.  So we land, we had a flat tire on landing, and we came to an abrupt stop and slid sideways.  (laughs)  But to make sure that the airplane didn’t get wrecked from another airplane, we got out and pushed it, and got it shoved off into a median area there, and walked over to the terminal building.  And there’s Claire Elliott, Lou’s wife, waiting to pick us up.  So she has a van and we drive to Flag.  And she’s a more common-sense kind of person.  She’s married to Lou, who will just go out and do anything, but the whole thing here was to get us up to <Lee's Ferry> so we could be on this trip where they had this writer.  Well, we got there, and Mike and I were really tired.  We got the trip put together and got up there, and everything was on time--though just barely.  And then at the end of the trip, the article came out.  It was a front-page story in the Wall Street Journal.

STEIGER:  Big deal.

WILSON:  It was a big deal.  And David Kay gave me a call about a month later, and he goes, "What did you guys do to that guy?!"  I said, "Well, you know, we gave him a regular trip."  We did give him a good trip.  We did!  We gave him a really good trip.  And he said, "You know, there’s not a single good thing I can quote in this article."  (laughter)  And he started readin’ me some of the stuff, and I’m goin’, "God."  (laughs)  I mean, he made some quotes, and we were paranoid about <Lava> at that time, because we’d had this flip, so there was some of that stuff.  And so he made it out to be this really....  Well, I’ve got the article.  I guess you could read it if you’re interested in it.

STEIGER:  He made it out to be this death-defyin’ thing?

WILSON:  Yeah.  But anyway, it was kind of neat bein’ on the front page of that newspaper.

STEIGER:  Even if it wasn’t a complimentary article!

WILSON:  Well it wasn’t negative.  It was not a negative article.  I didn’t see it as being bad in terms of Mike and I--it was just in terms of David wanted to have something that showed....

STEIGER:  That would sell some trips?

WILSON:  That would sell some trips.  Instead of death-defying, he wanted some pleasurable things.  And the hikes were hard, and all this stuff.

STEIGER:  The guy was a pussy, in other words.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And all the rapids were a big deal, "death-defying rapids" and all that stuff.  It wasn’t in those words, but basically you could read between the lines.  Anyway, they did use some quotes, but it wasn’t what David really wanted to have.  So that was the Wall Street Journal trip, flying out of the canyon in the middle of the night.

STEIGER:  Do you have the article?  What year was it?

WILSON:  I have the article, I can figure that out.

STEIGER:  So that was early then?  Must have been seventies.

WILSON:  Fairly early.  I just have to look it up, I’ve got it there.  Can we stop for a minute?

STEIGER:  Yeah, we can.  Actually, we might as well.  We got four minutes of tape left and we’re done with this.

WILSON:  Okay, I’ve got a couple of things I’ve gotta do.

STEIGER:  Okay, we’re stoppin’.

