FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Isabel Simmons

Interview number NAU.OH.28.38

Isabel Simmons, who has been in the <Flagstaff> area since 1948, and who worked at the Navajo Army Depot from 1950 to 1971. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on January 13, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, August 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in <Chicago>, 1909 

    Raised in <California> 

    Came to <Flagstaff> area in 1948 for husband’s health 

    Worked for State Employment Service 

    Hired Navajo’s to work on railroad 

    Navajo Army Depot, 1950, during Korean War 

    Went from 400 to 1,400 employees during war 

    Hired about 400 Native Americans, mostly Navajo 

    Ammunitions handlers 

    Living quarters scarce and poor 

    Cut backs began in 1958 after Korean War ended 

    Worked as assistant adjutant from 1958-71 

    Survivor assistance to families during <Vietnam> War 

    Depot historian, 25th Anniversary 

    Wrote large supplement in local paper, and brochure 

    Early history 

    Established in 1941 

    Made ammunitions 

    Navajos who worked there, discussion 

    Problems with leaving for various ceremonies, lambing in spring (good story) 

    Navajo’s American names, many given by traders 

    Interesting stories, customs 

    Navajo letters from people hired 

    Navajo drinking problems at Depot 

    Sam Boone, medicine man

Tape 1, Side 2

    Sam Boone, continued 

    Problems between Navajos and Mexicans at Depot 

    Few blacks, Grady Neal, mentioned 

    Naming of Navajo Army Depot 

    Navajo humor 

    Officers 

    Different articles written by Isabel 

    Gardening at altitude, Code Talkers, Canyon de Chelly, Keeping a boarding house 

    Navajo Code Talkers 

    Phillip Johnson 

    Story about officer who ate sardines

This is an interview with Mrs. Isabel Simmons, who has been in the <Flagstaff> area since 1948, and worked at the Navajo Army Depot from 1950 to 1971. The interview is being conducted on January 13, 1976, at 3702 South Cochise Drive in <Flagstaff>, which is Mrs. Simmons' home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN L. ROGERS: When and where were you born?

ISABEL SIMMONS: I was born in <Chicago Illinois>. You want the year?

SUSAN ROGERS: If you want to give it - you don't have to.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Nineteen nine [1909]. It doesn't matter.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you want to tell me a little bit about your childhood and how you _____ came here?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Left <Chicago> when I was about two because my father was a native San Franciscan, and he did not like the Midwest. I lived in <California> most of my life until we came up here for my husband's health. Graduated from high school in <Oakland California> - I was raised around the Bay Area, when it looked a lot different than it does now. There's still ferryboats on the bay, and there weren't too many houses in the hills. It was a nice area to be raised in, in those days. And <California> was a very beautiful state. Frankly, I was quite reluctant to come to <Arizona>, but my husband had asthma, and like a lot of other people, we came up here for his health, which was well worth it. So when we came here in 1948, August, I believe, I went to work for the State Employment Service for about a year and a half, where I had my first experience hiring Navajo Indians for the railroad. I'd never seen an Indian before in my life, and I frankly was a little alarmed the first time or two, but after I worked with them a while, I don't think I felt- As Will Rogers [used to say], I never met an Indian I didn't like. I mean, I was never treated rudely or anything by them. I liked working with them. It was DIFFERENT, but I enjoyed working with them.

Then I had a chance to go out to the depot in July of 1950, and I went out there on the seventeenth of July, and about that time, <Korea> broke loose. The depot had, I think, 400 people at that time. It was a very small place. Of course with <Korea> we started expanding, and we went up to 1,400 people before <Korea> was over. I was a placement assistant - I've forgotten what it was - anyhow, we did the hiring, I was in Personnel. Navajo Interpreter Scott Franklin, who is now a minister up at <Tuba City>, I think, was our Navajo interpreter at that time. He and I worked together, mostly hiring the ammunition handlers, the lower-grade ones. Well, we hired everybody, but he and I could hire those directly. And he took the ones, of course, that didn't speak English, and there were a lot in those days. And we had, at one time, around 400 Indians, mostly Navajos, with a few Hopis, and some Pimas, and a couple of Supais, a few Pima Papagos. But the majority were Navajos. They worked mostly out in the field with the ammunition, especially those that couldn't speak English, of course, had to take the lower-grade and then they’d work under a Navajo foreman. And it kept us pretty busy. I remember one time I ran a survey, and we hired around 105 people and we lost 110 people that month. You never quite kept up in those days. Housing was a big problem, because <Flagstaff> wasn't over 8,000 people at that time, I don't believe. Housing was just as scarce as it is now. There was the Indian village out at the depot, of course, and then there was what they called Victory Village, which was rather a sad housing for the Anglos and the rest of 'em. I was only in there once. I took a very good applicant up there. She was a stenographer, and they were SO scarce. So I took her up there and she took one look and said, "I won't live here!" And as I remember, it was - well, you had coal stoves to heat with, and it was really, we'd consider it pretty primitive, ______ sense. So it was hard to keep people. They'd come to work and couldn't get housing, and they would leave. And then of course whenever you have wartime conditions you have people coming and going a lot. If they don't like it here, they'll go somewhere else. Of course our winters aren't the easiest in the world.

I worked in Personnel up until 1958, and then of course <Korea> was over. The depot was beginning to what we call RIF people - reduction in force - and I worked on several of those which were very grim, as far as I'm concerned. You know the people, you know they're being laid off, and some of 'em have six kids or ten children, and it was a part of my job I didn't like. So anyhow, Personnel, of course, was being cut way down. We had eighteen, I think, was our tops at one time. We were going down steadily, and the depot was going down, so I transferred into the adjutant's office, military personnel. Most everything you could name, and I was in the adjutant's office from 1958 to 1971. I didn't realize I was there that long! And I ended up as assistant adjutant and information office for the depot. And information officers are public relations type of thing. And assistant adjutant, of course you've got to work with everything.

I enjoyed my life very much, but in a small depot like that, especially in the adjutant's office- Do you know what an adjutant is? Well in the army it’s the administrative officer. So in other words, the adjutant's office is supposed to take most of the administrative details off your commanding officer, and he runs the place, but the adjutant's office handles the administrative work. In a small depot, you get everything, which was interesting, but it got on my nerves toward the end, because you did everything. I’ve retired officers and I’ve shipped 'em overseas, and I've handled enlisted men's promotions and retirements and discharges. But you did- like you'd send an officer overseas, and then four months later you had to do it again, which meant you went back and checked all your regulations.

The thing that finally got to me, one of the reasons I retired, besides the fact the depot went down and I had enough time anyhow - we did an awful lot of survivor assistance when <Vietnam> came along. As the only military installation in northern <Arizona>, we were responsible for handling a lot. You wouldn't think there'd be much in an area like this, but one year we had thirteen Indian boys killed, from <Tuba City>. And of course the officers made the notification to the next of kin, and they took care of the actual contacts with the people, but if they weren't in, I got it. And it can get a little- Well, most of the people- Well, we had one girl that got a call, unpleasant, and you couldn't blame her, because somebody, their husband's just been killed, you can't expect them to- So whenever you give anybody information like that, you just take it, that's all. But most of the people were so nice - sometimes I used to wish they weren't - it felt better if they COULD have yelled at us. And then on top of that, as information officer, I got to arrange the publicity, if we wanted it, when they presented the men posthumously. And that is not the most joyous job in the world. And we had about two or three years of that during <Vietnam>. And, see there were boys from <Flagstaff>. There was one over at <Valentine>. And anything in northern <Arizona>, we got. I was glad to help the people, but it was a nerve-wracking job. I just got to the point- Well, none of us liked it. The officers did an excellent job, and the Army - at least in OUR depot - did a marvelous job for the survivors. Everything was done that they could possibly do. Whenever anybody was killed like that, they would send an officer out to help the family, if the family wants it. It's always what the family wants. Usually they want all the help they can get. This one girl I talked about, said she wanted nothing to do with the Army, and we didn't - outside of seeing that she got her money - we didn't do anything. We never pushed, and I do think that's one thing the Army did a marvelous job on, and we really tried to do our very best at helping people. But I was glad to get out of it. I'd had about enough of that. It was very nerve wracking.

Now, do you want a little history of the depot?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, along with a few other titles, I said at a small depot you get to do most everything. I was depot historian, and so one day in 1967 we had our twenty-fifth anniversary, and we combined with Armed Forces Day and we had a big supplement in the paper, and believe it or not, I wrote everything in, which I'll NEVER do again! When we had one of our designers design that, we had a man out there, Bob Langford, who was an EXCELLENT artist, and he made that, it's supposed to be a rawhide stretched. (

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.) And it was a pretty good supplement, I think. And of course I did an awful lot of research. And we also did a brochure. Now, I didn’t do all the work for it, but not as much as - there were quite a few of us working on that, including, let's see, Bob Langford, of course, and then we had our photographer, Bill- Hmm, what was his last name? And Ward Olson worked on it, too. So I hunted back through old records and dusty old pictures, and they're still - I HOPE - all together at Navajo. At least I hope they are. I put them all together, with a big notice on it, "These are valuable old records," so I hope they're keeping them. And this Navajo Ordinance Depot was established on 5 February 1942 by War Department General Order Number Nine, and later redesignated Navajo Army Depot in 1962. I think it's now Navajo Army Activity. There's only a hundred people there, which are really standby. And the depot actually began in 1941 when Colonel C.M. Steeson [phonetic spelling] of the Army Ordinance Corps, accompanied by four Santa Fe Railway officials, selected the cattle shipping station called Bellemont, in preference to sites at Lake Mary or Chino Valley. [They liked the] lay of the land, the promise of water and proximity to Santa Fe Railroad probably were deciding factors. Of course it was right by the railroad, they ran a spur line in there. And from what I hear - well, there are still quite a few springs out there - of course they drilled a well - but there's a lot of springs out there, yet. Used to be a couple of old farmhouses out there, and I think they're gone. And it was a cattle-shipping station. Pete Michelbach, whose father was one of the old settlers here, told me once about he'd worked out there shipping cattle, and snowstorms and everything. It's a little colder out there than <Flagstaff>, but it is a big- Have you been out there?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, it's a big level grassy plain, you know. Must have been pretty good pasture.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can't you see the depot from the highway?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Yes. Well, you see, it's a fairly good-sized place. It's about 28,000 acres. You go back several miles, it's really quite pretty in there. I used to go out in the area occasionally for publicity purposes. And it's really a beautiful area out in there - big trees and I suppose they still have quite a bit of game, because its more or less protected out there.

So it actually began in 1941- No we've read that.

Early depot histories are full of the trials and tribulations encountered in getting the depot started. Heavy snow, cold weather, and rocky terrain all contributed to construction delays. The isolated location made it difficult to obtain skilled labor and keep it. See, at that time I doubt if <Flagstaff> was over 6,000 people. So you bring an influx of people and you had problems.

The Navajo Indian Reservation furnished a large supply of unskilled labor, but here the Army ran headlong into a language barrier, as very few Navajos spoke English. And back in 1942, not too many did. In 1950, a lot didn't. I think that is pretty well over. In order to keep Navajos from returning to the reservation, depot officials built the first Navajo town on record, a collection of hogans later replaced by the Indian village. I've got some pictures of that. The trading post was established, known as Richardson's Trading Post. And sheep brought in [from] <Williams> furnished the women for their weaving, and Navajo interpreters hired. Despite bad weather and all the other problems, the depot, under the command of Lt. Col. E.B. Myrick [phonetic spelling] - he was the first commanding officer - made its first ________ shipment on Armistice Day, 11 November 1942 with Senator Carl Hayden loading the first case of ammunition. And Navajo Army Depot was formally dedicated on 7 December 1942, just one year after <Pearl Harbor>. And since that time it's had as many as 2,000 civilian employees. That was during World War II, and 40 military; and as few as 400 civilians and 5 military. Of course, now it's down to 100 civilians and 2 military, approximately. And during <Korea>, Navajo again played its part in keeping the ammunition coming, but there's much less trouble than in World War II, due to a nucleus of stable, experienced personnel. They also had housing of sorts for everyone.

Of course we used to have an awful lot of problems with the Indians going home for Yei'ii bichais, and for squaw dances, and the lambing. There's a story they told out there - I don't know how true it is, but it's a good story - about during the spring all the Navajos were taking off to go to the reservation for lambing season, and at that time a lot of them had herds; it was important. Anyhow, Washington wanted to know why we were having so much trouble, and someone wrote back that it was lambing season, and Washington came back with a reply to postpone the lambing season. (laughter) That wouldn't be surpris[ing]! It just sounds like them.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let me ask you a question here. Why was it the Navajos were brought out there, and maybe not the Hopis or the other Indian groups?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, there were a lot more Navajos close by. And, you know, the Hopis, I think their tribe's only, what, a few thousand. Now, they hired quite a few Hopis, and the Hopis generally, as a rule, worked more as - most of them spoke English, nearly all of them did. And they were all skilled people, and most of them were carpenters or electricians, and took the more skilled jobs because they could speak English, and they had the ability. So that was the reason for that.

And of course the Navajos, there was so many MORE of them. The railroad used to use a lot of Navajos. Believe me, when I worked for the employment service, we would ship out a bunch of Navajos about once a week. I remember we had one Navajo - I began to think he looked sort of familiar, and I checked out the records. We'd shipped him out about four times in as many weeks. He'd _____________ got free transportation to <Barstow> or wherever they were going. Well, he had a girlfriend over at <Ash Fork>, so he'd get off at <Ash Fork>, and then he'd come back over here and start over again. So it was really quite interesting.

So, of course, in 1971 the depot went on a standby basis. They still have _______ store ammunition out there.

But while we were hiring Indians during <Korea>, it was really very interesting. They did not, at that time - still don't - have the same time sense that we did. Of course, they have another habit that drove you up the wall. They'd have three or four Social Security cards, and THAT always made it interesting. The only thing I ever found and really regarded with much care was their census number. They usually took care of that, but Social Security- And a lot of them, of course, their names were rather unusual. I think they'd anglicized 'em. I have read that a lot of these were given to 'em by the traders - sometimes out of a peculiar sense of humor and sometimes I guess out of desperation. But here's some of the old names we used to have in the files. Of course there was a lot of Many Mules, Many Goats, Many Children, Many Whiskers. And here's Boldest Brown Eyes, and Hosteen Porthole, and here's Cattle Chaser. Then there's Slim Whiskers, and here's Sonny Many Children. And here's Smiley White Sheep. And here's one that fascinates me, Hosteen Sauerkraut, and Mike Soda Pop. There's Captain Sam’s Sun, and Braided Hair Son, and Joe Chewing Tobacco. Wool Boy Big Boy; that was all one name. And this is Big Boy Wool Boy, Wool Boy's Kid, Saltwater's Nephew, John Shoeing, and let's see, Yellow Man's Grandson, and Johnny Jumbo. And then Dennis So She Many Turquoise, and I remember him VERY well, because I was helping badge a whole bunch of 'em, and they had to put their names on board, you know. You just try to fit Dennis So She Many Turquoise, on the board! But the names were interesting, and I enjoyed working with the Navajos. I found out after I worked with them a while, a lot of them said they COULDN'T speak English, COULD. I learned to tell- And if they liked you, and knew that you liked them, they were very nice.

I never will forget one time I had a nice-looking Marine sergeant - he'd been a marine sergeant - and we were interviewing him for a job, and he spoke about the best English I've heard from a Navajo, practically no trace of accent. Most of 'em, you can sort of tell it's an Indian speaking. So anyhow, we got along beautifully, and I enjoyed talking to him. In fact, he's the one who gave me an idea for my code talkers article which I wrote about twenty years later. I had never heard of them, and that's what he had been. And so I don't remember his name, I wish I did. Anyhow, after I hired them, we sent them into another office for their technical processing and paperwork. I got a phone call from one of the girls, "Isabel, what did you hire him for this job for?! He can't speak English!" I said, "He speaks beautiful English!" She had made him mad or done something, and he was not saying a word, which is typical Navajo. I mean, if you make them angry, they don't fight back, but they've got passive resistance down to a science! But as a rule, I think I got along with them well.

I was kind of interested - of course this has been many years ago - but one of our Navajo interpreters got to talking to me about their customs, and witchcraft, they believed in witchcraft pretty strongly. Maybe they still do, I don't know. But especially someone turning into a coyote or a wolf. That seemed to be a very strong feeling of theirs. And I know one time a lot of them were quitting, and I asked our interpreter, "What's the matter?" And finally he looked at me and said, "Well, several men have been hurt. They think there's a witch around." I said, "Well, don't look at me, I am NOT a witch, and I've had nothing to do with it." So I (laughs) don't know whether that helped or not. But it was very interesting. It was entirely different from anything I had EVER run into in <California>, believe me.

Then we used to, when we’d hired them, we'd send out all these notices to please come, say, on the tenth of October. And we'd give them about two weeks, because mail delivery in those days on the reservation was worse than it is now, I imagine. I mean, it would go in the trader's basket and stay there until somebody picked it up. And so two months later we'd get some kind of a letter like this. (leafs through pages) Let me see if I can find that. Anyhow, "I'll come when I get my house done," and "thanks" and this sort of thing. And here's one from- We used to get letters from the boys up at the Indian school in <Brigham Utah>. Here's one: "This morning I would like to write a short letter to you, just to let you know when we are going home for vacation. The date we're going home is on 24 of April, but I'm sorry, I don't know when the school starts. Would like to tell you what's going on around the school campus. Last night we went [to the] show. The name of the show was Oklahoma Annie, it's about cowboys. The weather [is] nice today. Well, it is almost time to go to the dining room, so I'd better close here. Goodbye and good luck to you. P.S. Almost forgot one thing, that is, if there's anything wrong with application, please let me know before school close." Which was interesting, but didn't help you trying to fill jobs.

And here's one of my favorites. Is this going to be publicized much? Should I, is it okay to give names?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, it can be used for research.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Okay, because this one is one of my favorites. "Dear Sir, I am like to apply for a job, but I don't know what to take. I want a good easy work, not lifting or heavy work. Maybe you might have an easy work that I might not think of. So will you please list me on a paper so I would take one. I'm doing this in my own handwriting. Thanks, your friend, Donald Bitsilly." So we got some very interesting correspondence. It didn't really help you much on hiring, but I will say one thing, you might look at that handwriting. Most of them write a beautiful hand, they really do. They write very, very well. They may not express - at that time they didn't express themselves as well, but I can't ever remember seeing any poor handwriting from ANY Indian.

And here is one, I think I copied this from something that the guards had on file. And this is reply to charges of being drunk and disorderly with assault. I gather that happened down at the Indian village fairly often. The guards had to go down and separate them. "I must have been drunk but don't remember just what happened. In fact, we were BOTH drunk. Edward Archie was as drunk as I was. I did not knowingly or intended to commit assault and battery, nor intended severely harm Mr. Archie. We both planned and have drank together before and we have never done any harm to each other. If one of us had been sober, this wouldn't have happened. He is just as much to blame as I am. Why should I suffer the consequences alone, when he is also at fault with me. I don't think it's right. As far as my work is concerned, my record is good. I don't remember hitting Mr. Archie. His wounds might have been caused by falling, bumping, or several other things. I suggest we have another hearing together with Mr. Archie. At the last hearing I was the only one charged for everything. I request another fair hearing with Mr. Archie." I don't know how that came out.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there quite a bit of a drinking problem on the depot?

ISABEL SIMMONS: I would imagine. Well, most of the years that I was there, liquor was not allowed on the depot. The Indians were not allowed to drink. Of course that didn't mean they didn't drink. But from what I have talked - I'll tell you who could tell you a lot about that would be Chuck Kennedy out at the depot. He is assistant police chief out there - I guess he still is. I know he's still out there, and he has been there. This is where I got some of this information from, and I think it used to be- Saturday nights of course, they no doubt smuggled liquor in. I imagine that there was quite a to-do down at the Indian village at times.

I never will forget, one of our medicine men had rather long hair. There used to be a lot of longhairs out there. And he got drunk one night and his wife was mad at him for some reason. She cut his hair off. Well, he came into Personnel very unhappy because it seems like that's kind of bad for a medicine man, when he gets his hair cut off. And there wasn't much Personnel could do about it, except tell him that his hair would grow if he'd wait. But he was very unhappy. As I said, it wasn't a problem we could do much about. But I'm sure there was quite a bit of drinking down there.

SUSAN ROGERS: It didn't seem to affect their jobs there so much?

ISABEL SIMMONS: No, I guess not. I was never out in the field much. Actually, as far as I know, they were pretty good workers, if you would put them with a Navajo foreman. And then we had a couple of medicine men. Sam Boone was one of the old medicine men, and he sort of kept a lot of people in line, I think, including his own family. He was a great big fellow, about six-two and heavy for a Navajo, which was unusual. There's a lot of stories about him. He used to go up to Finance, where they'd pay off, and he'd stand around, he'd say, "Easy money." He could speak a little English, enough to say a few things. (aside about tape)

SUSAN ROGERS: Let me flip it over.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, there's a lot of stories about Sam Boone, who was kind of a favorite character out there. But one time he got lost. He was way out in the area, and he'd be three or four miles from headquarters. A bunch of 'em were working out in one of the igloos, I guess, or one of the docks - W4, I think it was. He was out quite a ways, and somehow the bus didn't pick him up. I don't know what happened. When he got to a field phone and he got through to the colonel's office and he said, "Sam Boone, W-4, no bus. God damn it!" And so they sent someone after him. And those of us that do any writing said that was one of the most concise messages you could give. You knew who he was, where he was, what his problem was, and how he felt about it, in about four very short sentences. But oh, there are a lot of stories about him. I knew him and talked to him a few times. He was unusually big for a Navajo. At that time, not many of them were heavy. I think probably they eat better now, because you see more - most of them were very slender.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about any problems between the Navajos and the Hopis?

ISABEL SIMMONS: I don't know of any. Frankly, there were problems between Navajos and Mexicans. They did NOT get along. Now, the Hopis were in a different classification most of the time. They were working as carpenters and electricians; that sort of thing. The Navajos and the Mexicans did not always get along. In fact, one time I think that, I thought it was funny, but the man in charge didn't. They almost had a riot out there. You know, they'd back these great big semis up to the loading docks, and most of the truck drivers were Spanish or Mexicans, a lot of 'em. Of course they could speak English and so forth. It wasn't a matter of discrimination, you just can't put a truck driver on a truck that can't read the signs or anything. So he would back up to these big docks, and the Navajo would stand there and kind of wave him back. And then when the truck driver turned around and straightened up, the Navajo would move a little. Of course the truck driver was in the wrong spot. I guess they came to blows over it. But of course I wasn't out in the field. I hired those people, but I didn't see them much after I hired them.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there lots of other immigrants working there, or was it mainly Navajos and Mexicans?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, of course there were quite a few local people there. And people came in from other places. A lot of people transferred in from other depots at times. We had a few colored people, but not an awful lot. Of course the first thing you think of now is discrimination. It wasn't a matter of discrimination - there weren't many of them here, and what there were, most of them worked in the sawmills. A lot of them were brought in from <Arkansas> for the mills, and they were loggers and they were making good money, very happy where they were. We had a few, Grady Neal worked out there, and he was one of the best men we had. But we never had a very large percentage.

SUSAN ROGERS: _____________.

ISABEL SIMMONS: I don't remember many ever applying.

SUSAN ROGERS: How did the name come about, do you know?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, I think it was mainly because we were so close to the Navajo Indian Reservation, and they were our main source of- They knew they'd have to get most of their labor from there. You see, there was a terrific amount of just manual labor in handling ammunition - at least there was then. I imagine there still is now in a small depot. Maybe in the big ones they've got it probably more mechanized. But it was just an awful lot of handling, and loading it onto trucks, unloading it, and doing a certain amount of renovation. After ammunition is stored for a while, it's got to be checked to see how much it's deteriorated, blown up, or renovated - one or the other. So there was a terrific amount of handling required, and the Navajo Indian Reservation was the logical source for that sort of thing.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about any kind of social activities that were planned?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, the Indians, of course, they had their trading post, the Richardsons' Trading Post, was, I imagine, quite a social center there. And they did have - I think they had a chapel down there, and there were services on Sundays there. And I suppose they had sings and everything. Up on the hill, at one time, of course, they had a bowling alley there around headquarters. Had a bowling alley, and they had the officers club. They had a commissary and a PX - post exchange - of sorts. And there seemed to be quite a bit of activity. Of course when ________ housing was built, they provided fairly good housing for the people. And I think now they've done away with the Indian village, and everybody lives in married (?)housing since the depot has gone down so much.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did you live?

ISABEL SIMMONS: I lived in town. (both talking at once) I lived in <Flagstaff> and commuted, so I wasn't too concerned with much social life out there. The officers club did have quite a few things, but by the time I’d worked eight hours a day and driving back and forth, I (snaps fingers) preferred to stay in town.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you have any other things you want to tell me from your file there?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Oh, let's see, here's one I remember. I think this was Robbie George, who was our Navajo interpreter, and who was very friendly and outgoing - more so than most of them. And when we left the Personnel building at quitting time, we had to walk over to the main building to clock out, and he and I had formed the habit of cutting across the lawn to reach the building, despite regulations. And one day he looked at the path we had worn across the grass and regarding me solemnly, his black eyes bright, he said quietly, "Isabel, if we keep this up, we'll have a Navajo Trail of our own!" And they have an excellent sense of humor. Most people don't think [so]. It's rather subtle, it isn't the backslapping type.

I remember one time I was hiring - oh, I had about thirty in a room downstairs in the basement. I called one of them to come in, and he fell flat at my feet. Evidently he'd been tripped. And he got up, he never said anything, and I looked around, and you never saw so many deadpan faces in your life! You didn't have a ghost of a chance of finding who did it. Why make an issue of it? But I've never forgotten that. They were just all looking straight ahead, just as solemn as they could be, you know - probably dying laughing inside. They had a good sense of humor. It's rather subtle, but they do have a good sense of humor.

Another time, they had a meeting - I've forgotten what, it was up in the headquarters building, mostly Indians with I think just one or two white men there. I've forgotten what, but one of the Indians looked around and he said, "Ah, red power at last!" So they're interesting to work with. I enjoyed it, very much.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me a little bit about some of the personalities, maybe some of the commanders that were there or something.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, Lucille would do a better job than I'd do. She worked for every commanding officer. See, I really didn't know them too much until I went into the adjutant's office in '58. And then you just didn't see them much. Now, Colonel Smith, who was ____ in this brochure, was one of the nicest- He was not only an officer, he was a gentleman - which isn't always true. He was a very nice fellow. And we had Colonel Sinbabco [phonetic spelling]. Now, Colonel Abelsor, you know him? He was our last commanding officer at the depot before it closed down. He retired in January of '71. He's retired here. Several of them retired here. I think Colonel Ramnes is still in town. Colonel Wood DID live here, but he moved to <California>. Colonel ______ is still here, and takes an active part. He's not too well, but he does take kind of an active part in city affairs, Kiwanis and all that sort of thing.

But I enjoyed working with the military. They had their own tribal customs, just like the Navajos. And it took me a while, I remember that first year, I didn't know a colonel from a sergeant. It was really difficult getting oriented to it and everything. But I enjoyed it, it was interesting, and we handled an awful lot of variety of things. I think the military had their own tribal customs. On the whole, most of 'em were pretty nice. You'd get one now and then, but usually in the adjutant's office, you're treated with a certain amount of respect anyhow, because you have their records, and you're the one that watches for their promotions and works on their pay increases and all that. Usually they're quite nice to you. And a lot of 'em were really very nice. I had some young adjutants that were just awfully nice fellows. I liked working with them. A few I didn't enjoy as much. One thing about it, if you get a military and you don't like him, he's not going to be there too long anyhow, so you can kind of ride along with the punches, and think, "Oh, well, in a year or so he'll be transferred. Maybe sooner, if he's too obnoxious."

SUSAN ROGERS: You said something about different articles that you have written. Do you want to tell me a little bit about different writings you've done?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Oh, my husband got me started on writing. I took that famous writers' course. He talked me into it, and then I decided I ought to do something with it. Of course at that time I was in the adjutant's office and my boss was the information officer and he turned quite a bit of writing over to me, and I've always liked English, liked to write. One day I decided I ought to see if I could sell anything, and I wrote an article on gardening at this altitude, sent it to <Phoenix> for the ____, and they accepted it and paid me, which was real nice. And then of course I did so much writing when I was in the adjutant's office - either Army regulations, or publicity, or something - that when I came home, the last thing I wanted to do was do any writing. But I sold that article, and then I sold a couple of articles to Sunset magazine on gardening and revised it. And then- what was my next one? I missed one in here somewhere. Anyway, the one I liked the best was my Navajo code talkers article. As I said, the idea was planted when I had this Marine sergeant. I never heard of code talkers, and it was kept a secret for quite a while. And then George Kirk, who was one of the code talkers, he worked out at the depot for years, went to a meeting of them up at Window Rock, and his wife Lee Kirk was a friend of mine, a telephone operator out at the depot. And I said something about, "I'd like to do an article on that," and she said, "Well, Mr. Johnson, who started it all, is in town," and they brought him over! Well, I didn't do much with it for a couple of years, and then after I retired I decided I SHOULD do something with it, so I wrote it up and I sent it to The Marine Corps Gazette, and they published it in their November issue.

SUSAN ROGERS: Of what year?

ISABEL SIMMONS: In '71, I think, or '72. I have a copy of it. And then I wrote an article on Canyon de Chelly. I went up there with Phyllis Manning and we got a personal tour by a little Navajo girl, and it was fun, and I sold that to Western Gazette. In my last article, I've gotten paid for it, but I still haven't seen it published. I sent The Good Old Days, one of these nostalgia-type things- See, my mother kept boarders, so I wrote it on the old-fashioned boarding house, which you don't see anymore. And it was fun. I had a lot of fun writing that, but they haven't published it yet. They paid me for it. And then, I don't know, I've got an idea for an article when I get through working on this deal for the Women's Club and a few other things. I don't write very often. I mean, it's sort of an avocation with me. I travel quite a bit at times. And I think I have another article somewhere I sold. I can't remember what it was.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want to tell me a little bit more about the code talkers?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Wait a minute, and I'll get that magazine for you. (tape turned off and on) (inaudible, far from microphone) That was kind of a thrill.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want to give a little history about that?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Well, Phillip Johnson was raised on the Navajo Indian Reservation and spoke Navajo, I guess, just like a Navajo - which was very unusual. It's a difficult language, and I'll bet when I came to <Flagstaff> there weren't over thirty white people that spoke Navajo at all. The reservation - it's hard for you to realize now - the roads were not too good, they didn't have paved roads up there, even as late as '48. The reservation was isolated, very isolated, compared to the rest of the <United States>. I was rather shocked when I learned about conditions there. Well, anyhow, he had served in World War I. And then during World War II, he got the idea that if they could use Navajos for code talkers, they couldn't break the code. Because the Japanese had no- there’s no way in the world to break Navajo if you don't know it. It has no root system like English. I mean, there's no relationship to English at all. So he broached the idea to - I think it was somebody that's [in the archive?]. I think it was in <San Diego>, some officer, didn't think too much of it, but Phillip agreed to get a few of the ones that spoke English and train 'em a little. He took 'em down to- again I think it was <San Diego>, to an Army base, and tried 'em out. It worked out beautifully. Well, then they, I think all together, trained about 300. Of course they had to give 'em some special training, because the Navajos naturally had no word for cannon, Howitzer, and so forth. And like "America" was "Great Mother," and I've forgotten what's in that article. "Submarine" would be "iron fish." Something of that sort. They had to translate it into their terms. So it took, I think, around six weeks or so to train those men. And most of them were used in the South Pacific. But the Japanese could not break that code at all. ‘Course I understand a time or two some of the Navajo were taken for Japanese and had a little trouble convincing the Americans that they were code talkers. But it was absolutely unbreakable. There was nothing they could do about it. I guess it was quite a service to the country. And it was never publicized during World War II. As I said, that Marine sergeant we hired along in '50 or '51 was the first time I'D ever heard of it. And now, of course, they have their own organization, they meet and they're very proud of it, and they should be. Phillip Johnson, I think - yes, he gave me some of his books at the library, I think. That was really, I think, it was an article that kind of wrote itself. It was just fun to work on. Some of 'em were sort of a chore, but this was one that kind of wrote itself, and I thoroughly enjoyed doing that.

SUSAN ROGERS: You mentioned that you were involved in the Women's Club, and I just saw your picture in the paper, too. Do you want to tell me a little bit about - maybe you know a little bit of their history?

ISABEL SIMMONS: I just joined them. I don't know much about them. I know they've been here for years, and I've known people, but while I was working, I didn't-

SUSAN ROGERS: So you just joined this year?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Yes. So I couldn't tell you too much about them.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

ISABEL SIMMONS: Some of the older ones there could.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah I talked to them. Okay, I think you've answered most of my questions. Can you think of anything you want to add about the depot or <Flagstaff> or anything?

ISABEL SIMMONS: Oh, I could go on and on and on. I think one of the officers I remember quite well is a major we had that was half Eskimo, and he used to open a can of sardines and let them get thoroughly ripe before he ate them. He was one most of us remember quite well.

I met a lot of people out there. I don't know, some day I ought to write a book about it, I guess. It would be quite a job. I've got an awful lot of material. It was interesting, it was fun. I liked my work out there. I haven’t minded retiring, though.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you think that about covers it, then?

ISABEL SIMMONS: I think so.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.


