GLEN CANYON DAM DEBATE

Interview number: 53-38

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A]

This is the River Runners Oral History Project, it's December 7, 1997. We're in <Flagstaff Arizona>, at the house of Kenton and Diane Grua. We're getting ready to have a group discussion with three or four participants who are very high profile in the controversy over what to do about <Glen Canyon Dam>. We have here Katie Lee, Larry Stevens, and Dave Wegner. I'm Lew Steiger, and Kenton and Diane Grua are in the room also. We're going to now hear a little introduction from Katie, Kenton, Larry, and Dave. We're just going to hear who these guys are and why we've asked them here to talk about <Glen Canyon Dam>, and what we ought to do with it. 

Steiger: So, Katie Lee? 

Lee: Okay, I'm Katie Lee, and if you don't know who I am by now, I guess you never will. I am someone who spent ten years in <Glen Canyon>. I'm now seventy-eight years old, and I look like I'm about ninety-eight years old, but I feel like I'm about twenty-eight years old. And what started this all off is I kept reading these things by Larry Stevens, and they started to tee me off, because there was an article in the National Geographic that was written by.... What was his name, Larry? 

Stevens: Mike Long? 

Lee: Mike Long. And Mike called me and asked some questions about <Glen Canyon> 'cause he had heard that I had been there. I was a guide there for about nine years, and I explored a lot of those canyons and named several of them, along with my two friends, Frank Wright and Tad Nichols, a photographer. And Tad is somewhat of a -he studied botany, I believe. He was a somewhat scientist. He didn't push that, because the Glen just took him over, and science wasn't what he was interested in when he got there, but photography was, and feeling the canyon for what it was worth. And I think that across the way from me, Larry Stevens over here, has got a feeling for his canyon -I'll call that his canyon, the Grand; and I'll call <Glen Canyon> my canyon, which is gone, but it's still very much with me. And what really got me most of all, was when Larry Stevens so-called said in -and he can refute this, because I know magazines sometimes misquote people like crazy, and National Geographic is one of the great ones who does this off and on, a lot. But when I read that... "Larry Stevens, a river ecologist, responds that 'we can't go back to the pre-dam ecosystem, because really, nobody knows what it was.'" Wrong! There were a lot of people who knew what it was, and I was one of those, and I don't have to be a scientist to know that at every bend in that river for 180-some miles, with the exception of maybe, I would say, ten miles out of that entire canyon, had wall-to-wall water, and the rest of them were banked with bars and miles and miles and miles of greenery, trees, shrubs, bushes -very few cacti. Many, many side canyons had many, many, many trees, redbuds, all kinds of shrubbery -fish. And those canyons sometimes went up ten, fifteen miles, and they would still have beautiful growth in 'em, and pools. Some of 'em were perennial, and some of 'em were just flood canyons -what they call.... I would like to get ahold of the guy that started the word "slot." Slots are in <Las Vegas>. Those canyons have so much dignity and beauty -or had -and there are still quite a few fluted canyons around the country now today. But the beauty in those places is that when they flooded, they grew, and as they grew, they became more and more mysterious and beautiful. And there was a network, and it was obvious that the people who had lived in that canyon back in the prehistoric days had loved it. It wasn't one of those places where they suffered a lot -until whatever it was drove them out. And I have the feeling that it drove them out rather quickly -probably the drought. It seems to be what scientists come up with today. But I want to have Larry say to me... I need to know why a guy makes statements like this, who is a scientist. He claims that they've gained more streamside vegetation than was lost in Glen. That's just flat untrue. It just cannot possibly be. I have looked over into the Glen [or is she saying Grand?] -I have not run the <Grand Canyon> since then, but neither has Larry ever seen Glen. And I saw the Grand before Larry saw the Grand, while it was still a river and not a sewer. To me, I just could never go back there, because of what I saw before. 

Steiger: Now, let's just get this down. You ran <Glen Canyon>.... 

Lee: I ran <Glen Canyon> from 1954 to 1963. 

Steiger: And you did a couple of trips in <Grand Canyon>? 

Lee: I did three trips in <Grand Canyon>: one in a power boat in 1953, one in a cataract boat in 1955, and one in a cataract boat in 1956. 

Steiger: And after <Glen Canyon Dam> was built? 

Lee: Never went back to either canyon. Well, yes, I did go back to watch my canyon die. 

Steiger: You went back into Glen while it was fillin' up? 

Lee: I went back into Glen while it was filling up, in a little runabout I had, called Screwed River. Actually, it was Screwdriver if you don't do what I did, which was put a space in between the "D" and the "R." I just watched all those places being choked to death and suffered along with it. Dumb, but that's human nature. We don't leave the bed of our loved ones while they're dying. And I didn't. But I couldn't stand it after 1967 -I never went back again, and I have never laid eyes on it since. When I have to cross that atrocity, <Glen Canyon Dam>, I shut my eyes. I come over the ridge there from the gap, and the first time I see the water, I start the tears. 

Steiger: Okay, and for background, what's going on now in 1997 is there’s a bunch of people that have said, "By God, let's either take this thing down, or bypass the dam." 

Lee: We don't need to take it down, we need to bypass it. It'll give way, the river will chew it to pieces. 

Steiger: There's an organization called the Glen Canyon Institute, which you're one of the.... 

Lee: I'm on the board of trustees, and we have with us Mr. [Dave] Wegner, who is.... We don't call you our scientist, that's what I call you, _____. 

Wegner: On the board of directors. 

Lee: Oh yes, well, a little more than that. 

Steiger: And so you guys are calling for bypassing…? What you're about is: "Let's restore <Glen Canyon>"? 

Wegner: Ultimately. 

Lee: Ultimately it will restore itself if we just let the river run. It will be a horrible mess at first, but that's all right, Nature will take care of it. 

Steiger: Who should we hear from next? 

Wegner: Well, we should do introductions. Kenton will introduce himself. 

Steiger: Okay, Kenton, who the hell are you? 

Wegner: I've been wonderin' that for a bunch of years. 

Lee: What are you doing here, anyway? 

Kenton Grua: Why am I here? A fly on the wall. (chuckles) 

Wegner: Hardly! 

Kenton Grua: Well, let's see, yeah, that's my name, Kenton Grua, AKA "Factor." Never got to see <Glen Canyon> -yet -and hope someday soon to be able to. [I've] always admired Katie Lee and Martin Litton and the people who had a chance to be down there and see it. It's been a great privilege and pleasure to know them and at least.... What's the word I'm looking for? At least to be able to know the canyon through someone who actually knew it firsthand. And for the last twenty-nine years, I guess, I've been runnin' pretty much full-time as a boatman in <Grand Canyon>, mostly workin' for Martin Litton, but doin' quite a bit of science work the last five or six years, and really learning a lot from that -hookin' up with Dave and with Larry. I admire both of them for their commitment and their zeal to both protect <Grand Canyon> and make it the best that we can make it with what it is; and now the possibility of restoring <Glen Canyon>. I like that idea a lot, I always have. And for years and years [I] thought I might want to be the one to take the dam out, but now I think Nature's probably gonna do that anyway, and we'll just wait and see what happens. But maybe we'll get smart and decide to take it down before it takes itself down. 

Steiger: Okay, very good. Lorenzo? 

Stevens: All right. My name is Larry Stevens. I've been a river guide since 1974; spend, on average, about 120 days a year in <Grand Canyon>. Never did get to see <Glen Canyon>. I'm a scientist, I have been studying river ecology -especially the way <Glen Canyon Dam> has affected <Grand Canyon>, since '74. Did the first invertebrate inventory of the river corridor, a three-year project in the mid-seventies, and that gave me a rather distinctive insight into the dynamics of the Canyon, in that I get to know elements of these river ecosystems that are not kind of visible to most people. Invertebrates live in a world that is pretty special, so I get to look at the creatures that live at springs and seeps, and try to understand how they are unique, and how many species there are in those kind of settings. So biodiversity has been a big focus of my studies. I've tried to understand, given the level of information on the pre-dam river, how <Glen Canyon Dam> has affected the <Grand Canyon>. I've extended some of those studies into Lower Green River, Cataract Canyon, and based on the best available information -which is very thin on <Glen Canyon> as to what was there in the pre-dam time -try to develop some idea of what the tradeoffs have been: what we've lost, what we've gained, and what the relationship is between the present situation in <Grand Canyon>… what we've lost in <Glen Canyon>, and what we've lost on a regional basis, and what has changed on a regional basis. So studies involving invertebrates, birds, the aquatic ecosystem in <Grand Canyon> and Cataract Canyon. It has been an honor to work in that environment because altered or not, the <Grand Canyon> is a remarkable landscape to be able to get to do ecological work, and just to get to be in. 

Steiger: I have a question for you quickly. Kind of the way this got started is I got a call from Katie last week, the gist of which was, "Who is this little son of a bitch, Larry Stevens, and why is he saying all these bad things about our plan to take down <Glen Canyon Dam>? What is he, a shill for the Bureau of Reclamation?" or the Park Service, or something? So just in terms of your work… And I said no, you had worked for those guys, but certainly you're not.... Anyway, what's your affiliation? 

Stevens: My present position is as a consultant to the Department of Interior, and I never worked as an employee for the Bureau of Reclamation. I have worked for the Park Service, and have provided information to a lot of different entities as to what the conditions are in <Grand Canyon>. And I'm speaking this morning as a private citizen, not as an employee of anybody. 

Steiger: Just correct me if I'm wrong. One of the things that I said to Katie was, even though you may be a consultant or whatever, I see you as kind of a self-made man. You also have a publishing business, you've written a guide about the river, and you've published several books and stuff, and I have the sense that when you talk, you're speaking just from your earnest beliefs, as opposed to lookin' out for whatever job you might have or not. Is that safe to say? 

Stevens: I feel like I work for the <Grand Canyon>, and different people hire me for different things, but what I work for is the healthiest, best <Grand Canyon> we can have. 

Steiger: Okay. Okay, Dave? 

Wegner: My name's Dave Wegner. And what am I? I don't know. I'm here today, representing the resources of the river, and hopefully the river itself. I do have the privilege of working with the Glen Canyon Institute, Katie Lee, and a whole bunch of other folks who are interested in restoring, to the level possible, the river to <Glen Canyon>. The Glen Canyon Institute has been in place since 1995. We came together as a group of people, both doctors and scientists and a whole bunch of just interested publics and university folks who are just concerned about <Glen Canyon>, concerned about our future on this planet, and believe this is the time and place to draw the line in the sand and say, "Enough is enough," and this is the place to do it. By training, I'm a scientist, though over the last twenty-five years, in working for both the Department of Interior and the Bureau of Reclamation, and until I got asked to leave by the Department of Interior, I spent most of my career studying the effects of dams on riverine ecosystems in the western <United States>, starting [with] all the headwaters in <Utah> and <Wyoming> and <Colorado>, and [I've] been to just about every river that feeds the Colorado River system. So I have a pretty good feel for what the system is about. The last several years, I've been involved doing work on other rivers in the western <United States> -the Trinity River, the American River, Sacramento River -a whole bunch of other river systems that basically have the same effect -dams -and their effects on the ecosystems downstream. Over the last two years, I've been lucky enough to look at this issue from an international perspective, in <Turkey>, in <France>. Just two weeks ago I was in <Japan>, looking at the effects of dams on rivers in <Japan>. This is a consistent problem all over the world. My concern, and my, I guess, reason I'm here is that even though I've been trained as a scientist and had the privilege of working with Larry Stevens and scientists all over the country on the issues in the <Grand Canyon>, I've also come to see the other side of the coin in regards to "What do we do with science?" We have, I believe, a moral responsibility as scientists to not only collect the data and analyze the data to the highest quality possible, but then to insure that it's used. And having worked for the Department of Interior, I know that many times data is collected, and then it sits in a file cabinet or on the shelf. We have a very unique and important opportunity at <Glen Canyon>, because we still have the opportunity to fix some of our drastic mistakes that we've made. Why <Glen Canyon>? Because it was a political dam to start with, it's still a political dam today, it serves no real purpose in regards to making the environment -in my mind -any better. Certainly we have lost a lot because of the dam and because of the lake. And I didn't have the privilege of going down <Glen Canyon> before it was drowned, so I don't have the eyes and the ears and the historical knowledge that Katie Lee or Martin Litton or David Brower or many who I consider my heroes, to have. I mean, all I know is what they tell me. And that's why people like Katie are so important to this, because they give us the perspective of what's been lost. And that's a real important thing that we don't lose sight of. I consider the issues of <Glen Canyon> extremely important, because of probably two reasons -maybe three reasons -one we've already talked about. We still have time there -in my mind -we still have time to recover it. Lake Mead is probably too far gone, in regards to the amount of sediment that's there, and the amount of other changes that have occurred there. But at <Glen Canyon>, we still have an opportunity. It's only thirty-plus years old. There's still an opportunity to bring it back. And as we saw this fall up in <Salt Lake City>, from some pictures that the park rangers brought, some of these fluted canyons, as Katie calls them, (

Lee: Thank you!) recover within six months to twelve months -the sediments that have been dumped in them have changed. The second reason this is important is because of where it's at. That dam, that piece of concrete and steel, sits above one of the most treasured areas in the world, <Grand Canyon>. People from all over the world come here to stand on the rim and enjoy it, to go on the river -those lucky few who get to go on the river and enjoy it -scientists who get to go down and study it. It's a tremendously remarkable place. And from listening to Katie and Martin Litton and others, I can only imagine that <Glen Canyon> is equally as beautiful, equally as important in regards to the environment and our ecosystem. Third and probably equally important to me, is that <Glen Canyon> is and was the heart of the Colorado River system. We know now that we have endangered species problems throughout the whole entire Colorado River system: endangered fish, endangered birds, endangered plants, insects that we don't even know about yet, that Larry's still finding out about in the <Grand Canyon>. But <Glen Canyon> was the heart, it's what made the Colorado River system tick. It was where the waters were slow enough, where the endangered fish could raise their young, and evolve. It's where the waters slow down enough so the nutrients were allowed to integrate into the clays and silts that came downstream. And we drowned it! We drowned it for political reasons. And yes, it's changed the resources downstream, and Larry is absolutely right, we will never restore <Glen Canyon> to what it was in 1869 when Major Powell came downstream. But what we can restore, in my mind, is the physical processes that define a canyon-bound river system. And those in itself are a good place and a good reason to do it. I have the luxury of having people sometimes pay me to go and speak about this issue all over the country -all over the world, in fact; and people are looking for something to grab onto. All we hear is gloom and doom. You listen to what's coming out of <Kyoto Japan>, everybody's talking about the demise of the planet because of global warming. Pick up the newspaper today, the <Flagstaff> newspaper -what's on the front page? How the Peaks are gonna change here if the climate warms up; how the tree line's gonna go; how we're gonna lose the tundra. People don't know what to do about that. It's tough. I mean, everybody can go out and cut down on what they input into the atmosphere, but <Glen Canyon> is something we can do something about. It's only concrete and steel. We can get out there, we can physically open the tunnels and move the river around it. And I think it's just an issue that's time has come. And I'm lucky enough to be in a position now of not having to listen to what I've been told to do by the Department of Interior, and to work with people, and to push this issue forward. Every day I believe in it more and more. And from what we see coming into the Glen Canyon Institute, in regards to responses all over the country, all over the world, this is an issue that's being picked up everywhere, being debated on college campuses. As we speak, they're being debated all over the country. In <Japan>. People all over the world now are asking, "What are you guys doing?" And I'd like to say that we're responsible for what's happened the last few weeks in getting issues on other dams on other rivers all of a sudden being looked at with sincerity: the Edwards Dam on the Kennebec River in <Maine> is coming down now. Dan Beard, former commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation, a good friend of mine, and vice-president of the Audubon Society now, is -the Audubon Society is pushing taking down dams. This is a time and a place. We've drawn a line in the sand of <Glen Canyon> and <Grand Canyon> and said, "enough is enough, let's look at it." 

Steiger: You said <Glen Canyon>'s a political dam. Would you explain that just quickly? 

Wegner: Well, in the late forties the issue of building dams in that part of the Colorado River system came to a head, largely -and I don't want to go into too much history, because I don't want to take away time from these other folks who are much more important to this discussion -but in the forties, the <United States> wanted to control the Colorado River system. The first dam was Boulder Dam, which is now Hoover Dam, down outside of <Las Vegas>. The Upper Basin states decided, realized, that they needed to protect their, quote, "endowment," [unquote] -"endowment" being their water. The only way to do that was to build dams, to capture the water upstream of the dividing point at Lee's Ferry, and to protect their investment. 

Steiger: Protect it from who? 

Wegner: <California>, <Arizona>, and <Nevada> -because western water law is built around the principle of beneficial use. If you use it to, quote, "a benefit," [unquote] (

Lee: Use it or lose it.) you can keep it, and it's the whole "use it or lose it" concept of "How do you manage water systems?" The Upper Basin will never use their allocation of the Colorado River. There's no way they will ever use their full allotment, but water is power -not in terms of electrical power, but in terms of physical development. "Grab onto it, and this is our future power." And they needed a place to store the water. We all know the battles that David Brower, in particular, and the Sierra Club and others went over to make sure the dam was not built at <Echo Park>, up on the Green-Yampa system. We know the other battles that have been fought in the late 1950s as these whole issues came about. Well, on April 11, 1956, Congress passed a large Upper Basin water development plan called the Colorado River Storage Project Act. April 11, 1956. That Act brought about the ability to build <Glen Canyon Dam>, <Flaming Gorge Dam>, and several other dams in the Upper Colorado River system. That date is very important, 1956, because in 1956 there was no such thing as a National Environmental Policy Act -NEPA -that brought us EISes [environmental impact statements] or anything else. That didn't pass until the last day of December 1969, and it was signed into law by President Nixon on January 1, 1970. That Act would not have allowed <Glen Canyon> to be built. There is no way on God's green Earth that <Glen Canyon Dam> would ever be built today, or even in 1970, based on the environmental effects that are going on. 

Lee: We tried to fight it with the <Rainbow Bridge>. We're not supposed to encroach on a national monument. 

Wegner: Right, but the issue was, is that <Glen Canyon> was a political dam -to answer your question -because it was passed by Congress. Nobody ever came out and asked us. 

Steiger: Well, if you had done a NEPA on it, why wouldn't it have been built? 

Wegner: Because of the environmental effects, because of the effects on not only the unique landscape, but because of the endangered species issues. Stevens?: Even with the Antiquities Act which was already in place? 

Lee: Oh, yes. 

Wegner: And nobody knew how to use these laws. Stevens?: Nobody contested that. 

Lee: Was the Antiquities Act in place by then, already? __________: Some of it was. Several: Yes. 

Lee: I thought it didn't come until '61. Wegner?: Oh, no, they started way back in the early 1900s. They started passing laws, but nobody had the ability to use them. (

Lee: I see.) There wasn't the environmental movement. The environmental movement really came about in the 1950s when the Sierra Club went from a hiking club.... I'm going to give David credit for this. 

Lee: We weren't environmentalists, we were conservationists, and we were individuals and we didn't join things. Wegner?: The Sierra Club was known mainly as a hiking club. (

Lee: Right.) Outings club, I think is what they called them, didn't they? (

Lee: That's right, it was an outing club.) And it was because of David Brower, in particular, and people like Martin Litton and Katie, who started opening people's eyes to something beyond just hiking the importance of the environment in itself, that allowed… you go back and you look at this whole genesis of the environmental movement in the <United States> -and I give a lecture on this that gets kids all excited -but it's really interesting, because as people like David Brower emerge out of the mist, literally, off of their hikes and out of the canyons and off of the peaks, and they're now starting to say, "This is wrong, what we're doing to our landscape." David, to give him all the credit, he lost his job with the Sierra Club over his stances on <Glen Canyon> and <Marble Canyon> and <Bridge Canyon> and all these dams that the Bureau of Reclamation was putting forward and building. 

Lee: Well, they're not there, because of David Brower -the dams in the <Grand Canyon> are not there. Poor Larry would never have had a <Grand Canyon> at all if we hadn't had David Brower. Wegner?: If we didn't have David Brower and a few other folks who stood up beside David. 

Lee: And let me say another thing. I understand his passion for his canyon -really. He's come to love it as much, obviously, as I did my Glen. And I can see where he wants to not see it destroyed, but I think he would find it just as beautiful, if not much more exciting and lovely if it were real and not full of slate-blue, ice-cold water, and if it got its beaches back. 

Stevens: Can we just say that my intent is to see that the species of the Southwest be preserved. 

Lee: Well, those species will [move?], won't they? 

Stevens: There's a story there that we need to go into. 

Lee: Go ahead. 

Stevens: The story that Dave is putting together is one of politics, and it's one of the… kind of… historical dimensions of settlement of the Southwest. I haven't heard the Glen Canyon Institute really tackle the issue of changing the Colorado River Compact of 1922, which is a prodigious document in the law of the river. And the law of the river itself is just an enormous kind of amalgamation of laws. 

Lee: It is, we know that. 

Wegner: We don't have to do that. 

Stevens: All right. But what you are doing is assaulting that political structure, assaulting the structure of how we use water in the West. So the task that you're undertaking is, I think, bigger than you even imagine environmentally. You're familiar with the complexity of the law of the river. It's part of the social fabric, so the tasks you're talking about taking on here are very much kind of twofold, (

Lee: Oh, absolutely!) one environmental, and the other very far-reaching. 

Lee: Dan Beard told us, he said, "You have now entered the political arena." We know that. We know that absolutely. 

Stevens: Just let me say that overall, I see the restoration of <Glen Canyon> as being a valuable and necessary undertaking. 

Lee: Overall? 

Stevens: Overall. And I need to tell a story about sort of regional change that affects my view of the timing of that. But I very much appreciate Glen Canyon Institute's emphasis on the topic, because it helps rivers around the country. We've got 70,000 dams in the <U.S.> We have so few rivers that are not regulated in the <U.S.> that it's just abominable. We've lost much of the integrity of our flowing water ecosystems, and we need to approach the issue of how to restore river ecosystems once we're through with these reservoirs. 

Lee: What the people don't understand politically is that if you take the dam down, you don't lose the water -you get more. 

Stevens: What I'm trying to say is, the effort of the Institute I think is incredibly noble, and far-reaching. Most of our planning only goes on on a four-year or three-year basis in this country -sometimes a five-year. We're talking about fifty-year or hundred-year kind of planning activities that we need to undertake in terms of managing these river ecosystems, which tend to be the most diverse and productive ecosystems that we have. So I really appreciate the Institute's emphasis on this, and I think the issues are all extremely relevant, they need to be in the face of the public, and in the face of the politicians from now on. 

Steiger: Quick question. I don't mean to interrupt you if you're going on. Just put this aside if it's too much of a digression. You said we need to address this when we're done with these dams. Why would we be done with them? When are we going to be done with them? I mean, aren't they going for flood control and power production? Why would we ever be done with that? 

Stevens: Well, especially in the Southwest, especially in the Central and Southwest, we're done with our dams when they're filled with sediment. Or, not actually when they're filled with sediment, but more when they reach a level of sediment aggradation that precludes their use for things like flood control and effective hydropower production. 

Wegner: And with <Glen Canyon>, there's no flood control at all, officially designated. 

Stevens: Yes. About four-and-a-half feet -big deal. 

Wegner: That's not official, it's a gentlemen's agreement, Larry, that makes it there. That is not written in law. 

Stevens: No, it's in the ROD, four-and-a-half feet of flood storage. 

Wegner: Exactly, but it's not in the law of the operational mandates that are in the operating procedures. 

Stevens: ROD is law. 

Wegner: It's an agreement on, "We'll try to manage to that." 

Stevens: Well, yes, it's a law with many exceptions allowed for. We'll undoubtedly see that this year. 

Wegner: It's not legislated as flood control. 

Stevens: But it's signed off by the Secretary of Interior, after a lot of politicking. 

Steiger: Well, dams all over, I mean, they're not gonna silt up for hundreds and hundreds of years, right? 

Wegner: Depends. 

Stevens: Depends on the size of the dam, (

Wegner: Watershed.) the amount of sediment coming in. Forty thousand acre-feet per year for <Lake Powell> gives the reservoir an overall life expectancy of 640 years. But by the time the reservoir is one-third full of sediment, its capability of storing water to meet downstream needs will be (

Wegner: Or generating hydropower.) seriously affected. 

Wegner: Because the canyons are wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, but you'll fill it up rather quickly in terms of geologic time, to make them rather ineffective in terms of producing power. 

Steiger: So 200 years.... 

Wegner: We've got thirty-four years into the process here. A hundred and fifty years is probably.... 

Lee: It's going a lot faster already than the Bureau anticipated or extrapolated -whatever it is they thought they were doing. 

Stevens: The estimates change as we get more and more information on it. 

Wegner: Yeah, __________ what the watershed does. 

Stevens: So there's a timeframe here that's larger for this reservoir than there is for most small reservoirs, for many small reservoirs. 

Steiger: But there are small reservoirs across the country that are gonna silt up faster. 

Wegner: Oh, that already are. 

Stevens: They already have, yeah. <Mississippi> system, especially the western <Mississippi> system -<Missouri> and whatnot -has many problems -many of the reservoirs have problems. 

Steiger: And these are dams that were built when, that are silting up? 

Stevens: Thirties, forties. Early in the century. 

Lee: Around the same time, I suppose. 

Steiger: And they're already siltin' up? 

Stevens: Sure, yeah. 

Wegner: And people knew that a lot of this would be happening, but it's just.... We as a culture were so driven to develop the West and to control Mother Nature that dams were just part of the game. You go back and you read some of the issues that Floyd Dominy talked about. Here was a man from <Wyoming> -that was his job, he just went around and built dams for a living. And when he got to be commissioner of Reclamation, he just upped the ante -he built bigger dams. So that was part of our culture back in the thirties, forties, and fifties, was to control, to manage, to define our future through the control of Mother Nature. 

Steiger: I think I heard you say that in <China> they figured out -they have these dams that have been going for centuries because they put these sediment gates in 'em? 

Wegner: They call 'em sediment exclusion structures, yeah. 

Steiger: Well, how come we didn't figure that out? (Lee laughs) 

Wegner: I would like to think that we thought that we didn't need them. We were probably arrogant and we didn't look to other cultures to figure out how they had dealt with some of these things. 

Lee: With Dominy at the head of it, nobody was gonna look anywhere else -he was king. 

Wegner: Nobody really dealt with these issues back then, 'cause they didn't have to deal with them, because they just [decided], "Let's build! We'll figure out how to solve it later on." I mean, that's one of the arguments I hear today. I mean, "Well, let's just continue developing around the country, and we'll let the next generation figure out how to handle our mistakes or the problems that we create." That's not right. 

Stevens: We could put sediment bypass in <Glen Canyon> and extend -as long as we did it in every dam downstream -extend the life of those reservoirs indefinitely. 

Wegner: Go back into the record, you'll see that some of the early discussions in the mid-fifties was extending the life of Lake Mead. One of the ways to extend.... 

Steiger: For <Glen Canyon>. 

Wegner: Yeah, that was the reason for <Glen Canyon>. 

Steiger: I have to say philosophically I'm totally with you guys as far as the idea.... Oh, here's a little aside FYI -Martin never saw <Glen Canyon>, never went through it, he never boated through it. I don't know why, I think it was 'cause it was [flat?]. 

Lee: Of course. 

Steiger: I mean, that's what he told me. But anyway, I'm philosophically for it, but that's my standard line when people ask me -you know, it's a topic of discussion now -I say, "Philosophically, I'm totally for the idea of restoring <Glen Canyon> and doing away with the dam." But I'm not laying awake nights worrying about it, worrying about how to make it happen, because I look at the town of <Page>, these people are sittin' there, I look at 3 million visitors a year, and the Colorado River Compact. I look at the political barriers to that, and I think, "Wow, that's a huge thing." But one of the things that interests me, why we have Larry here, what I heard Larry say at Bob Webb's deal wasn't about the political reasons not to. To me, the most formidable contestants to the views of the Glen Canyon Institute are Larry's… because I think I heard you say that there are biological reasons not to do it. And these are the quotes in the Geographic that have gotten Katie all fired up here. If this is the time for that -I don't know. 

Stevens: That's part of the story. I guess I have three points about the overall situation. One is the politics, which is absolutely daunting. We don't live in the 1950s anymore -we live in a very crowded Southwest, with a lot of people clamoring for their own ... resources. 

Lee: Toys. 

Stevens: Their toys, their lifestyle that is really more befitting of <New York> or the wet East. Kenton Grua?: Golf courses, fountains, jet skis, cigarette boats. 

Stevens: Right now I don't see any limitation on that. I don't see any diminution of the drive to make the Southwest look like the wet East -and that requires water. And the way the water law is set up here in the West pretty much precludes going back. Maybe that can change -it'll take a revolution. I think actually a revolution in understanding human relationships to the environment, to get that to happen in the Southwest. So that's one arena that concerns me a lot. The second arena is in what the regional story is with biological development -especially with riparian vegetation in the <Grand Canyon>, and its value, especially to bird species, but probably also to bats, in that those species have lost their habitat elsewhere. We've created a refuge in <Grand Canyon>, and yes we could wipe out that, but what we'd be doing in that effort would be to wipe out a lot of the biodiversity of the Southwest. Those bird species don't have any other habitat, in a lot of cases, in the Southwest. And I'm not saying that that's something that we want to be maintaining. What I would really recommend there is a regional planning process to restore those kinds of habitats elsewhere in the Southwest so we don't have those species having to use the <Grand Canyon> as a refuge, so that those species can exist elsewhere in the Southwest where they used to. 

Lee: Let 'em have the Glen back -that's where they all were in the first place. 

Stevens: Great, but if you chop out <Grand Canyon>'s vegetation, it takes.... 

Lee: You don't do it that fast. 

Stevens: Oh, you do it fast with floods. I've studied that in great detail, and by reimplementing the flows that were quasi-natural in that system, you end up chopping out that habitat, displacing those birds. They only live for a few years, they can't go for ten, fifteen, twenty, fifty, a hundred-year (

Lee: No.) duration before they can find other habitat. It doesn't work like that. My point there is that regional planning is what we need. And <Glen Canyon> plays a part in that, <Grand Canyon> plays a part in that, and the management of especially riparian and stream habitats in the Southwest, is part of that story. 

Lee: Well, as for those people who are so adamant about skiing across Res. Foul and dirtying it up to the point where we have the equivalent of the Valdez oil spill every four years with their two-stroke motors and the oil spills and the batteries and the stuff they've dumped in there. Somebody asked me, "Where's all that stuff gonna go, Katie?" And I said, "Why, I'll tell you what we used to do in the <Grand Canyon>, in the <Glen Canyon>. We used to take all our cans and bottles, all our garbage from the day, take it out in the boat in the middle of the river and dump it. And in ten miles it was ground to an absolute pulp, there was nothing left of any of it. It never showed up on any of the beaches, because the silt and the sand ate it." And that's what will happen to whatever is down in the bottom of the <Glen Canyon> today, left by our toy-oriented society. Another thing about <Glen Canyon>, as far as I'm concerned, I figured that when, as, and if this canyon restores itself with our help -and that's what it's gonna take -and it's going to be a little faster than I think people believe it will be, because after I saw those photos that Dave saw as well, of what's happening up on the Glen, there's a small ecosystem right there what was <Glen Canyon>. And Larry, if you haven't been up there and done a lot of walking or hiking around the Escalante.... 

Stevens: I've done a fair amount. 

Steiger: What are these photos that you're talking about? 

Lee: Bill Wolverton was his name, and he is in love with the Escalante, like I am in love with the Glen. 

Wegner: He's the seasonal ranger. 

Lee: And he's been used as a seasonal ranger, and he has taken these photographs after and before floods. 

Wegner: Repeat photography. 

Lee: Yeah, repeat [photography] in the same spots. And within six to twelve months, even the bathtub line on the walls is gone, absolutely gone, you cannot see.... 

Steiger: You mean a bathtub line that's been left.... 

Lee: ... from the reservoir. The reservoir will come up, and then they will let it down. 

Steiger: And it silts everything. 

Lee: Silts everything in, and it's really silted in. And then there will be a storm. And that storm will take that out immediately. It will be gone, and so will all the evidence on the walls. Now, that was an eye-opener to me, because I am thinking, "Oh, God, it's gonna be three centuries before you can even see an echo of what <Glen Canyon> was." But I don't believe that now. I think that, knowing what the Glen was like, and how fast some of those canyons would empty out and flush, and flush into the Canyon itself, that these huge silt and sand banks, which are obviously up there, are going to go down a lot quicker than anyone thinks. And if we have a bunch of El Niños, and our weather patterns are changing so rapidly at this point, yes, I think that the canyon will come back a lot sooner than we expect it to. But I do not care about those people who did not care about me and my canyon. And may they all run Dominy Falls, as far as I'm concerned. People need to understand that there isn't everyplace in this world that they can take their bloody, noisy toys. And if the Park Service ever had a brain, which I don't think it has very many, they would put into that system one place in this whole entire <United States>, where? you can run the <Glen Canyon> anytime, anywhere, with anything you want that has no motors, no noise. You can take an air mattress, you can take an inner tube, you can take a boat? but not one single motor, no overflights. This is the one place on Earth where you can do and be what you want. And if you get hurt or injured, nobody's coming after you. There will be no rescue systems, you are on your own, (emphasizing each word) this is a wilderness once again. That's my plan. I know we can't make it in this society, but I would hope to think that there might be some people who would just say, "Hey, that's right!" There is no place that we can do this. Let this government allot this one stretch of maybe 200 miles of river, where we can do what we please without somebody else buzzin' in our ears, for those people who want to go for the spirituality of the place, like Larry has his spirituality with the <Grand Canyon>.... 

Steiger: Well, there's only one problem that I can see with that. 

Lee: There's a lot of problems with that -there's not just one. 

Steiger: There's one that jumps right out at me: you've got 3 million people a year water skiing over that thing now. 

Lee: I said they can run Dominy Falls. 

Steiger: Yeah, well, are you gonna have 3 million people goin' through <Glen Canyon>? 

Lee: No. No, I just said no. I just said, "No they cannot take a motor in there." 

Steiger: You said no controls. 

Wegner: There would have to be some permit system to allow only so many people on at a time, certainly. 

Lee: That is true. I just simply say but that's the place where you cannot take your toys. You can take yourself. 

Wegner: And your spirit. 

Lee: And your spirit and your boat and your inner tube -anything that does not make a racket. 

Wegner: I'd like to respond to a couple of points that Larry's made. Is that okay? 

Steiger: Yeah. And Larry, I think I may have cut you off. 

Stevens: One more point. The third point is the rate and problems associated with the actual restoration process. Each of those are topics. 

Steiger: Would you recap the first two? I know you just made 'em, but just go.... 

Stevens: The first is just the daunting political framework in which <Glen Canyon> exists. Changing that is.... 

Lee: The water allotments. 

Stevens: The water allotments. Glen Canyon Institute will face major setbacks when the water supply to <St. George Utah> is established from <Lake Powell>. That's being actively planned. Once you have water rights being taken from.... All I'm saying is there's right now the plan to remove water from <Lake Powell> and move it over to <St. George> and put it into the Virgin River system. Once that's in place, the possibility of altering <Lake Powell> will be greatly diminished. 

Lee: We'd better do that before they get it started. 

Stevens: You'd better get a move on, that's what I'm saying. 

Lee: Real quick. 

Steiger: So that's one, politics. 

Stevens: Politics is one. The regional environmental management is the second point, which is not sacrificing our bird species, which have limited habitat elsewhere in the Southwest, because we screw up the habitat in <Grand Canyon> -which granted is accidental, but the bird use down there is so prodigious that we don't want to eliminate our last remaining refuge for those species. 

Steiger: So what you're saying is with <Glen Canyon Dam> we accidentally created this bird sanctuary that is now extremely important to the region. 

Stevens: Right. We need regional planning to restore those habitats before we alter <Grand Canyon> habitats. And then the third is the actual restoration process, the problems associated with it, and the timing on it. 

Steiger: That's the third? 

Stevens: That's the third [element?]. 

Steiger: And do you want to expound on that? 

Stevens: Just briefly, there are problems associated with drawing down <Lake Powell>. Those problems have to do with metal contaminants in the sediments in the delta. Again, my concern here is for native fish, for the aquatic ecosystem throughout the river system down in <Glen Canyon> and downstream. Drawing down the water of <Lake Powell> will expose sediment beds that may be extremely toxic to aquatic life. They may be toxic for two reasons: one is heavy metals that have concentrated in those sediments, especially mercury -more or less natural mercury, there's probably a lot of mine tailings seeping into this from all the headwater mines. 

Lee: But Larry, that was all there before. 

Stevens: In low concentrations. But by putting sediments in where those heavy metals can actually concentrate, you expose one of those layers, and suddenly you get a very high burst of heavy metals going through. I'm just saying it's a topic of concern, and something we don't really have a whole lot of information on, but it's something to be concerned about. The other source of downstream pollutants is hydrogen sulfide, which is a natural product. Whenever you put silts and clays and sand together and seal 'em off from the air, anaerobic processes produce hydrogen sulfide and concentrate it. And hydrogen sulfide is absolutely deadly to fish. By drawing down a bed that is loaded with hydrogen sulfide, you do a fish kill through the river system. And I haven't seen anybody actually try to model that, but you might have 100 miles or 200 miles of fish kill, or perhaps even more, before that hydrogen sulfide dissipated. That's a topic. I'm just saying it's an arena for the basic draw-down story that needs to be looked at. 

Lee: Don't those things just.... Don't they naturally even themselves out over time? I mean, it's no different than a big flood when it kills a bunch of fish. 

Stevens: The smell you were talking about last night in your readings -part of that is hydrogen sulfide. Usually in flood situations you have a relatively small amount of sediment that is anoxic -especially on the forewaves of floods, you get this incredible set of aromas. And those are some of the smells you were talking about last night. A lot of organic material that's being churned up, a lot of hydrogen sulfide, and just kind of a rich array of organic compounds. And in natural flood situations, it's kind of a minor event: there's enough water coming through to dilute them really pretty effectively. But when you have a huge body of sediments in which those compounds build up -and granted, the sediments are unnaturally stored -drawing down into those might mean that you could actually wipe out all the fish in the mainstream for some long distance downstream. It's something to think about in terms of the restoration process. And as I said, overall, I'm very much in favor of ecological restoration of the Colorado River. It's just you've got to think about these.... 

Lee: You just don't want it to happen overnight, so that _____________. 

Stevens: I want it to happen in an intelligent fashion. 

Wegner: So do we, absolutely. 

Stevens: I think with <Glen Canyon> we have the time to be able to plan that out. This regional story has to be dealt with -certainly the regional politics has to be dealt with. Then the actual, sort of "on the ground" effects have to be thought through, too. 

Lee: You know how we are, we're hamstrung by about twenty-five different bureaucracies. (

Stevens: Yeah.) Our chances of getting this through are just like pushing a pencil through a cement wall. 

Steiger: If the dams, if we could actually do some kind of sediment bypass, and have these dams and have this power, have all that stuff forever, why would we want to go back the other way? 

Stevens: <Glen Canyon Dam> is a cash cow, there's no doubt about it. It's a huge cash cow. It's a golden goose. Granted, it's got a life expectancy, but it's still a golden goose, and I think that's the way the political process sees it. This is not an issue for 200, 300, 400 years. It's just that solving the problems in 200, 300, or 400 years will cost probably the equivalent of our national net worth at that time. 

Steiger: You mean you think it's gonna cost more? 

Stevens: Cost more through time, yeah. 

Steiger: Than what we're gonna bring in. 

Stevens: Yeah. Absolutely. I mean.... What would the cost of taking down <Glen Canyon Dam>.... 

Lee: We don't need to take it down. No one needs to take it down. 

Stevens: Well, there's some problems. I haven't heard all of your arguments about how to allow.... 

Lee: Well, we were gonna have a condo. We're gonna move <Page> all the way down on the face of the dam, in condos, you know, like.... 

Stevens: Turn it into a solar power facility. 

Lee: Yeah, solar-powered houses, condos, down on the face of the dam. That's where <Page> can move to. 

Stevens: But how are you going to allow those channels to translate a flow of, say, 300,000 cfs? 

Wegner: Okay, we can address that. I mean, I want you to finish first. 

Lee: The river, if it were let loose, would chew that wall down in about twenty-four hours. 

Stevens: Yes, right. Well, it would chew the bedrock. 

Lee: That's what I mean, it would chew not the dam wall -it would chew the sandstone away from around the right side, which is leaking so badly they've only got about 20,000 miles of caulking and pipe back in there. 

Stevens: Okay, but anyway, my three topics are those, and I see significant problems in each of them. Solve those problems, and you've probably got a good restoration opportunity on your hands. 

Lee: ________, we see that. 

Stevens: And my take on it is those are decade-old, maybe fifty-year or hundred-year kind of planning horizons. I have one other thing to say, which is the <Glen Canyon> that we lost cannot be recovered. Yes, we can have vegetation come back, and that vegetation would be largely tamarisk and Russian olive, and that would come back very quickly. 

Lee: Why? 

Stevens: Why would it come back? 

Lee: Why would it be the most predominant now when it wasn't the most predominant then? 

Stevens: Because -I do a lot of work on the biology of those species, and the conditions for their establishment would be perfect. And if you go into the contemporary Green River, which has a lot of the natural features that Green River and Cataract Canyon, that environment has a lot of the natural features we were sort of interested in for <Grand Canyon>. Tamarisk is king -I mean, you see green lawns of tamarisk seedlings every year that spring up in great.... 

Lee: We had a lot of tamarisk in the Glen. 

Stevens: Yes. And what I'm saying is you would have a system that is largely dominated by tamarisk, probably for centuries. [END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] Worse, is Russian olive's begun to come in. Russian olive is a much more aggressive species than tamarisk is -a very competitive species. And again, it's like a problem in restoration -you don't want those non-native plant species to be taking root. You want cottonwoods, you want the willows from Woodbury's diagrams of the shoreline that are literally the only kind of conceptual illustration of what the shorelines of <Glen Canyon> looked like in the pre-dam time. It shows a scoured shoreline, some willows, a fair amount of tamarisk. 

Lee: Squawberry bush in abundance. 

Stevens: Yes, up in the higher zones. The lower zones, which is where the tamarisk would take over. 

Lee: Tamarisk and willow, always on the bank. They grew up in rows. 

Stevens: ______. All I'm saying is, there are problems with the restoration, and non-native species is going to be a big one. But, you cannot bring back the spring, the life that lived around the springs and the seeps in <Glen Canyon>. Those were islands of habitat that probably had many, many unique species. Woodbury didn't get to look at 'em, we didn't get the data on 'em. We probably had dozens of things that would qualify as either a threatened or endangered species in those settings now. Because those populations were unique, completely restricted to those springs and seeps, they're gone. They're literally gone, and there's no way (

Lee: I don't agree with that.) and there's no way to bring them back. I know that because I've spent the last five years looking at springs in the region, in <Grand Canyon>, and just about every spring I step into has unique assemblages, many of them have unique species that only occur in those springs. It's a characteristic of all the hanging gardens from Zion over to <Canyonlands> and Natural Arches area. <Glen Canyon> had a lot of beautiful and unique.... 

Lee: The same little frogs and the same little butterflies, and the same little flowers, and the same little fish in spring after spring after spring. 

Stevens: What I'm saying is, you probably didn't. You probably saw separate species. The genetic diversity, regionally, was incredible because of those springs. We just looked at four populations of snails that occur at four springs in <Grand Canyon> -they're all in the same species, every one of 'em, they're described as being the same species. I think they're all different species. The genetics shows us that they're all -even though they're described as being the same species, because they look alike, genetically they're completely distinct. 

Lee: But Larry, so it isn't the same one -there's going to be another species come in there that uses that same place. 

Stevens: In geologic time. (

Lee: Yes.) Not in ecological time, not in any human generation time. 

Steiger: You mean you're talkin' like multiple centuries. 

Stevens: No, millions of years, probably. 

Lee: No. No bloody way -can't be that way. 

Stevens: Katie, all I'm saying is that from the springs that I'm looking at in <Grand Canyon>, these organisms -especially the invertebrates -have no possibility of moving from spring to spring, unless there's a major change in global climate that allows those habitats to be connected again. 

Lee: Yeah, that's not what I'm saying. 

Stevens: The problem is that we don't know what we lost, but my guess is we lost just absolute jewels of biological assemblages. 

Lee: But then you will have other jewels of biological ... to replace those. [I'm] not saying that they're going to be the same -how could they be, when they've been buried under a mass of stinking water for the past thirty-five years. No! But once they're drained, and those springs start running again, there will be another species, another group of species. I don't think it's gonna take a hundred years, doesn't take that long. 

Stevens: In a hundred years or so we might pick up maidenhair fern. Maybe in a thousand years we could pick up monkey flower and cardinal flower and some of those. But there is no opportunity.... 

Lee: Birds move around, man -they go from spring to spring. They drop this and that, and they shit on things. 

Stevens: The invertebrates are gone, is what I'm saying. Wegner?: These are all good points that Larry's raising. 

Steiger: Well, while you were away, what Larry basically said was the biology that was there is never coming back. 

Stevens: Of springs and seeps. The river biology is kind of broadly distributed, but the springs tend to be many endemic species. 

Steiger: Wegner, I know, is just chomping at the bit. But I want to get one last thing from you. You listed these three obstacles to the current course of action advocated by the Glen Canyon Institute. If you could wave a wand, and you were in charge of everything, what would you have us do then? What would be the Larry Stevens plan for all this? 

Stevens: Get us out of the <U.S.> (laughter) 

Steiger: Change the political system. 

Stevens: Probably get the Native Americans out of the Southwest. 

Steiger: Secede? 

Lee: What did you say? Get the Native Americans out of the Southwest?! (

Stevens: It grieves me that humanity has done what we've done.) Well, they were here before we were?! 

Stevens: Yup. 

Lee: Where do you want to put them? 

Stevens: Send 'em back to <Asia>. 

Lee: (laughs) Oh, I see, it all started with them. I keep forgetting. 

Stevens: It's important to understand what impacts those people had on this landscape. We lost so many great creatures because of Native American depredation. 

Steiger: But now you seem to be coming from a relatively narrow _________. 

Stevens: That's a magic wand statement. 

Lee: (laughs) Oh, shoot! 

Steiger: But your bent is biology, period. 

Stevens: Biology, biodiversity, the integrity of ecosystems, yeah. 

Steiger: But seriously, gettin' us out of the <U.S.> and nukin' all the Indians isn't really what you want to do? (Lee laughs) 

Stevens: You said "magic wand"! I would love the ecosystems of the Southwest to be in healthy and self-sustaining shape. 

Lee: I want the Indians to come back, and I want us out of here. (laughs) I think they took better care of the place than we are, for Christ's sake! 

Steiger: Well, I'm just thinking of the readership and everybody. I mean, what we got goin' on here is here's this controversy, and maybe we don't have to really decide where we stand -there's some of us that could sit on the fence forever on this thing. 

Lee: I never was a fence-sitter -you got the wrong guy! 

Steiger: I know, you aren't. You're one of those people that knows the truth. 

Lee: That's right! I said it was Nature breathing, and it was. 

Stevens: So the realistic magic wand is solve those three arenas, and move for ecological restoration of the Colorado River. 

Steiger: Okay, meaning, "Let's look at our political system, and why we're doing these things, and perhaps make some adjustments there." So that was one, politics. 

Stevens: Solve the regional refuge issue. 

Lee: Don't kill all the birds. That's number two. 

Stevens: And it's not just birds. It's pretty much everything that moves through. It's also the fish. 

Steiger: And three is.... Wegner?: Wait, timing, process. 

Stevens: Work through the process. Logically approach the process, try to get a handle on the problems that really might be pretty significant in terms of the ecology downstream. 

Steiger: I know Wegner's really ready to go, but there was one other thing. You said at Bob Webb's deal that you counted 'em, there was 107 dams above <Glen Canyon>. 

Stevens: No, in the Colorado River system overall. 

Wegner: In the system, yes. 

Steiger: Overall. 

Wegner: That's counting Lower Basin, though. Eighty percent of those are ______________ (several talking at once). 

Steiger: I don't know where this fits, but that if you just took out <Glen Canyon>, you still can't make those other dams go away. And that's still going to affect.... 

Stevens: Right. The regional story here is the Colorado River is one of the most heavily developed rivers in the entire world. 

Wegner: Every drop of water is used seventeen times as it works it's way downstream. 

Stevens: By the year 2020, twenty percent of the flow is supposed to be diverted from the Upper Basin. So even if we just simply removed <Glen Canyon>, we are not going to restore natural range of flow or sediment or water quality to the Lower Basin. 

Steiger: Okay, by 2020, they're gonna divert.... 

Stevens: That's the plan, right? Twenty percent of the Upper Basin's flow is supposed to be diverted in trans-basin diversions out of the Upper Basin. 

Wegner: _____ reality. 

Stevens: <Denver> area into the <Missouri> system, into the Animas.... 

Lee: They've already started that, years ago. 

Stevens: Yeah, it's well underway. 

Lee: They did that, I tried to plug that tunnel up years ago that went from <Aspen Colorado> to the eastern slope. 

Wegner: But that occurred years and years and years ago, and Central Utah Project's on-line. 

Lee: ______ that place. 

Stevens: The plans are in place and going on. 

Steiger: We're gonna have to turn this over to Wegner, I can tell. 

Lee: Bob Webb said in his article, "I think we should ask what's best for the canyon as a whole, not what's best for the humpback chub." 

Steiger: Well, now, that's a whole nother can of worms, is this Endangered Species Act. 

Stevens: Right. 

Steiger: Let's see, just for the transcriptionist, you mentioned Woodbury. You said Woodbury didn't get their.... Who's Woodbury, and how do you spell it? 

Stevens: Angus Woodbury, W O O D B U R Y, in 1959 was a compilation of all the two years of work they did on biological information about <Glen Canyon> before it was dammed. 

Lee: That's on that list I gave you. 

Stevens: Yes. And so what he did was bring together the existing literature, which is not very robust. We don't know things like population size of most of the fish, or what their behavior was. I don't think we had any information on migration of fish. 

Lee: You could catch 'em with your hands! (laughs) 

Stevens: Some times of the year, possibly. And so there are descriptions of what species, in some categories, of what species existed. Pretty good information on plants, pretty good information on fish, birds. Reasonable information on mammals. Lousy information when it comes to invertebrates. No investigation of the springs or seeps. And you've got a literature there with maybe twenty publications or so that talk about the organisms that live in there. Very little information on the actual community structure: what percentage of the population, different times of the year, different species of fish made up, and that kind of thing. 

Wegner: That didn't exist for many areas in the Colorado River Basin. 

Stevens: It's only because we've had the controversy over operations of <Glen Canyon Dam> that Dave Wegner stimulated, that we have had such a profusion of information on <Grand Canyon>. Let me just also say that we have had -this is not justification for the continuation of <Glen Canyon Dam> -but <Grand Canyon> is, at this point in its sort of tenure -the best studied large regulated river in the world. 

Lee: God, it ought to be -$60 million in ten years. 

Stevens: Well, $60 million. You know what the Columbia River Basin budget is? $160 million a year. For what?! They don't even have the level of integration that Dave Wegner was able to pull together for <Grand Canyon>. 

Steiger: That's for science?! 

Stevens: For science, yeah. 

Lee: For dear little scientists. I think that's (whistles). 

Stevens: So because of Wegner's attention to the process of trying to learn about this system, we've got a really robust information base on <Grand Canyon>. And while it doesn't justify the continued existence of <Glen Canyon Dam>, what it does is provide the rest of the world with some understanding of what big dams do to big rivers. And that's very important. 

Lee: Well, you see, the Wreck the Nation Bureau knew. They've only built about 10,000 dams, and they know bloody well what happens to an ecosystem below their dams, every single time. 

Stevens: And I would say they do not. You cannot find.... Katie, I've been through the literature.... 

Lee: I can't believe that they would build these dams and not know what happens to a river. They don't care! 

Stevens: Yes. They know what happens ____________. 

Wegner: They know what happens to the hydraulics. 

Stevens: They have no idea what are the processes that go on downstream, what the fate of different species, why, for example, we would go from having multiple species, to gradually just focusing down to one. And Katie, I'd be happy to go through (

Lee: They do know. They don't care.) the world literature on this with you. It's amazing how little we know about regulated rivers. It's pathetic. 

Lee: They don't want to know. They just want to build dams. 

Stevens: Yes, correct. 

Lee: And so therefore, they don't care. I'm not saying.... But they do know. 

Stevens: They do not know. 

Lee: [One] can go down and look beyond what's there when a river turns from the color of your shirt to the color of his bright blue jacket, and they don't know what happens below their cement plugs. 

Stevens: I tell you, you would be embarrassed at the amount of money that's spent with the little amount of information that we have. 

Lee: I wouldn't be embarrassed, I would _________ (

Steiger: What's the money spent on?) what I've always thought is true. (

Stevens: Administration.) They're a bunch of idiots. 

Stevens: Mostly administration. 

Wegner: Building more dams. Building projects that can't pay for themselves. 

Steiger: We gotta turn this over to Wegner, but I [need a break] before we do, 'cause I'm not gonna make it. But, there was one question, I think if we put this -you know, you said one thing that really surprised me, this thing about the Native Americans -and if we put this in the article.... 

Lee: Somebody's gonna get upset. 

Stevens: Your editing is your editing. What I'm saying is Native Americans have had a phenomenal impact on the biodiversity of this region. 

Steiger: I think that if they're readin' this -anybody who's readin' this, I just want you to explain that a little bit. 

Stevens: All right. Just relate back to Paul Martin's "Places in Overkill" story. Pretty good evidence that we lost a lot of places in megafauna to Native American depredations. If you go back and read.... 

Lee: Well, they overpopulated, too. 

Stevens: They overpopulated, too, exactly. If you read Cabeza de Vaca's journal, he was shipwrecked in <Florida> in 1540 and walked across the southern <U.S.>, over to <Arizona>, down into <Mexico>, and over to <Mexico City>, naked. It took him five years to do that. He was enslaved for two years by Indian tribes. The story he relates about -this is first contact -about Native American life in the Southwest, is deplorable: resource exploitation -nobody has any firewood, they have to walk many miles to get water, incredible amount of in-fighting and slaving going on between the tribes because of limited resources. The story of the Native American picture that he paints is not very pretty at all. And that goes in this face of this Rousseau-an kind of view of Native Americans being good managers of the landscape. They were not, they were simply exploiting like we are, it's just that they didn't have the technologies to really do the job that we're doing. It's human nature. You use it to support your family -use what you've got naturally to support your family. To hell with everybody else. 

Lee: It's happening in the jungles in <Brazil> right now. 

Stevens: It's human nature. 

Steiger: The Yavapai Tribe, they've done a great job in <Prescott>. (laughs) 

Stevens: Yes, casinos! _________: Shopping center! _________: Let's plug his casino. 

Steiger: Well, when you say the Pleistocene Era, I mean, what.... 

Stevens: Twelve thousand years to the present. 

Steiger: Okay, so the Indians.... 

Stevens: Pleistocene ended 12,000 years ago. We lost all of our African-style megafauna -elephants, saber-tooth cats, just species after species -giant ground sloths -just a million really cool critters. 

Steiger: These guys just hunted 'em out? 

Stevens: Yeah. Ate 'em. 

Steiger: Seems like there were more people here then than we.... 

Stevens: The people that were here didn't leave much in the way of traces: hunting camps, the Clovis people and some of those earlier.... Just ate 'em. 

Steiger: So what you're talkin' about, Big Picture-wise is the Native American lifestyle which took place before the Europeans came in. You're not talking about necessarily what the tribes are doing right now? 

Stevens: Right. 

Lee: Oh, no. 

Stevens: No. I mean, the tribes are doing what they're doing. I think they labor under the assumption that they're good managers of their landscapes. 

Steiger: Okay, a quick break, and then it's Wegner's turn. (tape turned off and on) 

Lee: I have to get that out of my.... Just give it to you ________. 

Steiger: Okay, we just had a little break. Now we're back on the case. (aside about colorful language used in interviews) Okay, we're rollin' now, and we're gonna turn this over to Wegner -except for, I wanted to get on the tape, I don't know who Paul Martin is. You referred to him on this. 

Stevens: Oh, sorry. Paul Martin's a paleo-ecologist, works out of the USGS Desert Research Lab in <Tucson>. Diane Grua: University of Arizona was his employer. 

Stevens: Yes, U of A paleo-ecologist. 

Lee: I got somethin' else to say to Larry, too. I want to know where he gets the idea.... 

Steiger: And so he's the one that said, "Hey, these Native Americans were not so cool. They wiped out all this _______." 

Stevens: He's been promoting that theory for quite a long time, with good evidence. 

Steiger: Okay. And Katie has something to say. 

Lee: I just want to know where Larry got the idea that the <Grand Canyon> was full of slime and mud. There wasn't any slime down there until that bloody cold water came in and started all the algae. Slime wasn't in it! We had nice, nice mud, the kind that smelled real good, and you didn't get in it unless you wanted to get in it. And this article here says, "With all that mud and slime and warm beer, your average over-sanitized American won't want to put up with that." My answer to that was my over-sanitized American will put up with any damned thing in the world if he wants to go down the <Grand Canyon>. So there! 

Steiger: There's the problem! We're gonna hafta carry more ice! (laughter) 

Lee: Warm beer or not, he'll go if he's waited on the waiting list, especially, for ten years, or whatever it takes. 

Stevens: I've been doin' commercial trips since '74, and I have a pretty good sense of what Americans like, and have been on trips.... 

Lee: Who cares what they like?! Give 'em what they get, and that's the way to go. The trouble is, they baby them. 

Stevens: My statement stands that most Americans, after one or two days of even sort of low levels of clay and silt in that water, they're kind of entertained by it for one or two days, and I just see the enthusiasm level go (phttpt), drop right off to.... 

Lee: See, we didn't have that in the natural canyon. Kenton Grua?: That'd be good though, wouldn't it? 

Stevens: All I'm saying is that most Americans, when you put them in the face of mud, it's like, "Oh, wow, this is really neat, but not for twelve days." 

Lee: Yes, it is, great for twelve days. Push 'em in and leave 'em there. (chuckles) 

Stevens: All I'm saying is that my experience tells me otherwise, with thousands and thousands and thousands of passengers who are your normal over-sanitized Americans. 

Lee: Nine years in the <Glen Canyon> -didn't have that problem. All my passengers loved mud. 

Stevens: Yeah, but it does point out an issue of changing social values. (

Lee: Oh, indeed! And it also change....) And it's part of the overall political story, because those changing social values are very much reinforcing the law of the river, the approach of using water (

Lee: Yes.) in an appropriate fashion in the West. 

Lee: I have a way to lessen, you know, your problems down there in the river. You've got so many people traveling down there all the time. If you would just take 'em on a real river trip, and make 'em really go through what we went through when we went on our river trips, then by God, you would get yourself a less heavy passenger list, and you'd get the kind of people that really love that place and enjoy it! Quit pandering to these twits that have to have everything laid out for 'em, gourmet dinners and beer and wine -cold beer and wine -and all that kind of stuff. You want to lessen your passenger list? That's how you do it. You don't want all those people down there in the <Grand Canyon>. They'll ruin Larry's playground, his happy place. 

Steiger: I wasn't thinking of them, I was thinking of me! (laughter) And the, quote, "beer thing." But anyway.... 

Lee: All right, enough. That's off the subject altogether. 

Stevens: But it's a good subject! (laughter) 

Lee: I want to hear Dave. I want those people out of the <Grand Canyon> that don’t deserve to be there, and that's about three-quarters of 'em. 

Steiger: Yeah. Okay. We gotta git… We gotta give Wegner a crack. He's been sitting there patiently. 

Wegner: Well, there's been a lot of things that have been said this morning that deserve comment, but I specifically want to address Larry's three main areas of concern, because they are relevant points, they are valid points, and they need to be talked about, because this is going to be the focus of the next several years of the Glen Canyon Institute. First off, I want to put it officially that I have the highest regard for Larry Stevens. He and I have worked together for years in the <Grand Canyon>. He was my chief scientist at the Glen Canyon Environmental Studies for years and years and years. He's everything I want to be in regards to a scientist. I didn't have the ability, both mentally or politically, to do what Larry gets to do, which is go work with the animals a lot more, and the species, than I have. And so I want to make that perfectly clear: I have the highest regard for Larry, and when he speaks, I listen, because he's never not spoken with the resources in mind, or based on good science -that being what it is. Let's talk about the three points. The first Larry point was that the Glen Canyon Institute is facing huge political obstacles to this. I don't think we're kiddin' ourselves, or we're kiddin' anybody. We know that. We knew that when we took this issue on, and the fact that this past September Congressman Hansen initiated these congressional hearings in <Washington> and called me all kinds of names, and Adam Werbach all kinds of names about being nuts and wacko and fruitcakes and everything else. You know, you could take that real personal, if you let it. But the fact is that he held a congressional hearing before we even had a proposal, anything even out there on the street. Our conference wasn't until three weeks later when we officially announced this. That in itself indicates to me that this is an issue that people (a) are concerned about -politicos -(b) people want to talk about this issue, and (c) that this [is an] issue whose time has come. And if you followed up with the articles in the New York Times by Dan Beard, and all the publicity that's been coming out around the country, around the world, this is definitely an issue whose time has come. Yes, it's going to be daunting. We don't personally believe, based on legal counsel that we've gotten from some of our board members of the Glen Canyon Institute, that this is going to require a change in the [Colorado River] Compact. Ed Dobson, who's a water judge from <Montana>, who sits on our board, Glen Canyon Institute Board, and is well versed in western water law, indicates that this will have nothing to do with the Compact. Dan Beard, former commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation, tells us the same thing. That doesn't mean we're not gonna push a few buttons and cause this whole issue of whether you have water for golf courses or fountains out there. It's gonna obviously raise a lot of hackles, but it's an issue whose time has come to discuss. And that's why we've initiated this process, and we're starting a citizens' environmental assessment, because we believe that politically the best way to deal with this is with data, with information, and to get the public involved in this decision -something the public wasn't involved in when they built <Glen Canyon Dam> the first time around. And so we believe that the political issues are there. We also believe that there are ways to deal with it. So that's issue one. 

Steiger: Just a quick aside. Okay, Hansen is Jim Hansen? 

Wegner: Congressman Jim Hansen from <Utah>. 

Steiger: H A N S O N? 

Wegner: E N 

Steiger: Okay, this is just for the transcriber. [Thank you! (Tr.)] And Werbach is.... 

Wegner: W E R B A C H, and he's the president of the Sierra Club. 

Steiger: Okay, thanks. 

Wegner: The second point that Larry raised regarding regional ecology, regional systems: absolutely this is an important issue, and it's one that we intend to discuss at great length in the citizens' E.A. and with the scientific studies that as we raise money through the Institute, we'll be commissioning to be done. <Glen Canyon> is a part of the Colorado River system. The Colorado River system is over 1,400 miles from the headwaters to the Sea of Cortez at the mouth. <Glen Canyon> is one of many dams on the Colorado River system. There are probably other dams you could start with to begin the restoration process of the river system. <Flaming Gorge Dam>, obviously, would be another good choice, or Navajo Dam, or some of these others. The issue here, though, is the <Glen Canyon> is, and always will be, the heart of the Colorado River system. Our intention and our reasoning for starting with <Glen Canyon> is because of the fact that it provided a very unique part of the environment and of the ecosystem, and it's an important place, if we're going to take this issue on, that we begin with. Now, does this mean that it will be the only dam on the Colorado River system that's ever dealt with, taken down, removed? No, probably not. The long-term reality is that if we can learn from this, if we can apply from this, we are going to be able to take this technology -just like we're taking the studies that Larry and many scientists in the Glen Canyon Environmental Studies have done below the dam -we're marketing those all over the world now. People all over the continent, all over the globe, are calling Larry up and wanting to know, "Well, how do you do this? How do you do that?" on studying these dam-impacted ecosystems. And that's good. We're gonna do the same thing with this restoration perspective. Larry is absolutely right. Today we have more bird species, a higher diversity of birds, probably insects and such, below <Glen Canyon Dam>, than we did prior to the dam being there. Does that mean, though, that as we draw down the lake, that we're going to lose these species? I don't believe we are. I think just has Katie has mentioned, that as we draw down the lake, the habitats, we'll be replacing them upstream: side canyon habitats, places where a lot of these species used to reside before <Glen Canyon Dam> and Lake -Reservoir -Powell drowned them out. These new habitats will be replaced, and there'll be new areas for these birds and insects and such to go to. We are not condoning the rapid drawdown of <Lake Powell>. In fact, over our scenario of looking at this, we would probably recommend -and of course this stands to be potentially changed through the citizens' E.A. feedback and such -but would happen over a ten to fifteen, twenty-year period of time. We would -again, as Larry has indicated -we would utilize the best scientific knowledge available to figure out how to plan this so we had minimal impact on the downstream environment, as we drained the reservoir and started to move through it. We would utilize the regional weather cycles, draw it down a little bit each year, but continually to move that sediment down further into the reservoir, eventually get it down to the dam and then move it through not as slugs of sediment, but as kind of a slow dilution of the sediments that have accumulated in the upper end of Reservoir Powell. So I believe that there are ways to do it. 

Lee: If we can get to the moon, Dave, we can do that. 

Wegner: But I also want to be emphatically clear on [this]: we're not gonna do this without using the best science available. And some of that best science resides in Larry Stevens' papers, and in his mind, and in hundreds of other scientists and boatmen and people who have been working on the Glen Canyon Environmental Studies, and other studies throughout the country on how do you restore ecosystems? Is this the best place to start, in terms of taking down dams? I would say probably not. But is it one of the most important places? Probably yes, that we need to start moving on trying to understand how do we restore ecosystems, how do we bring back processes that help define natural riverine systems. So I think we can address a lot of these issues through the citizens' E.A. and through the additional scientific studies. 

Stevens: Let me just interject here that both Dave and I are participating in the Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, which is a regional planning effort connected to the Wildlands Project, which has these goals in mind. So there is an ongoing public effort to begin to plan for these kind of restoration activities throughout the entire region. 

Wegner: What was the third point again? 

Stevens: The details of the restoration -dangers, the ____________. 

Wegner: Oh, right! The details -the third point that Larry raised -the details of the restoration process and how Glen Canyon Institute proposes to go about it. We began this as a citizens' involvement process. We don't get a penny of federal money or state money. All of our efforts are funded by the public in regards to whoever wants to donate a little bit of money here and there. And it's surprising, we get kids from all over the country who are sending in a dollar here or a dollar there; and some people we're looking at for potential donations on helping to fund this issue. We propose to do this through a citizens' environmental assessment. We're gonna follow NEPA process. After twenty-five years of working for the government, I feel pretty knowledgeable about if you bring and let the public get involved in the process, you can come out with a reasonable document and a reasonable set of recommendations, conclusions, and hopefully action items. Is there any reason why we can't do this? According to the Council on Environmental Quality, that office of the president of the <United States> who controls, manages, directs the National Environmental Policy Act process, there is nothing that says, (a) we can't do this; there's nothing that says, (b) that the Bureau of Reclamation or the Department of Interior can't take our recommendations and implement them; or (c) that Congress can't take them and do something with them. So we feel we're on solid ground in regards to the process. We are going to be involving the public in this through a series of public forums, meetings. My intent is that we're going to be using the college campuses, largely, for this endeavor, so that we can get people involved. We're not going at this as thinking that we're an elite group of people who have some sort of philosophical tie, that we're better than everyone, or that we're the only ones who can save <Glen Canyon> -I believe; I think Katie believes; Martin Litton believes; David Brower believes -that the public -this is a much deeper issue, it goes to public process, it goes to what the public desires, and it goes, inevitably, for the future generations on how do we manage and take care of our limited and diminishing resources? So the process that the Glen Canyon Institute is taking off on here is, yes, it's daunting. There's a lot of people who still say we're wacko and crazy and everything else. But it's an issue whose time has come; it's an issue that we will carry forward in combining the best of the science, combining the best of the political process that's available to us, and combining the public. I want to draw specific reference to Larry's comments about the sediments and the heavy metals in <Lake Powell>, and the cleanup that will be required. Yes, we know there's a lot of heavy metals that have accumulated in the upper end of <Lake Powell>. EPA and the Fish and Wildlife Service, they tell us how these heavy metals have migrated out of the sediments and into the biological environment: the plankton and the zooplankton and the small forage fish, and are now found in the striped bass. We know there's a problem here. We also know, though, that we believe if we draw the water down slowly, we'll slowly remobilize a lot of these sediments and slowly start to move them down through the system. I am 100 percent in agreement with Larry: you do not want to send slugs of this material downstream, 'cause it could have very potentially detrimental effects. As we found out with the experimental flood in 1996, again, Larry's absolutely right. The rising wave of the floods often mobilize a lot of organic matter, and you will find those earthy smells that Katie was singing about and talking about last night, mixed in with a lot of the organic matter. But if you schedule the draw-downs, and with… around the floods and the seasonal events that go on, I believe that we have the smarts to be able to manage the releases from <Glen Canyon> as we are drawing down the reservoir to slowly mobilize these materials and start to move them down through the <Grand Canyon> and through the Colorado River system. Certainly there's a lot to be learned here, certainly there are probably better ways to do it. I know Mr. Brower, if he were sitting in this room, would say, "I want to see a catastrophic crack in the dam occur this year, and I want to get this thing cleaned out real quick." (

Lee: Me too!) Scientifically, realistically, that's probably not the best way to treat a lot of our very critical resources that are downstream. And Larry's the best expert on this. We have endangered snails, we've got endangered birds, we've got endangered fish and plants that we need to be concerned about down there. And Native American resources. We just can't send a huge amount of water down there and hope to try to maintain the stock. And that's what I see in <Grand Canyon> right now, is our stock of material -and in Cataract Canyon -that can help to repopulate the <Glen Canyon> reach, once it becomes evolving. Now, do we have to wait for Mother Nature to do it on its own? as Larry has said regarding the springs. No, I don't think we do. We have all kinds of scientists out there, educated people. We're gonna have a lot of engineers. Let's instead look to retrain some of these people, that as these springs and such become available again, let's restore them. Let's bring in native plants, let's bring in native species of insects and such to start to repopulate some of these spring areas, and kind of jump start them on the restorative process. We don't have to wait. I am concerned, and I get this comment all the time when we go out to speak, that you're gonna expose this huge mass of garbage. Yeah, there's been a lot of garbage that's been dumped into that lake. My personal belief is that those who put it there ought to clean it up. (

Lee: That's right.) Now, the reality is, that's probably not gonna happen, 'cause most of the people who probably put it there are millionaires who own houseboats and jet boats and jet skis and everything else. But we have a lot of people out there who I think we can mobilize to do this: Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts.... (

Lee: The Wreck the Nation Bureau.) You know, we've got people who are in incarcerated areas -let's put 'em to work on work crews. I mean, we figured this out in the thirties and forties on the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] and everything else. We could put people to work, and I think in a relatively quick amount of time we could clean up a lot of the trash that might be below the waters of Reservoir Powell today. So I don't think that's an insurmountable problem. What about the city of <Page>? We get a lot of comments, "What are we gonna do with those people in <Page>? It's their livelihoods." And I do, I mean, I understand their concerns. I don't think that if we were to draw down Reservoir Powell, turn the river back into the canyon, that you would see <Page> dry up and blow away. I look to the town of <Moab> as an example of what happens when people all of a sudden realize that there are other types of recreational resources that you can utilize, i.e., river running, rafting -whether it's motors or no motors, motors is something that we need to further discuss -but certainly riverborne recreation, wilderness recreation, mountain biking, or backcountry biking, whatever. (Lee gasps) There are other forms of less impacting recreation that might be, and help to some of that trade-off. Well, is it 3 million people a year? I doubt it. But does that area need 3 million people a year? (

Lee: Never did.) Probably not. But the fact is, is that it's not gonna be like you're gonna take away all the recreational opportunities. It will change, undoubtedly. (

Lee: Send 'em down to Lake Mead.) You're not gonna have it. So there are other reservoirs that might be possible to use. Economic issues are gonna have to be dealt with. What do you do with the lost power opportunity? Now, let's make something else clear. In the year, I think it's 2022 now, <Glen Canyon Dam>, in theory will have paid off not only itself -<Glen Canyon>'s paid for itself three times already -but <Glen Canyon>, as Larry said, is a huge cash cow. It's a checkbook. It pays for the Central Utah Project, it pays for Navajo Dam, <Flaming Gorge Dam>, all the other dams of the Upper Colorado River system that are Bureau of Reclamation dams, are paid for by <Glen Canyon>. But by the year 2022, now, according to the recent predictions, <Glen Canyon> will have paid off everything. The debt will have been paid back to the American public -interest and everything included -for that. Today, we're almost 1998, we're looking at less than twenty-five years, the dam will in theory have performed its job, will have paid off everything. And at that point, we as a public, that being a public dam -I know the government doesn't want to let you think that we have any control over that -we are going to be at a point where, in theory, the dam has done its job, and we can move forward to the next level, which in my mind is restoration. But we have to start now, we have to start today, because we all know the political pressures -Larry's first point -that are out there. It's gonna take several years to get this through the system, to educate people, to move this through the political process, to begin to start diverting the water around the dam. In fact, we've got a napkin that Floyd Dominy drew out for us, the former commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation -it's in our safe deposit box in <Salt Lake City> -that says, "How do you do this?" He said, "This is not rocket science, folks. Just drill some more tunnels around the dam. We can drain the lake very easily." And he drew it out for us on how to do it. I agree with Katie, I think you open it up, the river's gonna have a great deal to do with making sure it gets around the facility fairly easily. This will be a controlled process, it'll be based on science. And I would say this even if Larry wasn't in the room -it's gotta be based on good science. We have too many endangered species down there that I care deeply about, that we don't want to do this all at once. 

Lee: Well, now, what if? What if Mother Nature actually, you know.... (

Wegner: Then we'll deal with it, Katie.) In the next couple of years, she takes it out. Okay? and takes it out big. There goes your <Grand Canyon>. You are hydrologists and scientists here. What is gonna happen? Is it possible, is it really true, that everything below there is gonna go out as well? Is Hoover Dam going? 

Wegner: It would depend on how full Powell was at the time it went, and how full Hoover was when it went. 

Lee: Well, if Powell is full, like it was before, and it goes over their gates, all of their fake gates, all of their playpens and everything else they put up there, and it takes it out.... 

Wegner: Having been there in 1983 when.... 

Lee: You know what the power of water.... 

Wegner: I know what the power.... That is. I stood on the dam and felt it shake. 

Lee: Of course it shook! It knocked those people off of their feet that were down in there that had to still stay there to maintain it and didn't want to be there at all. 

Wegner: And seeing what happened at <Flaming Gorge Dam> this summer, when they lost the bypass tube. They weren't so close to losing the dam at <Flaming Gorge>, but it shows you the fallacy of thinking that steel.... 

Lee: So if the lakes were full, if the reservoirs were full, I mean -lakes they aren't, never will be -would, as a hydrologist -you people are supposed to know this -would Mead and all the rest of the dams go? 

Wegner: It would probably be domino, depending on how it ________. 

Lee: And would it be a nice washout and <Mexico> would get a whole lot of water? 

Wegner: That's another issue. But yeah, it would probably domino throughout the system. 

Lee: You think it would? 

Stevens: I have little doubt that it would, if it was a catastrophic failure at <Glen Canyon>, it would be domino. 

Wegner: If it went slowly, probably not. But if it went catastrophic.... 

Lee: But if it went fast, 'cause that'll chew the dam down in minutes, as well. 

Stevens: But let me just say that that's not what we want, because the amount of suffering and human loss is absolutely -it would be ___________. 

Lee: Well just think of the people it'll get rid of, and we need to get rid of. We don't have any wars anymore. 

Stevens: And <Mexico>, too. I mean, the impacts on <Mexico> would be.... 

Wegner: The Glen Canyon Institute itself is working towards getting the citizens' E.A., a public process, and then the controlled drawndown of <Lake Powell>, and the eventual decommissioning of <Glen Canyon Dam>. Now, we don't need, as Katie has said, we don't need to take down the dam. In some respects, I'd like to leave it up there for future generations as an icon to stupidity. But the fact is that we are proposing putting forth the controlled process of decommissioning <Glen Canyon Dam>, draining the lake, and returning the river to the canyon. One more point, Lew, 'cause I know then you got something to say. This issue, though, is now getting larger -not only <Glen Canyon>, but the potential of providing additional water to the Lower Colorado River system, and eventually to the mouth of the Colorado River and the Sea of Cortez. Over the last year that I've been involved with this, I've again had the ability to start talking with scientists down in <Mexico>, and at Scripps Institute, colleagues that both Larry and I know there, who are educating me on what has been happening to the delta and the mouth of the Colorado River and the demise of the Sea of Cortez, with the lack of water going into those areas. Today we have the Cocopah Indians who are literally on their last legs, because they no longer have the fisheries, they no longer have fresh water, they no longer have an environment that they can survive in. So we're losing cultures now -not only the Native Americans that Larry and Katie have been talking about, but cultures today that depend upon the Colorado River -they're down to their last few people, because the young folks are movin' away, 'cause there's no way to support them anymore. And so another goal… what the Institute is now picking up as another issue with this, is providing more water downstream to the <Sea of Cortez>, to rejuvenate that environment, that habitat. And so there's a lot of benefits that we see out there from this whole process. Granted, there are tremendous hurdles. But I guess I look at these and say, "If not now, when?" If we don't do something now, we are constraining future generations, unless a catastrophic event occurs, to living with the errors of logic in the past. And granted, in the 1940s and '50s, people probably thought they were doing the right thing. They didn't know any better. They didn't have enough education for what we were losing. There was no real "science" going on. As Larry's studies have shown, very few people were down there looking. Eddie McKee was looking in the <Grand Canyon>, but who besides him? Lois Jotter went down and did some studies, but there wasn't this scientific knowledge of what the real impacts of dams were. Larry's absolutely right. You look at all the ecosystems in the world -and this is counting rain forests and everything else -the environments that we know probably the least about are areas below dams. Nobody bothered to look. And it wasn't until Larry and the scientists involved with the <Glen Canyon> studies really started to focus on what's happening in the <Grand Canyon>. And who would have thought Secretary of Interior Jim Watt would be credited (

Lee: What?!) with starting all of this stuff. I mean, he was. Back in 1982 he's the one that said, "Go down there and keep the environmentalists quiet." 

Steiger: He's the one that gave Wegner that assignment. "Good job, Wegner!" (laughs) 

Wegner: No, he actually threatened to fire me, but that's another whole story. But, I mean, the issues are important. The issues are not only important because of today, but for future generations. I mean, what's why I look at this as an issue whose time has come. And I think it's an issue that we want to make sure is based on the best information available. 

Lee: We want to get people like Doug Peacock to quit saying that we are talking about blowin' up <Glen Canyon Dam>. That was kid stuff, long ago -back to the Monkey Wrench Gang. We do not want to blow up <Glen Canyon Dam>. The only person that gets to blow up <Glen Canyon Dam> is Mother Nature (

Steiger: Which she might do.), which she may do. 

Steiger: The citizens's E.A., just for the transcriber, that's an environmental assessment. 

Wegner: Yes. 

Steiger: Citizens don't do that. I mean, how does.... 

Wegner: Well, the citizens are, because it's people like Katie and myself and citizens of this <United States> who will be involved in putting this together. This is not a federal or state-driven initiative. 

Steiger: You're gonna do an E.A., but you're gonna fund it through your public donations. 

Wegner: We are funding it through private donations: people like you and me, who will be donating our time, our money, or our expertise, to help accomplish this. 

Steiger: Okay. And also just for the transcript, NEPA, that's an acronym for the National Environmental Policy Act (

Wegner: Correct.) which was put into place in the late sixties. 

Wegner: January 1, 1970 it was signed into law. 

Steiger: And decrees that a federal agency can't do something without.... 

Wegner: Federal actions have to be evaluated in regard to their environmental effects or impacts. But NEPA, the National Environmental Policy Act, is a forward-looking law. It looks at impacts that are to happen, not impacts that have already happened. 

Steiger: Ironically, I guess, Stuart Udall was a big force behind that. But that's a total digression. 

Wegner: Well, there were a lot of people who were the force of getting NEPA passed. 

Steiger: I've got one question for you. I don't know if it's off base or not. Larry, are you wantin' to say more? 

Stevens: The only thing we haven't really talked about is fish, and that's an arena that relates back to regional restoration. 

Steiger: Well, I got a question for Wegner, and I got a question for you, and I'll ask 'em both right now, and you guys can have at it. You said the scientists, what you're trying to do is use the best scientific methods, et cetera, to figure out how to restore ecosystems. I think the question that would resonate, you know, for the citizens at <Page> and maybe the passengers we take down the river is not so much "how," but "why." Why do we want to restore all these ecosystems? What's the big deal? So that's question number one. And an offshoot of that is for you, Larry. This Endangered Species Act -I have the sense that life forms have been comin' and goin' long before man ever entered into the picture. There were lots of life forms that became extinct as part of natural processes. So why is it so important to maintain every single species that's here now? And I don't know if that's germane or not, and if you want to take it somewhere else.... 

Lee: I want to know that, too. Why is it so important? 

Stevens: It's a topic of many __________. 

Steiger: And we've got fifteen more minutes. 

Stevens: Why restore river ecosystems is the challenge. Simply from the standpoint of sustainability. If we value our natural heritage, we need to make sure it's on the planet. Species are one thing, but ecosystems are the house that those species live in. Without good attention being paid to the condition of those ecosystems, and without efforts to maintain those, we dribble away all the species. All the species simply -you know, the birds fly back, and there's a little bit less habitat so they don't nest successfully this year. One by one, they simply drop out. And in part, that comes right back to the ESA. The ESA I see as a major stumbling block to human nature, (

Steiger: This is the Endangered Species Act.) in that yes, we can just continue to live our human lives and consume resources and sap the earth of its biota, species by species. You know, maybe it's once a year, once every two years another species fails to show up in migration, because of development in Central America where these migratory things come from, where they over-winter. It's just the incremental loss there is very gradual. An individual might not notice it. But I cannot stand the thought of my daughter growing up and not being able to hear a yellow-billed cuckoo in the Southwest, and that's the state of the situation now. Within a few years we'll completely have lost that species. And it's not just that species, many species are in the same state -neotropical migrant birds, in particular. But the ESA is kind of moral impedance to the normal course of human behavior, which is just to keep consuming until it's all gone -and yes, maybe bemoan the loss of these life forms that have evolved in these landscapes, but we lose 'em, and that's not right. And that's not right in a moral or ethical standpoint in the view of trying to maintain our natural heritage. Let's rather approach the problem from the standpoint of sustainability, making sure that we have habitats and viable population of those species in the landscapes, and approach the future with that kind of view. Otherwise, just as in <China>, just as in <Europe>, just as in all the developed regions of the world, through time we undergo major loses in biodiversity. That's a world I don't want to have to see. I don't want to be responsible for promoting that kind of world into the future. 

Wegner: We have a responsibility to future generations, and to this generation, not to leave the Earth in a worse situation than what we came into it in. We have the tools today. (laughter) (

Lee: We have.) We have the tools today to understand what our mistakes have been in the past. We have the tools today to take a bold and innovative step forward and start the restoration process on many of our ecosystems. We know. What stops us? Economics. People don't want to take that hard step forward. Ignorance; politics; and you name it, you can go down the whole litany. I agree with Larry, the Endangered Species Act, in many cases, doesn't necessarily help us today. It's unfortunate, but we needed it, though, because we were so arrogant as people, to think that we could go in and develop and not really care what happened to species. So we needed to be shook, we needed a wake-up call, and the Endangered Species Act provided us the ability to do that. It said, "We got a law now, folks, that says we're gonna try to protect these species." It's unfortunate, because as with any law, it starts to be applied and starts to be misused, misinterpreted, or applied when you have one or several people or agencies that are very powerful, and they can start to shift it one way or the other. I see how the Bureau of Reclamation manipulates the Endangered Species Act all the time. Poor little Fish and Wildlife Service can't stand up to 'em. The logging industry is another good example. The law is there, but people.... And there's a lot of consultants who know how to manipulate the Endangered Species Act and get around it, and make sure they still develop. It's unfortunate we need it, it's there, though, we have to work with it. Larry's absolutely right: the key to environmental sustainability is having diversity, it's having the natural processes defining the environment, and it's having the native species being the predominant building blocks of what the environment is based on. It's unright -it's in fact ecologically unhealthy -to have exotic species of insects, plants, birds, fish, in the environment today, and people coming in and thinking, "This is so beautiful. This is so nice. We got a blue river below <Glen Canyon Dam>. We got beautiful trout." These are exotic species to this environment. And Larry mentioned a few minutes ago about the issues about the native fish. The native fish are an important part of our native, natural heritage of the Colorado River system. It's unfortunate, dams have significantly impacted our native fish populations. But it's not only dams, it's the reservoirs that sit behind them, with all the exotic species, with all their diseases and everything else, that's part of it. Will we be able to replace all of our native fish species? In some cases, no. We can't. There are too many exotics that we can't get rid of. There are too many diseases that are now impacting, and there's too many people upstream that are drawing water off during critical times of the year to help define the habitats for these. What we can do through this whole effort, is to restore the physical processes that define the river system -the physical processes of being the spring floods and the monsoonal floods that come down, physical processes of moving sediments, the physical processes of moving nutrients with those sediments, and yes, along with it, we are gonna get exotic plants -particularly vegetation distributed out into some of these sandbars, the Russian olives and the tamarisk. There's not gonna be a way to stop that now. But I firmly believe -and as I think Larry will agree -if you learn how to manipulate the system as we draw this down, we can make it, during how we release the waters and such, to a point that the native species have a higher probability of getting the jump start. And we did that in 1996 with the flood. And under Larry's tutelage, we scheduled the flood during the time of year when we felt that we could give the willows more of a chance to get started before the tamarisks seeds were blown about. Now, as we draw down the reservoir, as we release waters to the <Grand Canyon>, we'll -and that's where the science comes in -try to emulate the natural process as much as we can, and provide the opportunity for the native species to get the foothold, as much as we can. [END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] I believe the building blocks are still there. I think if we can do this with the best science, and the best intentions, we will be able to give the natural system the opportunity to develop its processes back again, and develop a sustainable environment again. 

Lee: Unfortunately, bureaucracies aren't as moral as you and I and Larry are. 

Wegner: Well, that's part of our responsibility, though, too, Katie -"we" as scientists, "we" as concerned public, "we" as entertainers, and others have to educate people. We have to educate people so that when they go downriver on river trips that they see the canyon and they see the blue water, and they say "ooo" and "ah" and "isn't it pretty?" and "we have cold beer whenever we pull up the drag bag." This is not the natural environment folks. The natural environment is what you sang about last night, it's the muddy rivers. 

Lee: I never thought that I would be able to reach -me, a seventy-eight-year-old woman -an audience, an auditorium full of eighteen, fifteen, nineteen-year-old kids. Stevens?: Three-year-old kids, some of 'em. 

Lee: __________. No, I never thought that they would respond. I mean, it's made me pick up my guitar again, which I can't play very well anymore, and go back to work. I was tryin' to pass the gauntlet -or the hatchet, in my case -but.... 

Wegner: There's three environments in this whole issue, or three groups, I think, that are extremely important if we're gonna carry this forward: it's the scientists, Larry and others, they've got to continue to do the best science possible. We have to listen to that science and use that science -we can't manipulate it -it's absolutely imperative we let Larry do his job -absolutely imperative. Secondly, it's you, Katie, and people like you, educating and getting the message out into arenas that scientists can't or I can't. And it's people like Kenton and Lew who go downriver every year, and they have an opportunity to educate this group of people who are in the most beautiful place on the planet, (

Lee: That's right, yeah.) telling them that this is why it's important you at least listen. I don't expect everybody to agree with us, I don't. (

Lee: No, they certainly will not.) But I expect, and I would like people to at least listen, and I'd like them to open up that one or two little brain cells that say, "What if?" 

Lee: Well, they listened to me last night. 

Wegner: They did. 

Lee: I'm surprised. 

Wegner: I've seen 'em open up to you, Katie. I saw the audience at <Salt Lake City> literally get on their hands and feet and clap after you were singing about the river and the canyon, in <Salt Lake City>. Let me tell you, there were a lot of people in that audience who were against us. They wanted to come in there and heckle us in <Salt Lake City>. 

Lee: A lot of Mormons in that audience. 

Wegner: Whatever their religious background, there were people who didn't agree with us -water users, power users, and such. But the fact is that now, even people in Western Area Power in the Bureau of Reclamation are saying, "What if? What if we did this?" People like Kenton and Lew and all the boatmen -the boating community is critical to this effort. 

Lee: A lot of the boatmen are not really for this. 

Wegner: I understand that, I don't expect them to be. (

Lee: They never saw a river, you know, a real river.) But those are the people who don't know you, they don't know Martin, they don't know Kenton, or Lew, (

Lee: They probably don't want to know me.) or they don't understand. They're there for a business reason, they're not there because they love the Canyon. And I don't want to sound like I'm against any boatmen, 'cause I'm not. If you're there in the Canyon, you're there for a reason. But you have to take the opportunity to get to know the people who understand the river. Get to know Larry and all the scientists. Stop and talk to 'em. Talk to the boatmen. 

Steiger: I don't know any boatmen that are there that don't dig it. There's easier ways to get money. 

Kenton Grua: And any that are there for more than two years are there for.... 

Wegner: Exactly. If they're there more than a season, they get caught. 

Steiger: Now, did you want to say something about the fish that didn't get said? 

Stevens: I guess the problems with endangered fish are pretty big. 

Steiger: I've heard it said that all we're doin' with the humpback chub is just watchin' 'em die. 

Stevens: There's a lot of stuff, a lot of verbiage about native fish down there. But I guess still the conflicts with fish.... Fish are, next to water and power, fish are the driver for management of that ecosystem (several speaking at once, none discernable) that result in management actions being taken. (several speaking at once, none discernable) For the flood, Dave __________. (

Lee: They have top priorities.) They have top priorities, yeah. (

Lee: Because of the Endangered Species Act.) Yeah. 

Lee: You know, we had a lot of trout down in <Thunder River>. 

Wegner: On the tributaries. (several talking at once, none discernable) 

Lee: ... the only place you need trout. 

Stevens: I agree. But what I'm saying, for the native fish in that system, there are so many non-native fish in the Upper Basin, and potential for pretty radical disease transmission, that <Glen Canyon Dam> represents a barrier against those non-native fish going through. So in terms of regional ecosystem management, in terms of regional population management, simply allowing the river to flow through <Glen Canyon Dam>, it could literally eliminate the native fish downstream. There could be so many new, non-native fish and diseases that come through without any control. All I'm saying is that there's an issue there. 

Lee: But that's only periodically. That's not gonna happen forever. 

Stevens: All I'm saying is that's an issue of… allowing the river to be free-flowing might really have very severe impacts on fish downstream. 

Wegner: I don't necessarily agree, but I mean it's a challenge, you're absolutely right. I don't necessarily agree with that. Most of the exotic species that are in <Lake Powell> and in the upstream reservoirs are clearwater reservoir, stagnant water species. 

Stevens: I understand, but when I go up into Cataract Canyon and go up in the Lower Green River and seine for fish in the backwaters, I get one <Colorado> squawfish and 100 or 200 or 500 non-native minnow species. And that influx, even though we might get one or two <Colorado> squawfish downstream, which would be fantastic, what we're doing is putting several orders of magnitude more non-native fish down there. 

Wegner: But as we return the river back to the canyon, you will lessen the habitats and environments for the non-native species, over time, and you will provide habitats for the native species. Because of <Glen Canyon Dam>, we've essentially lost three of our big river endangered fish species downstream. Squawfish is all gone, boneytail is all gone, razorback, what, we got eight to twelve. They're all pre-dam fish, they're all forty-plus years old fish, got cataracts, they can't see. They're not reproducing, or they're not recruiting. They may be reproducing, but they're not recruiting into the population. 

Lee: You don't like catfish, huh? 

Stevens: Catfish are fine, but they're not native. (several talking at once, none discernable) They were non-native fish in <Glen Canyon> before the dam, all throughout the river. By 1909, the dominant fish in the Lower Basin were carp and catfish, before there were any dams whatsoever. 

Steiger: Then how did _______ non-native fish get in there? 

Wegner: They brought in carp, they brought in -the federal government brought 'em in and dumped 'em _________. (Lee, inaudible) 

Steiger: At the turn of the century? 

Stevens: Before the turn of the century, for catfish and carp, yeah. 

Steiger: And what was the theory on that? 

Wegner: Carp was viewed as the "wonder" fish, the fish that would solve all the world's nutritional problems. Great. 

Lee: Frankly, I like catfish a lot better than I like trout. (several talking at once, none discernable) 

Steiger: I think we've got about two minutes left on this tape. 

Lee: Humpback chub in Glen were -Slim used to catch 'em all the time, just on a line. You know, just leave the line in the water, go back upstream next day, two, three days later, or, I mean, the next morning, and there they are, on a hook. 

Stevens: Did they fight pretty good, were they a pretty gamey little fish? 

Lee: I'm not a fisherman -person -so I don't know. 

Steiger: I could always pop in another tape. 

Wegner: That's all right, we can finish up. 

Lee: We're done. We've said it. 

Steiger: Have we eddied out? 

Wegner: We've eddied out. 

Steiger: Anybody want to wrap up anything? 

Lee: No, I don't want to hear any more of your talk any longer. My show was only an hour-and-a-half last night -this one has gone on as long as.... 

Kenton Grua: Can I say something? I haven't said much. 

Lee: Please, say something, Kenton. Hurry up! 

Steiger: You've got about thirty seconds. 

Kenton Grua: Okay, I think <Glen Canyon>'s a time bomb, ready to go off: might happen this year, might happen next year. I think we're in a race against time, and if this thing goes catastrophically, it's gonna really screw things up in <Grand Canyon> (

Stevens: Good point.) as well as upstream. And I think that, as well as the water issue, the waste of water that it wastes every year.... The two things that are really pressing, we don't really have maybe that much time to study it. 

Wegner: Over a million acre-feet of water are lost every year due to evaporation and bank storage. 

Kenton Grua: I mean, in a way, I'd love to see that thing go, but in another way, I don't really want to be down there when it goes. 

Lee: We're a little ambivalent about that, I understand, but I would really -I'm all for Nature takin' it out in a hurry, and then we'll get all our new species all real quick (laughs) and it won't ever be anything like it was before (

Wegner: True, it won't.) but <Glen Canyon>'ll sure get washed out. 

Wegner: Acts of God are certainly easier to manage, to explain, than is intelligent, active management of the system. (

Lee: That's right.) We're talking about intelligent, active management here, Larry. 

Lee: Yes, and cat-a-stroph-e, or catastrophe does not interact well with those very well-thought-out problems and solutions. 

Wegner: This issue promises to be on the agenda and on the plate of a lot of people for many years, so.... This is so cool to be involved with this. 

Lee: If I get really tired of it, I'll get on my knees and ask the Old Lady to just get it over with in a hurry, okay? 

Steiger: Okay. This thing's still going. I guess we really have shot our wad here, huh? 

Lee: I've shot my wad. 

Stevens: This is going to be an issue that goes on. 

Kenton Grua: I have a question for Larry I've been dying to ask the whole time. The only thing I can figure.... 

Stevens: I did not introduce buffalo gnats to the <Grand Canyon>. 

Kenton Grua: No, no, no, no, it has nothing to do with that. My question was, we say there's not more diversity, but there's more species inhabiting <Grand Canyon> now than before the dam. How can you say that with what you're saying was.... 



