Tim Whitney

June 11, 2007

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides (Adopt-a-Boatman)

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, <Tucson Arizona>



Steiger:  (first 6.5 minutes, preamble, not transcribed)  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is Lew Steiger sittin’ down here talkin’ to Tim Whitney.  It’s June 11, 2007, and we’re at the Whitney mansion in <Flagstaff> here, nerve center, heart of Rivers and Oceans travel business.  (aside about rabbit not transcribed)  The way that I typically do this is, just for organizational purposes, it seems like the easiest thing to do is just go chronological, just start at the beginning and kind of go through--unless you’ve got a better idea as far as how to approach this thing.

Whitney:  I was thinking about it this morning, and I thought, "Born in <Connecticut>, grew up along the Connecticut River, which has some symmetry for the rest of my life really.  Where it really started where I first came to the <Grand Canyon> was in 1964....  (pause for technical adjustments)  I don’t know how far back we want to go.

Steiger:  What I usually ask everybody is to just tell me a little bit about your family background and circumstances before you got to the river, just because it puts your perceptions in some kind of a greater perspective.  So you grew up in <Connecticut>?

Whitney:  Yeah, grew up on the Connecticut River.

Steiger:  Kind of a boating family?

Whitney:  Yeah, it was.  My father was in the navy, and when he got out of the service after the Second World War, he actually ran PT boats in the South Pacific and had a pretty interesting history there in the same squadron as Jack Kennedy.  We always thought that was a pretty exciting thing, because when he became president, we thought my father should go down to the White House and visit his old friend.  Of course that never happened.

Steiger:  But he actually knew him?

Whitney:  Yeah.  I mean, a little background stuff there is that....  The story we like to tell in the family was that they were both in the Solomon Islands about the time of the sinking of the PT-109.  My father had his boat, 179, in Squadron 10.  It was a pretty interesting story, really, about bringing it from <New Jersey>, on the deck of a ship, through the Panama Canal, and all the way out to the Pacific, and then dropped them off there.  They were patrolling and delivering mail, doing all kinds of things--watching for Japanese movement in the channels between the islands.  His executive officer at the time... he was just a ninety-day wonder, you know, out of college.

Steiger:  He was?

Whitney:  He was.  People were just joining and signing up, and if you had an education, and could go to officer candidate school or whatever, they’d give you some kind of a--move you up, you’d start out as a young officer.  But the story is that his executive officer at the time was a guy named Barney Ross, who came to his wedding.  He wasn’t like palling around with Jack Kennedy, but they knew each other and they were in the same anchorage.  So they were taking turns, basically going out and looking for Japanese tankers and supply ships and that kind of thing.  Something had happened to Kennedy’s executive officer, and so he asked my father if he could borrow Barney Ross.  And he said, "Well, I’m not goin’ out tonight, so if that’s okay with Barney, it’s fine with me.  I’ll have him back for tomorrow night."  Well, Kennedy takes Barney Ross with him and goes out and gets cut in half.  Barney Ross winds up becoming one of the heroes of the PT 109 story.  You know, these guys were swimming out into the channel in the middle of the night, looking for an American ship to come and rescue them.  And then the story goes on about how they hung out on the island, Japanese all around, and finally wrote a note on a coconut shell, a message that finally got out to where they could get rescued.

Steiger:  They actually threw a note on a coconut shell out, and it floated out to the other Americans?

Whitney:  No, they got it to a native, who delivered it to some American forces.

Steiger:  Because the native guys could cruise around the Japanese unmolested?

Whitney:  Yeah.  The island they were on was not much of an island, but there was a native contact there.  And those guys handed him the coconut, and he’d written on it.  Actually, I think he had it in the oval office when he was president.  They had saved it, and it had survived the war.

	But so anyway, my dad got out of the war and came back and settled in a little town in <Connecticut>, and then found a piece of property along the river, and that’s where my first memories are as a little kid:  had a day sailboat and a couple of little skiffs.  So we could mess around on the river.  And it was on a cove off the side of the river.  That part of the river was about six miles up from the mouth of the river in Long Island Sound.  So there was tanker traffic on the river, bringing fuel up and down.  So it was a commercial river, but also a lot of sailing in those days, and powerboating.  We grew up on <South Cove>, and you could see the river, but it was this quiet backwater, and there weren’t all that many houses around, so it was a great place to grow up, and just boating around, and running down snapping turtles and ducks and geese, and just big patches of honeysuckle where you could burrow around and just take the boat.  As long as they knew where we were going, it was fine.  So we got to spend a lot of time growing up on the water.

Steiger:  So when you say "we," is that you and Bob?  How many brothers and sisters in your family?

Whitney:  There are four of us:  my oldest brother Larry, and then Bob, and then me, and my younger sister, Ann.  And then we lived there until about 1962.  I was just about twelve.  He was working for Stanley Tools and was offered a position in <Canada> to run a plant in <Hamilton Ontario>.  So they packed up the family and we moved to <Canada>, from this little riverside town, <Essex Connecticut>.  So there was the whole Canadian experience of going to school, sort of in the British style.  It was very different than going to school in the States.  For me it worked out pretty well.  They were trying to find a school--there were a lot of big public schools.  It was a very different style that they had there.  But I wound up in a school which was good, was havin’ a good time.

But what I’m getting at, is in 1964, my folks had this great idea.  My mother has an uncle living in <Phoenix>, and so we had a bunch of cousins in <Phoenix>.  So they had this wild idea that they would give us the family station wagon--the three boys, Larry, Bob, and Tim--eighteen, sixteen, and fourteen--give us the family car and a AAA Triptik to take us across the country and then meet them in <Phoenix>.

Steiger:  They thought it would be a good experience for you guys?  Or they wanted the car out there?

Whitney:  No.  In retrospect, it was just one of the greatest gifts that they could have ever given us.  It was just this incredible adventure for the three teenage boys to pack up the family car with an old galvanized steel Coca-Cola cooler and our sleeping stuff.  He had a box made for the top of the car--we packed all our gear in there.  We were gonna just camp out and sleep in the car and drive across the country with this AAA Triptik.  It was just great!  All these historic places that we were gonna stop along the way.  And we could call, and they had a copy, so they’d know where we were.  It was bold and it was generous to give the three boys--and I couldn’t drive yet--for about a 3,000-mile trip from <Hamilton Ontario>, to <Phoenix Arizona>.

Steiger:  Now, AAA Triptik?  What’s that?

Whitney:  A Triptik was where--they still make ’em--you tell them approximately what your route is gonna be, and then they’ll make a map, a little flip folder of a map of the general area that you’re going across the country, and then take a marking pen and line out your route.  And it would show you, so you just flip to the next page.  And you’re going from--I can’t remember exactly--from <Hamilton> to <Detroit> or something.  We crossed around <Buffalo>, and so here’d be this line on the map, and all the various towns, and some places where you could eat.  And it would be ten miles on either side of the highway, so you could kind of see where you were going.  And then you’d flip the page, and then you’re in <Buffalo>, and then you get on whatever highway it was.

Steiger:  But rather than have to juggle a state map for twenty-seven states that you were going across, you had this one little book.

Whitney:  It was like a flip-chart river guide, to take you across the country.  And it would show historical....

Steiger:  You must have been pretty good kids for them to trust you like that.

Whitney:  There were people who thought they were crazy to let us do it.  Larry had gone to <New York City> a couple of times.  Early training was to learn how public transportation would work, and then they’d just let him go to a museum or something and say, "We’ll see you back at the hotel," someplace, and Larry had to find his way back.  He loved it.  And Bob was sixteen and impatient for life and already driving all over the place.  So between the two of them who could drive, and then Number Three, here I am, just kind of taggin’ along--"Whatever you guys say," you know.

	That’s what brought me to the <Grand Canyon> for the first time.  It was a lot of great memories.

Steiger:  So <Grand Canyon> was built in on the trip?

Whitney:  It was built in on the trip.  Of all the places that we stopped, certainly the canyon had the greatest impact, and the most jaw-dropping result.

Steiger:  Clear from <Connecticut> to <Arizona>, and the <Grand Canyon> was it.

Whitney:  And what’s kind of interesting, what’s fun to think about is this--it created a déjà vu moment for me that would happen almost twenty years later.  So I remember we came through the Four Corners, and then we must have come through <Tuba City>, and hit [Highway] 89, and we were driving up towards <Marble Canyon>, we were going to go to the North Rim first, and then come around.  I can’t remember, maybe we backtracked.  But I think we were on our way to the North Rim, and then went to Zion.  But we came towards <Marble Canyon>, and we got one of those classic little desert monsoon storms.  It just came across 89--I mean, I think about it now, we used to watch them at V.C., these storms that would just roll out of <House Rock Valley>, come right down the road, and cross the platform, and over the river, and bounce into the <Echo Cliffs>, and then go somewhere else, up and over.  So we’re drivin’ along, and pretty close to <Marble Canyon>, I think, and here comes one of these storms.  And there we are, it’s a ’61 Ford station wagon with one of those canvas desert bags hangin’ off the front on the radiator.  And we come through and we get rain and hail that lasts for a half a mile, and then it’s gone.  We’re drivin’, we’re back out in the sun.  That was just an amazing thing for us.  We’d never seen weather like that before.

Steiger:  Because in <Connecticut> it comes and stays a while?

Whitney:  Yeah, it can be there for a couple of weeks.  So here’s this really intense, short-lived thunderstorm that we come through.  That’s what created this déjà vu about twenty years later.  But anyway, we get down to <Marble>, we stop and <Marble Canyon>, and I’ll never forget, we came across the bridge, looked at the river and down in the canyon, and it was like this great western experience.  We’d never seen country like this before, let alone as big as the country was as we’re drivin’ out.

Steiger:  So had you been to the North Rim?

Whitney:  No, we were on our way.  We came over through <Marble Canyon> on the way to <Jacob Lake>.  We came through Four Corners, and then probably through <Tuba>, and then hit 89 and drove to <Marble Canyon>.

Steiger:  But you were goin’ to the North Rim, not the South Rim.

Whitney:  Right, we were goin’ to the North Rim.

Steiger:  How’d you figure that out?

Whitney:  It was on the Triptik.

Steiger:  They figured it out for you?

Whitney:  Oh, yeah.  You know, take ’em to the North Rim, and then I think we backtracked.  Then we went to Zion.  I don’t remember Bryce, but I do remember Zion.  I have a picture of us riding horses in Zion.  And I don’t think we came around through Vegas.  I’d have to follow up on that.  Maybe Bob will remember, or Larry.  But I remember the Marble Canyon Lodge, and behind where the cash register is now, there’s still that little wooden platform, and you came in there.  I remember standing up on that little wooden platform, and there were all of the Arizona knickknacks and souvenirs--ashtrays and shot glasses and rubber tomahawks and all that stuff.  And the one thing, though, that....  I’m not even sure that there was a sign to the Ferry, but I sort of regret or lament that we didn’t know, nobody said, we didn’t know enough to be looking for a sign for <Lee's Ferry> in 1964.  Who knows, maybe nothin’ was goin’ on down there.  I’m not even sure it was paved.

Steiger:  I’ll bet it was a dirt road.

Whitney:  A dirt road.  But no ramp, you know, and maybe just a little slot to get down to the river.  I mean, who knows, maybe Georgie [White] could have been rigging or something, but probably nothin’ was goin’ on down there.  But anyway, we went back, we looked at the river, and then got in the car and we headed to the North Rim.  We wound up getting there, I remember it was nighttime when we got there, and I’m not even sure where we were exactly, but I do remember that we were camped out.  That night I was sleepin’ in the front seat, stretched out in the front seat.  And in the middle of the night, Bob slides over the back of the seat--I guess he was sleepin’ in the back--and Larry was outside maybe.  So he slides down behind the driver’s seat, and he’d been driving--I mean, it’d been a long day--but driving most of the day.  So I moved my legs, he slides into the driver’s seat, starts the car.  I said, "Well, where are we goin’?"  And he didn’t say anything, and just kind of drove and then stopped and went back to sleep.  We wake up in the morning, and we’re like a hundred yards from our gear pile.  We’d unloaded a bunch of stuff out of the car, our food and a cooler and this other stuff, and realized that Bob had driven in his sleep.  And we’re not that far from the rim!  So that’s a long-standing story about Bob driving around the edge of the <Grand Canyon> in his sleep--nobody’s the wiser.

	So that’s where we really saw the canyon for the first time, and it blew our minds, of course, and we were trying to just comprehend the whole scene.  And as I remember, there really wasn’t anybody around.  I don’t think we were in the park.  It must have been on a forest road someplace.

Steiger:  So it wasn’t an official point, do you even remember?

Whitney:  No, I don’t remember where I was exactly, but we could walk to the rim from where the car was.  I don’t think it was on the Triptik, where we were.  I’m not sure exactly.  We might have been in the park, I don’t know, and just wound up pulling over someplace.  In those days, not as many people around, probably.  But it was just a spectacular aspect of the trip.  And then off to Zion and eventually wound up in <Phoenix>, and then came back to the canyon with my cousins and the whole family when my folks flew out, and everybody gathered in <Phoenix> and we came back to the canyon, camped on the <Mogollon Rim> a couple places.

But I think it was in the early eighties we were coming down from <Page>, working for Fort Lee Company, and the same kind of thing happened, where we came through a storm--we were on our way to the Ferry to rig the boats, and came through the same kind of a storm that came across 89 down there.  And I flashed on it at that moment.

Steiger:  Twenty years earlier.

Whitney:  I remembered that that had happened in 1964.  So that was the first introduction to the canyon.

Steiger:  So you were fourteen.  At that point did you have any inkling that you’d be comin’ back?

Whitney:  No.  We didn’t have any idea--I mean, I didn’t.

Steiger:  It was just a neat place, and that was about it.

Whitney:  Goin’ to visit the cousins in <Phoenix>, and <Grand Canyon> was part of it.

Steiger:  Pretty cool trip for three boys, all the way across America.

Whitney:  Yeah.  I only remember, really, just a few stops.  There was a lot of driving.  <Nebraska> would never end.  We went to Lincoln’s homestead.  I can’t remember, there were a lot of other stops:  St. Louis.

Steiger:  Gas probably cost 15¢ a gallon or something.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  And you had what, $300-$400 for the whole trip?

Whitney:  I think we had a gas credit card kind of a thing.  Everybody had some Traveler’s Checks, I think.  The <Grand Canyon> was definitely the biggest part of it.  I don’t remember calling home that much.  I don’t remember having to check in.  Probably Larry and Bob did.  I’ll just never forget coming down and crossing the river and <Marble Canyon>.  Oh, I still have some pictures of the rock house at Cliff Dwellers and thinkin’ how cool that thing was.

Steiger:  You have any pictures of that station wagon?

Whitney:  You know, I know I have a couple of pictures of riding horses in Zion, and then the rock house at Cliff Dwellers.

Steiger:  You guys all standing in front of it?

Whitney:  Yeah.  We had these little Instamatic cameras--I think they had them then, I can’t remember--it was more than a Kodak Brownie camera.  That’s kind of what sticks in my mind, where you had to put the bulb in the flash unit.  But the pictures, I think I took the picture.  There wasn’t anybody there to take a picture of the three of us.  I think it might just be the rock house.  I’m not sure if there’s anybody else in the picture.

Steiger:  Amazing, 1964.  That map is just a big white space in a long ol’ line from <Marble Canyon> to <Flagstaff>.  There’s like nothin’ on there between those two places--Cameron [unclear].

Whitney:  Yeah.  It was a great adventure, and I know that there were some people....  I remember my uncle told my father he was crazy to let us do that.  The impact of what they had given us didn’t really hit me for many years.  I think about here I am twenty-sixth season in <Grand Canyon>, and who’d have ever thought, bein’ here fourteen years old, living in <Canada>, that I’d ever wind up out here, living here and working in the canyon.

Steiger:  So how’d you end up going from there, fourteen years old....  How’d that all transpire, how’d you get into river running?

Whitney:  Well, let’s see, it was in--I have to think--I guess about 1970 maybe--’69 or ’70--Bob came out and was visiting the cousins in <Phoenix>, and then wound up staying for a winter, and was doing  bunch of skydiving outside of <Phoenix>.

Steiger:  So he met Dick Clark?

Whitney:  Right, and that was that connection.  He’d come out with some friends.  He’d been goin’ to school in <New Hampshire> at Nathaniel Hawthorne College, and came out with a couple of friends and they were skydiving.  I came out for part of a winter, and that’s where I made my--well, I made my first jump in <Milwaukee>, but then came out and jumped for several days a week for a couple of weeks.  I was in school in <Madison Wisconsin>, so I went back to school and Bob stayed, and he was working out here.  And then I just remember from letters and just talking to him once in a while, that he made his way up to the canyon.  It was Myron and Dick and Dick Coffee, Jeff Byrne.  Whether Bob had run into Dick, or how that happened exactly, I’m not sure, but he wound up down at <Phantom Ranch>.  And I think Myron was working down there too.  So he got a job at <Phantom Ranch> and was working there for a little bit, and [writing] great letters about, again, the big-eyed stuff about livin’ in the West, and snakes and scorpions and all this great stuff, in the bottom of the canyon and the river goin’ by.  So they saw a trip come by, and there weren’t that many trips, I guess, and he just said, "Where are they comin’ from?"

Steiger:  He got a job at <Phantom Ranch>, didn’t even know there were river trips--or didn’t think about it.

Whitney:  No, just another adventure, to get down there and have a job--hike in, workin’ in the bottom of the <Grand Canyon>, that was good enough.  And then not only good enough, it was great, it was great stuff.  And then here comes a river trip, and he goes, "Well, where is that comin’ from?"  And then went up to <Lee's Ferry> and met Tony.  I don’t know if Dick was already there, or if Dick stayed, Bob came back to Phantom and then went back up to the Ferry.

Steiger:  So Dick was workin’ at Phantom too?  Or you don’t know?

Whitney:  I’m not sure, I don’t know.  I think Myron was.

Steiger:  At Phantom?

Whitney:  At Phantom.  I just remember some story about--I think it had to be Myron, if Myron was there.  It might have been somebody else--but Bob telling a story about some wrangler was knockin’ down the door one morning (raps table) saying, "Wake up, Yella Hair!  C’mon out, wake up, Yella Hair!"  I think he was talking about Myron wasn’t out of bed yet.  So he made his way up to the Ferry and that’s when Tony Sparks, before Lee Company, was operating at the Ferry.

	So I’m back in school in <Wisconsin>, working out on the Great Lakes.  Time goes by, 1973, and Bob’s gonna get his first boat, and he said, "C’mon out."  Everybody had to find their own crew at that time.  I think there were only three boats, they only had three boats and they were all on eight-day trips down to Pearce.  They had been going, of course, all the way out to T-Bar, runnin’ ten-day trips for $400-$500.  But now it was 1973, so it was a lot more sophisticated.  (chuckles)  So I drive out from <Wisconsin>....

Steiger:  Now, what were you doin’ on the Great Lakes--not to spin you out.

Whitney:  I guess I probably would have stayed in the canyon, but I was havin’ so much fun, was workin’ for the University of <Wisconsin>.  There was this big salmon study that was going on in the Great Lakes at the time, in Lake Michigan--mostly in Lake Michigan, but also in Lake Superior--so I was working for the university, runnin’ boats on rivers that would run into Lake Michigan, and out on Lake Michigan itself, taking a population of salmon, of Coho salmon and King salmon.  They were studying their migrational habits, working for a guy named Arthur Hassler [phonetic] who was really the guy who was credited with finding the mechanism that salmon use to find their natal streams.  And he’d worked in <Germany> under Von Fritch [phonetic], who was the guy who studied bee behavior, and discovered the little figure 8 dance, the little wag-tail dance that bees do in the hive to show where they had found pollen.  So there was years and years of him studying this.  Honey bees will come into the hive and do a little squiggly figure 8 and draw the figure 8 by walking around, and then leave through the eight in the direction where they had found this supply of pollen.

Steiger:  And the other ones would see the 8 and they know.

Whitney:  And say "watch that."  This is sort of a rough description of that behavior study, so Arthur Hassler....

Steiger:  So you were driving these open boats with outboards?

Whitney:  Yeah, Boston whalers.

Steiger:  So boats that had a steering wheel and all that.

Whitney:  Had a steering wheel.

Steiger:  Cool.

Whitney:  Yeah, we had some pretty good equipment, and it was really kind of interesting because....  To digress, it was a behavioral study, and the physiology was that they discovered that the olfactory lobe of a salmon’s brain is the largest and most developed aspect of their brain.  So he had this idea that olfaction was playing a part in how salmon could discriminate--the sense of smell--discriminate between all of these different streams as they move out to the ocean, three, five, seven years later, depending on the species.  So he created a chemical, an organic combination of organic chemicals which created an odor which was not found normally in nature, and it was a really strong odor, and not really pleasant either; and could drip that with these little pumps into side streams, streams that would flow down into Lake Michigan.  And it would be in parts per million, so it would be a very dilute amount of this liquid that was going into the rivers.

	So then the study was, we’d go into these fish hatcheries and imprint.  The idea was that at some point, at a young age before salmon--it’s called when they smolt, and they move from being juveniles to being young adults.  Right before they leave the streams that they’re born in and head for the ocean, perhaps they imprint the sense of smell of that stream.

Steiger:  So they know where to come back to.

Whitney:  That just goes into their brain, they just lock that in, and they’re able to pretty miraculously....

Steiger:  Find their way back.

Whitney:  Be able to smell the difference between these streams with all the different forks that come into these rivers.  They basically find their way back to their natal stream.  So this study was about trying to show that.  So there were these study and control groups, and we’d identify different fish by cutting off like one pectoral fin, or a dorsal fin, or something.  There’d be this combination, so as they were returning as adults two years later, if you could trap them, that you could identify which hatchery they came from, and thereby which group they came from, whether they were imprinted with this chemical or not.  And it worked.  It worked beautifully.  There was like three or four percent return of fish coming back into these streams.  So we’d take the chemical and drip it into a side stream.  Three years later when these salmon were maturing and migrating--and in
Lake Michigan

 they just migrate by going along the coast--but where a river would come in, if the scent was in that river that they’d been imprinted to, they’d just stop, take a hard left turn, and swim right up this river, and swim right to the pump, which was behind a weir.  So when the migration was hot and heavy, you had to clear hundreds of fish out of this weir every day, because they were coming right on in, right to the source.  So it was a very successful study, and money just kind of poured in from the National Science Foundation and other places, and put the limnology lab from the university at the forefront of a lot of limnological and marine studies type stuff that was going on.  So people were traveling all over the world, working on fish psychology.  And then the guy, the second in line after Arthur Hassler, was Jim Kitchell [phonetic], and he’s runnin the lab now, and he’s the guy that’s been working with Mike Yard [phonetic] and other people on the trout removal thing down in <Marble>.

Steiger:  Small world.

Whitney:  Yeah.  So anyway, so I was doin’ that, Bob’s in the Canyon.

Steiger:  "C’mon, do a trip with me."

Whitney:  Yeah.  And so how could I resist that?  So I drove out and got on this trip.  I’m trying to remember who else was....  I think Dick Clark was runnin’ a boat, and maybe Dave Hinshaw or Gary Mercado.  I’m trying to remember.  So off we go.

Steiger:  And that was....

Whitney:  1973.

Steiger:  Not Dave Kloepfer?  I guess he had already partnered up with Al Harris, got out of there by then, huh?

Whitney:  Yeah.  I didn’t meet Dave there.

Steiger:  He was there for a while, but I think that was before Gary and Mary and Dave.

Whitney:  I think it was Dave Hinshaw.  But they were all living there.  Their trailers were up behind the bathrooms and the parking lot.  And the warehouse was there, back where the park building is now.  Then the warehouse burned down, I think, maybe in about ’75 or ’77--something like that.  And then that’s when Tony moved everything up to <Page>.  Tony had big plans for the Ferry.  Before I got there, there was a restaurant down there.  And you might remember this.  And the chef.  You could have really good food.

Steiger:  I remember when I got there it was--let’s see, it would have been ’72, because my first trip was ’71, but I hiked in at Phantom, and I didn’t get to <Lee's Ferry> ’til the next spring, ’72.  I remember there were a couple of trailers where you park kind of....  There were these two trailers going longways, kind of with their backs to the river, looking in what’s now the big parking lot.  And then they were over behind where the bathrooms are.  There were like two or three other trailers where everybody lived.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  But I don’t remember a fancy restaurant.  I remember you could get....  There was beer, there was gas, there was....  Was there gas down there?

Whitney:  Well, there was gas, because that’s where....

Steiger:  And there was convenience store, and you could get a hamburger.

Whitney:  That was the restaurant, I think.  There wasn’t a separate building or anything.

Steiger:  You could get somethin’ to eat.

Whitney:  Yeah.  For a while Tony had somebody who was cookin’ food down there, not just flippin’ burgers.

Steiger:  Which would have been handy for riggin’.

Whitney:  And there was the rental dock, and the skeleton of that dock is still down there, where you could rent a boat and go upriver and catch twenty-pound rainbows--big fish.

Steiger:  Oh, yeah, and there were huge....  It was still the good secret.  I mean, people were already catchin’ on to it, but those were big trout up there.

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  So there you are.

Whitney:  So there we are, and it was just great bein’ at the Ferry and watchin’ people.

Steiger:  Three one-boat trips?

Whitney:  Three one-boat trips, eight days to Pearce.  And then the daily trip was goin’ on too, and there was always action because he was runnin’ the one-day trip from the dam to the Ferry.

Steiger:  So he started that?  Was that his idea?

Whitney:  Yeah, he started that.  And Jay Byerly was in there early, and Patrick Conley.  And Jay, I think, was the guy who--he kind of sewed the side tubes together.  I’m trying to remember, I think there were four.  It’s terrible, I can’t remember if there were just two.

Steiger:  I think there were four.

Whitney:  I think there were four.  They would run down during the day, people come down through the tunnel and take the trip.  And then they’d get down to the Ferry and de-rig the whole thing, and put it on a truck, and then the next day’s lunch and everything was all pre-done.  So we’d put that together, and the next morning about 4:30-5:00 in the morning, everybody’d pile onto the truck in the back of the truck, have a little something to eat, and the cooler’s prepacked for lunch, and drive all the way, down the tunnel to the dam and rig the boats, and take whoever was comin’ down, down to the Ferry--and did that every day all summer long.

Steiger:  And you had like twenty-horse Mercs, just like everybody else.

Whitney:  Exactly.  And I can’t remember what year it was--it was later on, before....  before Tony moved everything up to <Page>.  He had Waterman build him an aluminum boat to try to take everything back upstream in a boat:  take four or five boats, load ’em on, and run ’em back upstream--the first attempt to not have to drive around every time.  But still there would be the rig and the de-rig every day.  Of course now they just turn ’em around.

Steiger:  Now they’ve got it figured out.  Now they’re doin’ it right.  For sure.  Oh, man, what a better way, just to turn around and just get a big motor.

Whitney:  150 turnaround, drive right back upstream.

Steiger:  And the boats stay rigged and in the water all summer.

Whitney:  In those days it was probably just there was....  I mean, the equipment was already big enough, but the idea of 100-horse, two-stroke outboards to run everything back upstream was just a little...that was hard to see.

Steiger:  I bet they just didn’t even think of it.

Whitney:  Part of the deal was that you rigged and de-rigged all the time.  And so that was just the mindset that worked.

Steiger:  That’s what you were going to have to do.

Whitney:  Karen Byerly was there then, and I think she probably still holds the record for the most one-day trips of all time.

Steiger:  So she paid some dues.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Before she got to go downriver.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And she was a natural.  It didn’t take but a couple of trips downriver before she just....

Steiger:  Never mind those one-days.

Whitney:  Yeah.  The shoe fit perfectly.

Steiger:  So what struck you about that first trip?

Whitney:  Well, the river did.  I don’t remember a whole lot about that trip, except again it was just really big-eyed stuff.  But I remember being somewhere in the first couple days, being up in <Marble> somewhere, and just sitting by the river, just down near the boats, and just watching the river go by and thinking about what a force this place was.  I mean, I’d grown up on a river, but this was another... completely different animal.  It was spellbinding, really.  I just remember being completely taken with the moving water, and the force of it, and the sound of it, and the rapids.  I’d never seen any whitewater before.  Just the enormity of the adventure was just mind boggling.  And then the fact that all the other parts of it too:  you know, you’re cooking and cleaning and showing these people around.  In fact, I don’t really remember if there was....  I mean, there was some hiking, but I think we maybe got to <Saddle Canyon> and they’d been up there once or twice before kind of thing, but it was all about looking for these new places.  I remember the skeleton was still there at South Canyon.  I do remember that, up against a wall.

Steiger:  Skull and all.

Whitney:  Skull and all.  Yeah, the skull was still there.  Oh, just running into other people, and....  You think back on it now about how primitive some of the gear was, and some of the techniques.  A lot of other people have been interviewed, you’ve heard it all before, about collecting firewood.  The beginning for me was all those aspects:  stopping to collect firewood at the end of the day, and there was certain wood that you wanted, and certain wood that you just didn’t want.

Steiger:  Yeah, cookin’ wood.  It was pretty romantic [unclear].  (laughter)

Whitney:  But I just threw myself at everything.  Whatever there was, it was just "give me more!"  It was just great.  And the Port-a-Potties, they had moved into something really sophisticated then: the blue goo.  It wasn’t just take a shovel and leave a stick in the sand.  We’d moved to the blue goo, so it was all in one place.  Dig the hole and bury that.  So then the next thing that we could see was blue goo stains on the beaches, and have to figure out the next move.

But the river was really--I was really completely taken.  The canyon, too, but there was just something about the water and the river in the canyon that captured me completely.

The one other thing I do remember from that trip, though, is that....  And this is how new a lot of the places were, even to those guys who’d been down there, had several trips, I guess, under their belts.  There was this plaque down at Separation that nobody had seen.  There was this bronze plaque up there on the wall somewhere.  And so we stopped to try and figure out where this plaque was, and what did it really say, and what was on it.  I remember kind of climbing up in the rocks, and everybody scurrying around, and [not knowing] whether to follow or just start climbing around.  And all of a sudden I found myself standing right in front of it.  Here I was, this neophyte, this greenhorn, and everybody’s going, "The plaque’s gotta be around here somewhere," and I’m sayin’, "You mean this one?"  (chuckles)  So they came up and we found the plaque, it was a big deal.  I’m not sure if that’s the same plaque now--it may have been.  I think there were two or three plaques that have been there over the years.  Quartaroli was saying something about that.

Steiger:  Yeah, but wasn’t that Dock Marston?  They wanted to commemorate those guys that were left off, that weren’t on the one on the rim or somethin’?  Like, didn’t they leave the three guys?  The guys that hiked out, they left them off.  There’s a monument there.

Whitney:  Oh, yeah.

Steiger:  They put those other guys at the South Rim, but they left those guys off.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  Which most of ’em thought was bullshit and so they put this one down there, put ’em all on there or somethin’ like that. 

Whitney:  Yeah.  So anyway it was a wonderful, incredible experience.

Steiger:  I remember the trick to swampin’, I remember figurin’ out early on that if you wanted to get a job on the river and be there, and you were the swamper, you needed to get your ass up in the morning and start that fire.  It was big brownie points if the boatman didn’t have to do that.  You had to get up and get that thing goin’, just to start the program.  I remember figurin’ that out right away, gotta get up and start the fire before it gets light.

Whitney:  I’m trying to remember how all that went in camp.  It was pretty primitive equipment, right down on the sand.  There wasn’t anything on legs or anything.

Steiger:  Start the fire, boil all the water.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Dish water and any water that had to boil, get that on there, and then do everything else on the coals.  And then we groused and just whined and complained when we had to go to stoves, and that lasted for me for about five seconds!  (laughs)  I liked that stove.  "Hm, this isn’t so bad."

Whitney:  Yeah.  Yeah, propane was good.

Steiger:  Yeah, what’s so bad about that?

Whitney:  By the time I started in 1980, that was all ancient history, and there was propane and all that.

Steiger:  But you went for seven years before you started workin’.

Whitney:  Well, I did a couple of other trips, and really I’m trying to remember the dates, but I think I came back in ’74, I was back in ’79.  I know I wasn’t there in that low-water year of ’77.  It was funny, I was happily ensconced in what I was doin’ up on the Great Lakes.  Bob was workin’ in the canyon, so there was sort of a connection there, but it wasn’t until ’79 when I’d kind of had enough of working at the university.  My vertical movement had gone about as far as it was going to go without going back to school, and I wasn’t interested in doing that.  That’s when I left <Wisconsin>.

Steiger:  And so Bob worked there for like ten years, but he wasn’t ever....  He was gonna do something else when he grew up, right?  What’s he doing now?  Is he doing financial stuff?

Whitney:  No, he’s renovating a house right now.  He was into property management, real estate, and now he’s fixing up houses and selling them.

Steiger:  But it wasn’t like he was on a different career track in the winter.

Whitney:  One thing I remember that he wanted to do was he wanted to create a little FBO, a little fixed-based operation for flying in <Marble Canyon>.  And he and Jane talked about that a lot.

Steiger:  Because he was a pilot then, and still is?

Whitney:  He was a pilot.

Steiger:  Does he still do it?

Whitney:  He’s not flying anymore.  He’s a really good pilot, and he was an instructor for a long time, but just kind of got out of it.

Steiger:  You’re either all in or all out.

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  You can’t just dabble in that and stay alive.

Whitney:  He was flying pretty regularly when he came back to <Arizona> for a few years, too.  He was pursuing the idea of having a little flying operation in <Marble Canyon>.  And then when he left, he was putting something like that together out on <Long Island>, where he was working with a friend, and they were trying to put a little charter business together, flying back and forth from <Long Island> to <Connecticut>--I think to <Groton Connecticut>.  But he spent at least one, or maybe two, winters--one down at the Ferry--and talked about how there was no traffic, nobody knew anything about going down there.  You could be there from September ’til April and maybe two people would drive down to the Ferry.  The only people who would come down were people in <Marble> and V.C. and Cliff Dwellers.

Steiger:  So literally there’d be days where you’d be there, and nobody would come all day.

Whitney:  Nobody--just absolutely nobody.  You’d be the only person there.  Maybe take a boat upstream or go for a hike, just livin’ there, just bein’ there alone, nobody around--it was pretty wild.  When you think about how many people are goin’ down there every day now, busloads of people.  And it was just a little corner pocket of the universe where there was just nobody around.

Steiger:  Yeah, I think about Fred and Carol Burke goin’ there to measure the water, whenever that was--about the time you guys, ’62, ’63, whenever that was.

Whitney:  Was that when that was?!

Steiger:  Oh, it must have been a little later than that--’65.  It was mid sixties, ’64, ’65.  I know Fred was in the legislature when they were squabblin’ over the dam, so it must have been mid, it must have been ’65, ’66, somewhere in there.  But it must have been pretty peaceful then too.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Now I know you went off and did Sobek trips, too, but that was in the eighties, too?  Like <New Guinea>?

Whitney:  Yeah, that was really about the same time I started in <Grand Canyon>.

Steiger:  So how did all that transpire?

Whitney:  I went from <Wisconsin>, actually went down and was working for Baja Expeditions for Tim Means down there, in the winter of ’79, and I was down there in ’80, doing these whale watching trips in Magdalena Bay, which was really great stuff too.  And then from there, in May of--I think it was May of ’79--Bob and Dave, Gary Mercado--Gary had been over in <Africa> for the early Sobek trips, the first Sobek trips, and so I’d heard about that, and I’d written to Rich Bangs.  He wrote back and said, "Well, how’d you like to go over to <New Guinea> in May and run a couple of trips over there, some trips over there.  I didn’t really have--I mean, I’d been on some <Grand Canyon> trips, but I didn’t have any real whitewater rowing experience.  I knew how to row a boat on flat water.  And I thought, "Well, sure!"  (laughter)  So I’ll never forget, it was one of the most memorable days of my life, getting on a plane in <Los Angeles> and leaving for <New Guinea>, which meant you also had to go through <Australia>.  Fly to <Sydney>, then fly up to <Townsville> or <Cannes>, and then get a flight from there into <Port Moresby>.  And actually, Bob was in <La Paz> at the same time that spring.  So he gave me a crash course.  He just sat down and gave me a crash course in how to row a boat on a whitewater river.

Steiger:  At this point you hadn’t even really started workin’ in the <Grand Canyon>?

Whitney:  No.

Steiger:  You’d swamped a little bit.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Okay, good deal, now go over there to <New Guinea>.

Whitney:  Yeah, go over there to <New Guinea> and start runnin’ a Class IV river, Class IV or V river.  But, you know, I was into it, and excited and not just willing, but I was ready to go.  I was impatient for life, too, that way.  I just had to pinch myself, thinking, "I’m flyin’ to <New Guinea>, and I don’t know what’s going to happen when I get there, but I’m in!"  You know, just, "Put me in, Coach!"

Steiger:  So were you getting paid on that?

Whitney:  You had to pay your way over there.  Actually, I had been on a Stanislaus  trip with--I think T.A. and Double A were on that trip, actually.  Been over in Angel’s Camp and had one Stan trip.  So I’d rowed a little bit.  That was plenty, ready to go.

Steiger:  "Here’s your left oar, there’s your right one."  (laughs)

Whitney:  Right.  "Protect your downstream oar."

Steiger:  Good advice.

Whitney:  This is where I’m going to have to come back and fill in the blanks, because there are so many aspects to it.  I just remember taking off from L.A.[<Los Angeles>] later at night and heading out over the Pacific for who knows what was going to greet me in <New Guinea>.  So I make it into <Port Moresby> and I’m supposed to look for this house, a guy named John Mason--a great guy.  He came back and did a couple of <Grand Canyon> trips.  He was the Sobek connection in <Port Moresby>, and it was just great.  That was one of the great things in the heyday of international river running in the eighties.  There were just these halfway houses kind of things.  You know, people just opened up their places to you.  You come and go, and you cook and you eat, and you work on your boats there--whatever it took.  It was just all part of the adventure for everybody, and running into these people who were expatriated Aussies or Americans, and they were just all over the world, and if you could find that connection it just always made everything easier.

Steiger:  Yeah, you needed somethin’, some place to be.

Whitney:  You needed somethin’.  So I got to Mason’s house and there was a note there from Dave Shore in an envelope, and there was a bunch of money in an envelope, and there was a note that said, "Welcome to PNG.  Learn pidgin, buy a ticket, go to Lae"--this town where the boats were stored--"go to Hogen Hollier’s [phonetic], get all the equipment, buy the food, put all the gear on a truck, and tell the driver you have ‘plenty cargo,’ and drive up to the bridge in Bololo [phonetic], and I’ll meet you there."  (laughter)

Steiger:  [unclear] river trip [unclear].

Whitney:  Yeah, just this casual note:  learn the language, buy a ticket, fly up there, pull all this gear together, create a menu, buy the food, put it on the truck and take it to the river, and I’ll see you there.

Steiger:  Yeah, "Welcome aboard, kid."

Whitney:  Yeah, right!  And I said, "Yea-yus!"  I mean, it was a big--I bit off a big piece there, but that was all part of the excitement and the adventure of it.  I mean, I got most of it right.  I didn’t learn the language, but I got up there and managed to get the gear together.

Steiger:  Holy moley!  How did you figure out the menu, for cryin’ out loud.  What was there?

Whitney:  Well, I had just enough experience from the <Grand Canyon> and from Baja to....

Steiger:  To know what would be acceptable.

Whitney:  Breakfast, lunch, and dinner.

Steiger:  But did you guys have coolers, did you have ice?

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  How many days were these trips going to be?

Whitney:  These trips were like five, six days, I think.  We had coolers.

Steiger:  But once you put in, you were gone for six days.  There wasn’t any resupply?

Whitney:  Oh, no, it was a jungle river.  It was a river that tunneled through the jungle.  I mean, it was equatorial tropical rainforest, 8 degrees south latitude.

Steiger:  What was the gradient?

Whitney:  You know, it was a pretty steep gradient until the very last part of the river.  That’s kind of part of the story, was that it was May 29 I remember launching, and I think Jim Slade had run into a guy, Jerome Montague, who was over there in <New Guinea> on a U.N. project to help try and save the crocodiles.  Of all things, you’d think how could you ever run out of crocodiles in a place like that.  But the famous crocodile hunters, like this guy....

Steiger:  They were doing their job well.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And they were making big money.

Steiger:  Carved wooden figure.

Whitney:  They were getting good money for big crocodiles.  And out in the western part of the country, on the Strickland River and the Fly River there was just nothing out there, but people were....  We actually ran into some people that just kind of came out of the bush.  Jerome told me when we met them that we were only like the third [party of] white people that they’d ever seen.  There were some missionaries.  But the idea was to change the economy there by buying small crocodiles so that they would leave the brooding stock alone and stop hunting the big crocodiles, but capture the little ones, and then buy them, and then raise them in farms, so you would leave the breeding population alone.  So anyway, he had run some rivers in the east, and Slade said, "Well, we’re runnin some trips over here.  Maybe we could use you.  You could come, join a trip and row boats sometime."  So he showed up.  So it was three boats, it was Shore, Jerome, and me.  So we’re at the put-in, and I’m kinda lookin’ over my shoulder seeing where you tie what to what.

Steiger:  These boats are like Avon Pros?

Whitney:  Yeah, they’re like Avon Pros, but....

Steiger:  The squared-off ones, where they had the little square corners?

Whitney:  Exactly.  I don’t think all three were pros, but I don’t think it was big enough to be a Spirit.  They may have all been Pros.  There wasn’t anything really small... like a Green River or something like that.  But they were two-by-six wooden frames.

Steiger:  How many people per boat?

Whitney:  I guess that first trip there were probably maybe six or eight people, total.  It was kind of a hodgepodge of equipment.  There was enough of everything to make the trip happen, but a couple boats had pinned oars.  I had a rig where if you hit an oar, like if you hit a downstream oar, it would slide through this sleeve and be stuck in that position.  It wasn’t a thole pin where the clip would come out with the oar.  The oar would just move in the sleeve, and I’m trying to remember what the configuration of this was.  But then you’d be rowing overhand, where your hands would cross....

Steiger:  So that oar was going to be in.

Whitney:  It was there.

Steiger:  Yeah, until you beat it back out with a rock or whatever.

Whitney:  You’d have to pull over and then hold onto the blade and pull the oar back into position.  So I wasn’t getting ready, those guys were kind of chompin’ at the bit, so they said, "Well, we’ll take off and then you just catch up, and we’ll just be out here ahead of you a little bit, and you can run down this creek, and then it joins the river."

Steiger:  You’re gettin’ ready to run this Class 4 river?

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  And you’ve never rigged a boat before.

Whitney:  And I’m blown.

Steiger:  And it’s just ropes.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And then those guys are ten, fifteen minutes ahead of me.  So I just hurry along and I get everything tied down and I shove off, and I’m goin’ down the creek and getting into the river.  I’m just delirious with excitement.  I had a little fever goin’ on.  I don’t know what was goin’ on, but I was feelin’ a little bit off.  But still it was like here I am, on a boat, on a river, there’s nobody around, it’s a really wild place, and I’m just delirious with excitement.  And then I hit the first rapid, which is not a long rapid, but there’s a few waves in it, and I’m not straight for every wave, and all of a sudden I take on a bunch of water.  So I pull over and I bail out.  And then it starts to pick up.  So right away--I mean, you’re up in the mountains in this old gold mining district.  So the water’s moving along pretty well, pretty fast.  So this happens a couple more times, and it’s starting to get later in the day.

Steiger:  "Where are those guys?!"

Whitney:  "Where are those guys?!"  (laughter)  And now I’m startin’ to really meet the river.  Now there’s some real rapids.  It’s "read ‘n’ run," but it’s lookin’ pretty big to me.  I got nobody to bail, I’m shippin’ some water.

Steiger:  You were all by yourself.

Whitney:  I’m all by myself.

Steiger:  They took all the people?

Whitney:  Yeah, they took all the people.  That’s true, they took all the people.  Maybe there weren’t eight, maybe there were....

Steiger:  That seems wild that they would just leave you on your own.

Whitney:  And the whole thing is filmed too.  There was a guy, Wayne Zook [phonetic], who I don’t think is alive anymore, but he filmed this.  He won an amateur filmmaker award for it.

Steiger:  The whole trip?

Whitney:  The whole trip, with a map of the country zooming in, and where it is in the country.  I have the tape.

Steiger:  Oh, ho, ho, that’d be interesting.  I’d love to see that.

Whitney:  Yeah.  So Wayne Zook, and there was a gal named, I think, Arlene Harman [phonetic].  I remember that she did a bunch of Sobek trips, and there are some people around who remember her from doin’ a number of different trips.  There was a guy who worked at LAX in the baggage department.  So maybe there were just like maybe four or five people on the trip.  So anyway, it’s getting late, and I just decide I don’t know what’s downstream, and now there are rapids around corners, so you can’t really see what’s going on.  And I’m thinking, "I just want to run down and find these guys."  But it started gettin’ late enough in the day where it’s sort of dark, and I’m thinkin’, "Well, screw it, I’m just gonna bivouac over here.  I’m just gonna pull in, and I’ll figure this out in the morning."

Steiger:  Catch up to ’em.

Whitney:  Yeah.  Because I know that they’re supposed to be at this little village not too far downstream.  It’s just the river’s kinda havin’ its way with me, and I’m really not sure what’s around the corner.  Now it’s a little bit more exciting than I thought it was going to be.

Steiger:  Delirious with excitement is like, "Oh shit, I’m in the middle of this fucking jungle!"

Whitney:  Yeah.  So now I’m a little bit more back to earth.  And then... it’s almost a comedy now when I think about it.  I got the boat tied up, and I had a little bite of something to eat, and I thought, "I’m just gonna bag it."  I brought my tube tent from <Grand Canyon>.  I had my trusty tube tent with me.  So I’m all set.  So I just go up and I find a flat spot up in the rocks.  I didn’t want to be too far away from the boat.  It’s a little buggy, and I’m kind of lookin’ around, thinkin’, "I’m too tired, and I’m not feelin’ that good, so I’m just gonna lie down."  So I just kind of went to bed.

Steiger:  Never mind the tube tent.

Whitney:  Never mind.  So then it starts to rain.  It’s just this classic torrential tropical rain, only lasted about ten minutes.  So then I climb into my tube tent.  So I’m lying awake in my bag in my tube tent, and then I remember these frogs came out.  So now these frogs are jumpin’ around, and I’m lying in my bag in my tube tent in the rain with the frogs jumping on me.

Steiger:  The frogs think the tube tent looks pretty cool too, might as well get in there and see what’s going on.

Whitney:  Yeah.  So I’m thinkin’, "Yeah, this is a great adventure."  (laughter)

Steiger:  "We’re havin’ fun now!"

Whitney:  Yeah, "We’re havin’ fun now.  I don’t remember this part of the brochure!"  So that was my first night in <New Guinea> on a river trip.  And I woke up in the morning and just went down.

Steiger:  That was the Watut?

Whitney:  And that was the Watut, yeah.  So I just jumped in and started rowin’ downstream, and it wasn’t raining anymore, it was a nice day, and I just thought, "Well, I’ll catch up to them now."  Then the gradient started to pick up, and it’s a rocky stream, too--there’s some big boulders in this river.  And all of a sudden I hear voices--and as I think about it now, there are people everywhere, and I don’t know why somebody didn’t find me where I’d pulled over for that night, because there really are people everywhere.  There are just eyes in the forest all the time.  You really are never really alone, no matter where you are.  People don’t make any noise, but if they own the land, they’ve got their eyes on the land, and they know.

Steiger:  And there’s the concept of ownership, and "this is my land, and that’s your land."

Whitney:  Yeah.  I mean, they call it parliament of a thousand tribes.  It’s a very tribal country, and very strong property boundaries.  They talk about how they could recognize your footprint in my mud.  If you’d stepped over the line, it was just like moonshiners who knew if anybody’d come on their property or something.  So all of a sudden there’s this "Ay-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi!"--just kids yelling, and you can’t see anybody, but obviously they see me.  So I’m thinkin’ that I’m gettin’ close.  Then there’s more chatter and yelling and whistling and stuff.

Steiger:  Now, do these people look like this figurine that’s behind you?  These are guys that are wearin’ not much of anything.

Whitney:  In this part of the country it’s not nearly as primitive as the western part of <New Guinea>, or in Irian, across the border into Indonesian <New Guinea>, where they’re wearing grass skirts and penis gourds and basically naked, except....

Steiger:  Face paint and things through their noses.

Whitney:  Right.  And a lot of that, they don’t often just paint themselves like Africans do, for adornment, unless there’s some kind of a ceremony going on or something.  But often pierced ears and noses, just depending on where you were in the country.  So these are people that the missionaries have found, so they’re wearing western clothes, tee shirts and shorts.  The kids are running around with nothing on.  They have a village alongside the river.  There’s food everywhere, there’s plenty to eat.  It’s a country where the food basically falls off the trees right into your mouth.

Steiger:  Like coconut and pineapple.

Whitney:  And banana and mango.  And then pigs are a big meat source for people, and often they just walk around in the village.  The sanitary conditions--I didn’t know what to expect exactly, but sewage is just going in the river.  They’re living with dirt floors.  The famous New Guinea men’s house, fires are going all the time, and you’re just sitting on raised bamboo or slotted wood floors.  I mean, just an incredibly rich culture that way.

	So I hear this yelling, and I come around the corner, and it’s a really nice little plastery rapid where you’ve got to make some moves, it’s a little bit technical.  It’s not just a run-down-the-middle kind of thing.  And then I realize that there’s the village, and then I see the boats, and there are the guys.

Steiger:  They’re like, "Where the hell were you, dude?"

Whitney:  Right.  And they’re kind of--they’re glad to see me too.  It’s like, "Where’s Whitney been?"

Steiger:  They thought you’d be catchin’ ’em that night.

Whitney:  Yeah.  If I’d known a little bit more about where I was, I probably could have made it.

Steiger:  Could have gone down there, yeah.

Whitney:  Yeah, would have just booked on down.  Just the way it was going, starting to get dark, I just decided to bag it for the night and catch ’em in the morning.  So there they were.

Steiger:  Who knows, you could have gone by ’em.

Whitney:  Yeah.  So I pulled in and a lot of "hi, how are ya?" and had somethin’ to eat.  Then we kind of got reorganized with everybody, got somebody in my boat to bail, and off we went down the river.  It just continues.  It’s not nonstop whitewater, but it’s pretty continuous.  I mean, there’s some pretty good-sized stuff every day on that river, except right down at the end where it joins the Markham River and runs into the ocean.  Beautiful place.

Steiger:  Yeah, welcome to the world of commercial river running.  What a unique place to really start to be a boatman for the first time.  I know there’s a pretty good [story] where you went under the log and all that.  Do you want to get into that?

Whitney:  Sure.

Steiger:  Pretty classic.

Whitney:  It is classic, and Wayne got it on the movie.

Steiger:  We’ve got it on the Sobek tape, but if you want to tell it for this--Whitney’s first wreck.

Whitney:  Yeah, right.  I thought I had it made.

Steiger:  There’s this kind of drop and a slot, and you had to avoid an overhanging log, and your oar broke.

Whitney:  Right.  I mean, again, really, it’s a beautiful river and great jungle:  silver crested cockatoos flying all around, and parrots and lorikeets.  It’s just great sounds.  And butterflies galore.  It’s just a great setting.  A lot of times a windy river, so that there were rapids that went on around the corner.  Just some classic Tuolumne-grade, boulder strewn, rocky stream, lots of technical moves--with the added adventure of having things like trees that will just fall into the river, right into the current.  It just takes another flood or something else to eventually wash that stuff out, because the people there don’t use the river, they’re not on the river.

Steiger:  So they don’t keep it open.

Whitney:  It’s the river.  Lower down it’s a source of transportation to get their goods down to the market.  It was a really big thrill for somebody to get a ride.

Steiger:  Through a rapid.

Whitney:  Well, just downriver--put on a life jacket and get in a boat with all this colorful gear and these wild, crazy Americans doin’ dangerous-looking stuff.  And it would be a big deal for a head man from a village to get a ride down around the corner, and then walk back or something like that.

	So we come to this rapid and I think we stopped to scout it, just because it was a place where we’d scout.  And there were places where you’d have double scouts:  you’d scout the upper part of a rapid, then walk down the river and scout the lower part of the rapid, before you ran the whole thing.  And saw that this tree had fallen off the bank and had crossed the current, but the main part of the current was running under the log, under the tree.  So we’re talkin’ about it, and I haven’t been straight for every rapid, so I’m... kind of a steep learning curve, but I’m doin’ all right.

Steiger:  So far, so good.

Whitney:  So far, so good.  Occasional hit your downstream oar and it would slide up in the sleeve and have to pull over, pull it back into position.

Steiger:  What was the volume?

Whitney:  There was a gauge there where it was measured in feet.  It was up higher, which was interesting, that they had a gauge.  It was pretty good volume for that river.  There were places that when it gets tight, you can only go to the right or the left.

Steiger:  Like a thousand?

Whitney:  No.

Steiger:  More?

Whitney:  Yeah, more.  Probably like 3,000, maybe, something like that.

Steiger:  Runnin’ pretty darned good.

Whitney:  A real force.  So we’re lookin’ at it, and Dave’s a little concerned for me, I think.  It’s like we gotta get around that thing to the right.  I’m thinkin’, "Well, exactly."  But in the rapid it’s also just shallow enough, you know, you have to really watch for your downstream oar.  So he and Jerome go....

Steiger:  And you’ve got pinned oars, which are harder to watch, by far.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  Feathered oars, you can kind of feather ’em and almost just....

Whitney:  You couldn’t feather these oars.  And I’m trying to remember what the rig for them was, but they were basically immoveable.  And if you hit something, if you were lucky, it would slide in the sleeve, you’d be rowing cross-armed until you could get that fixed.

Steiger:  If you could feather ’em, you could almost keep your oar flat on the water and feel like you’re movin’, like you’re gettin’ somethin’ done.  But if it’s a pinned oar, and you want to go somewhere shallow, it’s like, "Oh dear."  Anyway, not to interrupt....      

Whitney:  Well, I’m just trying to remember exactly how that rig was set up.  But the other thing that I had was the fire grate, and I had that tied on the back of the boat where they had the little rubber grommets for the transom, where you could set a transom on the boat, so a perfect place to tie a grate.

Steiger:  Sticking up, right into the little transom dealy-bobber, oh yeah.

Whitney:  So it’s tied to the back, sticking up.  So it’s pretty exciting, but we’d been through some pretty good-sized rapids already, and I’m thinking, "Well, I’ve just got to make this move so I’m in the current."  And I take a stroke, and my oar just disintegrates--my right oar.  I’m doing a downstream ferry to the right.  You have to start out kind of in the current, and then you’re going to make this move to the right of the tree.  So I mean it’s pretty straightforward--it’s just really one move you’ve gotta make.  You’ve just got to row there.  And in the movie, you can see it, that the thing shatters about eighteen inches from my hand.  It’s not even just the blade, but the whole oar just disintegrates, and I’m left....

Steiger:  Because you hit a rock?

Whitney:  Hit a rock.  And trying to take a shallow stroke.  I’m watching where I’m trying to go, not exactly where the oar is, and the oar hits a rock, and it really just shattered.  The whole thing is gone, except for maybe eighteen inches or two feet of wood in my hand.  And I think they were whippies, those whippy oars.  So I’ve got my left oar, and I’m thinkin’, "We’re gonna go under this tree."  So the thing is to straighten up.  And there’s room.  There’s room for a boat to fit under this.  We might hit it, but we’ll duck.  It’ll be perfect.  We’ll just straighten up and ship the oar, go under the tree, pop out the other side, and start rowin’ like hell with my left-hand oar and see what happens.  So just goin’ back there, thinking about how exciting that was, and thinking, "Well, I can do this."  So we straighten up, and we dive under this log, everything’s just going swimmingly.

Steiger:  No problem.

Whitney:  No problem.  And I duck down, and this guy Bob ducks down, and he doesn’t duck down quite enough and he takes and kind of dings his forehead on the tree.  It’s happening pretty fast, but he didn’t get down quite low enough.  He’s in the front.  And then the grate hangs up on the tree.  Everything’s going to go just fine if we just straighten out.  And so the grate hangs up on the tree, stops the boat, and we just do a tail stand.

Steiger:  And that just sucks the current right....

Whitney:  It just stops the boat, and basically it just hangs up on the grate, and the boat just stands straight up, and then just peels over to the right.

Steiger:  Oh my God.

Whitney:  And so those guys are downstream.  In fact, I think they’re pulled in, or Dave might be pulled in.  So they get back out and we get to shore.  They got the boat, pulled it in, and we ran down the bank and put it back together, and keep on goin’.  Bob gets a butterfly bandage on his eyebrow, or something like that.

Steiger:  That was about the size of it.

Whitney:  Yeah.  So there it was, "Tim’s Log Rapid."  (laughter)  I’ll never forget, too, I get back and....  And there were other big rapids down there.  And a famous place called Between a Rock and a Hard Place, and some narrow stuff where some jagged rocks, and really narrow, and then you come around the corner and there was Big Pella, a rapid that was right around the corner from this place.  You had to pull in right away, and it was just a giant hole in the middle of the river.  And then doing this trip with Yost--when was that,  on the October Sobek reunion trip up on Cat, John Yost was saying that....

Steiger:  Just this last year, 2006.

Whitney:  Yeah.  ... that he and J.J. were over there, and that that rock is gone.  I mean, one of the most infamous rapids on the Watut River, and there’s no rapid there anymore.  This giant rock has gotten moved out of there.  It’s amazing, the kind of volume that the river can have.

	And then we went off to Amanam Island, we did a couple of other things there.  And I get back and I start thinking, "Gee, maybe I’m not cut out for this stuff."  So we get back to <California> and Rich says, "I heard you tipped over, over there.  Maybe you ought to go down and do a couple of Tuolumne trips, just kind of work on some of your skills."  So I stayed in Angel’s Camp, did a couple of Stan trips and a couple Tuolumne trips.  And I just couldn’t help myself the next time he said, "You want to go back next spring?" and I was back out there... thinkin’ that maybe this isn’t the sport for me; but I couldn’t resist and went back there.  That’s when I met Mike Boyle and Rick Redding and Paul Hinshaw.  Bob came back for a trip, and... wound up doing trips with Slade and a whole bunch of people.

Steiger:  So you did a whole season there, [unclear] a bunch of trips.

Whitney:  Yeah.  And they were booking those trips.  Sobek is a pretty popular trip.  And I think a season there was like doing two trips, maybe three, but the whole package included maybe climbing Mt. Wilhelm[ina], which was the highest peak on that side of the island, which was about thirteen [13,000 feet], I think.  I’ll have to look it up. 

Steiger:  A real mountain.

Whitney:  Yeah, it was a real mountain.  And it was pretty interesting to climb into an equatorial alpine environment, where you’re at a high elevation, but you’re at a low latitude, so you wind up with just the wildest-looking fauna.

Steiger:  Harsh conditions, I would think, too--harsh sun.

Whitney:  Yeah.  Fern trees.  I mean, these giants--sort of like a Joshua tree, only it was a fern.  It was really more of a walk than a climb, but you did have to climb at the end.  And then out to an island.  So we could be river running and scuba diving, or trekking on an island and climbing this mountain.  Whatever you could think of, basically.  I mean, every trip was almost like adding other add-ons that you could offer people to do while they’re there:  hiking the Kokota [phonetic] Trail, and famous trail that the Allied forces made great inroads to the interior, to fight the Japanese in the Second World War.

Steiger:  Pretty amazing.  So that’s your first real runnin’-your-own-boat commercial gig.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  Man, that’s quite a difference from a Fort Lee trip in the <Grand Canyon>, huh?

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  So you came back.  In between did you start workin’ in <Grand Canyon>?

Whitney:  So then I think that was ’79, and then came back and did a trip....

Steiger:  Now you’ve got the bug.

Whitney:  Now I’ve got the bug.  There’s just so much opportunity.  The world was your oyster, so to speak.  People were going everywhere.  Sobek was growing, and it just offered this lifestyle to people, to just pack up and be in another country, you know, a couple weeks later, doin’ the same thing in <Asia> or <Africa>.  You know how that went.

Steiger:  Yeah.  And you ended up going--you were in <New Guinea>, and you went to <Africa>.

Whitney:  I went and did three Omo trips, and spent most of my time in <New Guinea>, went back there for several years.  Then got an assignment to travel through <Indonesia> and meet with some people there, trying to put some kind of a program together in <Indonesia>.  That was pretty interesting, because you could fly from <Port Moresby> to <Jayapura>--was called Hollandia--which is where MacArthur went to lick his wounds for a while I think, after being forced out of the <Philippines>.  It’s on the north coast of <New Guinea> there, and so it was just across the border, but being in <New Guinea> was like being in Melanesia--well, it is Melanesia, with the Australian influence in the country--and then crossing the border, and you might as well be in <Indonesia>.  I mean, it was night and day.  There were trips up to the Bilean Valley, it was called, and it was pretty primitive people up there.  There’s still so much wild country out there that people haven’t seen.  I’m sure the Indonesians have made some inroads, and they’ve done some exploring.  But the interior of the Indonesian side of <New Guinea> is still probably some of the wildest country on the face of the planet.  A new species of bird was found there just a couple of years ago.

Steiger:  Is Sobek still even running?  Do they have a local operation?

Whitney:  Yeah, there’s a guy.  Murray Fletcher is a great old friend of Sobek people, and has been their Australian expatriate, has been there for thirty years.  He is just a great connection.  He wound up getting sort of OARS-style equipment, with aluminum frames and really upgraded good Domar [phonetic] boats, and has everything there for a four- or five-boat trip, which we did several years later when things kind of quieted down for Sobek trips in <New Guinea>.  Murray was there, and so several of us have put groups together and gone over there.  He’s come on the trips, or just rented us the gear, but knows that it’s in good hands.  So he’s got a little fleet that has been really fun and allowed people to go back and run the river.  Even in just the past few years, I know that Yost and Keller and other people have been over there.

Steiger:  So back to <Grand Canyon>.  Was <New Guinea> in the summer, or in the winter?

Whitney:  It was in the spring.  It could be different times of the year, but typically it seemed like April and May.

Steiger:  So in ’79 you started doin’ <New Guinea>, but then right the next year you started working in <Grand Canyon>.

Whitney:  After <New Guinea>, I came back and did a <Grand Canyon> trip, did a trip with Bob.  That was like only my third trip.  So there was ’73, and then one other year.  Maybe it was my fourth trip.  But then that’s where he said, "You should start drivin’ this boat, need to start learnin’ how to run this river."

Steiger:  So he just made you start driving?

Whitney:  So I just started driving.  And that was completely different.  I mean, I was really comfortable with outboards, I’d grown up with outboards, but....

Steiger:  It ain’t like a rowboat.

Whitney:  No.  And it’s long.  It’s a big ol’ boat.  It’s like two boats.  There’s all those people up front, and then it’s you and everything else in the back.  So I was moderately successful, but I do remember in the old <Crystal>, for instance, where there’s the big table rock at the top of the rock garden, before that got washed out, and we were runnin’ right.  I mean, it was always pretty much the right run.

Steiger:  I don’t remember.  I remember there was a flat rock--the old <Crystal>, I remember that there was this kind of flat, slanty rock that was just opposite the old hole that stuck out.

Whitney:  Yeah, that’s what I’m talking about.

Steiger:  Not really in the rock garden, but usually you were goin’ between that and the old hole, but sometimes in higher water there was a dory sneak where they actually went right of that, which I never had to do, but I heard Kenton talkin’ about it.  Maybe I rowed over there a time or two.  But usually you were out there.  And if you weren’t inside....  But [when] that rock was showin’, then you had to go out right next to the hole and do whatever you were gonna do.

Whitney:  Right.

Steiger:  Usually go down the highway.

Whitney:  Well, I just remember that it was really gnarly on the right.  But that’s where we had to go.  It was before the new wave was in there, but still you had to make your way to the right.  And the right I learned, anyway, was where you went down the right side of the rock garden.

Steiger:  Yeah.

Whitney:  And you’d be turned around, so the turn-around runs were big.

Steiger:  Then let yourself drift over backwards and then go back out.

Whitney:  Turnarounds, that was the run that a lot of people were doin’.  I mean, there were people who were runnin’ straight, turnin’ around in Hance and <Horn Creek>.

Steiger:  I remember doin’ that all the time.  On those ARR boats, it was the run of choice, and it was pretty easy once you got the hang of it.  But I remember that it was just....  I remember it got a lot harder once we got jackasses and everything.  You guys had jackasses.

Whitney:  There were jackasses on those Fort Lee rigs.

Steiger:  And on the ARR boats, too, when you started workin’ there, huh?  I felt like it was a lot easier when it was just a transom, because you could get the motor up so fast.

Whitney:  Exactly.

Steiger:  Now it’s pretty funny.

Whitney:  And running a couple of Hatch trips, I really liked the transom.  I learned on a jackass, and learned to turn it around and everything, so....

Steiger:  [unclear]

Whitney:  I remember that, probably just had to take the stick from time to time and go, "Okay, I’ve had enough.  Let’s move on."  And I remember I’ll never forget....  It wasn’t <Crystal>, but it was somewhere down in the gorge.  I was trying, trying, trying, and a lot of stuff was workin’ out, and other places it wasn’t workin’ out.  I remember Brian Dierker was kayaking.  I just remember seeing him there, because like the next year I pulled into <Matkat>, and he helped me tie up there, and we kind of introduced ourselves, and I remembered that he’d come up, and Bob was talking to Brian, saying, "He’s just learnin’."  [unclear] gettin’ the boat out of trouble, gettin’ the boat back out where it was supposed to be.

Steiger:  Was that pretty low water?

Whitney:  I don’t really remember.  I think....  Well, it was really fluctuating.  It was high fluctuating flow.

Steiger:  So it was everything.

Whitney:  It was everything.  When did they fill <Lake Powell>?  Was it ’80 or ’82 or something?

Steiger:  In ’80 there was a spurt.  But before that, in the late ’70s, it was a lot of everything.  I remember ’77, ’78, ’79 [unclear] low water.

Whitney:  The first experience I had was really high fluctuations.  We were camped at 60 Mile, on the right, right to the right of the rapid and the eddy there.  It was a pretty nice camp then.

Steiger:  That is a pretty nice little spot.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Hardly anybody ever goes there.

Whitney:  Oh, I know.  It’s a great little rain camp, too.  There’s a great little overhang.  There was a lot more sand in there then, too, and a lot more of a beach to play with.

Steiger:  You just run the rapid and pull in halfway.

Whitney:  Halfway, yeah.  Just basically miss the rock at the top and drive into the eddy, and you camped.  It was great for a one-boat trip--only had like twelve people on a trip.  So everything comes loose kind of in the middle when the water comes up.  So I’m sleepin’ on a cot box, I guess.  Bob says, "Tim, we gotta pull the boat in."  So I just jump out of my sleeping bag, just run off the front of the boat, expecting to land on the beach, and I go over my head in water.

Steiger:  And it was cold!

Whitney:  [unclear]  Twenty-nine, thirty years old.  You wake up underwater, basically.  I don’t know what he’s talking about, "fluctuating water, and we gotta watch this, you gotta watch that."  It’s just like tell me where to be and I’ll go do that, just throwin’ myself at everything.  So that was my first experience with rising and falling water.

Steiger:  Pretty good big brother.  So he just let you drive almost the whole way, as much as you could stand?

Whitney:  Yeah, as much as I could.  And then so I talked to Tony at the end, after that trip, and that was the last trip of the season, I guess, and asked him if I could have a job, come back next year.  And he said, "Sure."  Then I’m trying to remember if....  I have to cut this out.  I should have looked at the dates exactly, because then I think I went off and did an Omo trip, my first Omo trip, that fall, with Conrad and Stanley and Carlo and....  I have to think of who else.  But then the next year I came back in ’80, and I did two more training trips with Fox, Blake Hopkins.  So now I had like five trips.  And then it was like, "Okay, well, we need you to run a boat."

Steiger:  "Good to go," yeah.

Whitney:  So I can’t remember, was five enough then?  Did we have to have six?

Steiger:  I think it was six.  Yeah, I guess it was six.  No sir, it was three.

Whitney:  Oh, was it three?

Steiger:  It was just three.

Whitney:  I didn’t think I had enough, but they counted <New Guinea> as some experience or something.

Steiger:  Maybe that was it.

Whitney:  You needed more than that to be a trip leader, supposedly.

Steiger:  I thought originally it was three trips to run a boat, and six trips to lead.

Whitney:  Maybe it was.

Steiger:  And then somewhere along the way, it seems like it got to be six trips to run a boat.  And then when we started, then GCRG, there were some of us cynical guys that thought, "You know what we need to do is up these requirements so they can’t fire us so easy."

Whitney:  Is that where that came from?

Steiger:  Yeah.  (laughs)  That was my theory.  Honestly, I mean, nobody wanted Grand Canyon River Guides to be a union or anything like that, but I remember sitting around, that was the issue of requirements, and it was like, "You know, if we made this a little harder to do, maybe it’d make us worth something a little bit more."  Kind of there was that thought.

Whitney:  Off the record, too, was the "Where’s Saddle?" flip at President Harding.  Remember that?  Where’s Saddle and....

Steiger:  Was that....

Whitney:  No, [unclear].  We won’t go there.  But I was just talkin’ to somebody about that down in the canyon [unclear].

Steiger:  That was the company that shall remain nameless, and there was a guide of that company....  Was it a one-boater?

Whitney:  It was a one-boater.

Steiger:  And they were lookin’ for <Saddle Canyon> and just hit the rock at President Harding and tipped over.  And you were down there for that?

Whitney:  I wasn’t down there for that, but everybody came to their aid, of course, and put the whole trip back together and off they went.

Steiger:  So they didn’t even have to evacuate.

Whitney:  But I think that’s where some of that philosophy came from, that there needed to be more trips.

Steiger:  Oh, maybe so.

Whitney:  Because I do remember being at the outfitters [unclear] at the South Rim.

Steiger:  Maybe then it went from three to six.

Whitney:  From six to ten, too.

Steiger:  To lead.

Whitney:  Yeah, to lead, because then you had to run four more as a guide before you could lead a trip.

Steiger:  That was something GCRG....  Well, I remember....  That was late eighties.

Whitney:  I don’t think it came from GCRG--I think it came from somebody in the park.

Steiger:  I remember talkin’ about it and goin’, "That’s good, that’s fine, let’s make it twenty!"  (laughter)

Whitney:  I remember Frank Stratton at the outfitters’ meeting, though....

Steiger:  Not wantin’ it.

Whitney:  Yeah, being, "Do you guys realize...."  I think everybody realized that comin’ to the CORs, written in there.  A lot of people weren’t really aware of it.

Steiger:  Okay, we will have to cut some of that out.

Whitney:  But that was pretty hilarious, too, running with Fox, which was great.  I hadn’t run everything until running with him.

Steiger:  What was funny about running with him?

Whitney:  Well, he’s just such a great guy to run with--just smart, and a great sense of humor.  He really knew how to run the river.

Steiger:  Did he run for GCE somethin’?

Whitney:  He does now, still, I think, once in a while.  But I think he’d run for a bunch of people.  He probably ran for GCE and for CRATE [phonetic], and I’m not sure who-all.

Steiger:  I’ve never done a trip with him, but I’ve heard the name a whole bunch.

Whitney:  And I think he was livin’ in <Kanab>.  He came over for several trips.  I’m not sure if it was a whole season, but anyway, he was great to run with, just because running  with Bob and Dick, that was real precision:  the idea of sort of running everything as well as you can.

Steiger:  Was Bob as precise as Dick?

Whitney:  Well, he got that sense of it.

Steiger:  Those guys ran together a lot.

Whitney:  Bob trained with Dick, and so he got the Dick Clark school of river running training.

Steiger:  That’s a pretty good education right there.  There’s a lot of good boatmen out here runnin’ around that learned from him.

Whitney:  He was the same way in his skydiving, analyzing everything to the nth degree, and then tried to execute as precisely as possible--I mean, really thought of that stuff, and passed it on to Bob, and he kind of passed that on to me.  Fox was just naturally good.  He wasn’t quite as worried about that stuff.

Steiger:  A little more loosey-goosey.

Whitney:  Yeah, exactly.  It was funny, made me laugh, he’d be someplace and he’d be showin’ me... he’s runnin’ <Crystal>, and he wouldn’t be where he wanted to be, and he’d just go, "Uh-oh!"  I mean, he’d just sort of be talking to himself like he was following this running commentary.  "Okay, maybe now I’ll go over here and I’ll do this.  Okay, now it’s gonna be okay."

Steiger:  And people were all [screaming].

Whitney:  No, they couldn’t hear him, but I could hear him.  And he’s just sort of talking himself out of a little bit of a pickle maybe, and had a fine run, but it was just kind of just so much more relaxed, and knew what he wanted to do, but was not uptight about it at all.  Just [unclear], "Well, I guess I need to get myself out of this spot over here.  And I need to get over there."  It was great because it was that influence of being comfortable and more relaxed when you’re not getting the run that you want to get.  So there was an example, somebody was just taking it as it comes, and pretty relaxed.  His heart was pounding, but he was kind of taking it all in stride, just working out of it.  It was just that sort of more laid back approach, which was a great influence.

Steiger:  The old <Crystal>, man that was a complex rapid.  That was tough.  (aside about recording equipment)

Whitney:  So where were we?

Steiger:  You were about to run your first trip with your own boat, trip number five--or you had five trips.  So how’d that go, with the big boat?

Whitney:  Well, we met the people in <Page> then, so where was it?  Not the Pageboy--I’m not sure if there was a Holiday Inn yet.  <Lake Powell> Hotel or something.  I was feeling like I didn’t want anybody to know this was my first boat.  I mean, I’m pretty amped up.

Steiger:  It’s a one-boater, too.

Whitney:  It’s a one-boater.  Typically we’d all leave separately, and we’d run the gorge together maybe, typically on the same day, unless somebody got out ahead.

Steiger:  [unclear] camp together [unclear].

Whitney:  Well we never camped together or anything.

Steiger:  Basically you were on your own.

Whitney:  On my own.

Steiger:  Did you get a good swamper to go with you?

Whitney:  I’m trying to think if it was Roger Peace [phonetic], who I think was on my first trip.  He had come down on a commercial trip, and then I think he came and he swamped a trip for Bob, and Bob had just said, "Hey, if you need to find somebody, call this guy, he’s really good."  I don’t remember him being at the orientation.  So here were three boats of people--thirty-six people or something.  And that year I think it was me and Paul Hinshaw and Walt Gregg, and once in a while Jim Norton.  I’m trying to remember, I’ll have to figure out which season, if it was the next season.  But Jim Norton came and ran a season, and that was just fantastic, just great stories, one of the most colorful people I’ve ever run into in <Grand Canyon>.  So anyway, we’re at the orientation and I’m tapping my toes and twiddling my thumbs, "Oh, yeah, we’re gonna go down there and hike the Redwall, some good places...."  (laughs)  Like I really know my way around down there.  Like most people, not really sure it’s your time, but everybody says, "Oh, yeah, you’re ready.  Just go down there and run that boat down there."

	I was doin’ okay, havin’ pretty good runs for the most part, as far as I remember.  I mean, I wasn’t knockin’ the motor off the boat, or gettin’ hung up anywhere.  Didn’t really know where I was in the canyon all the time.  I mean, I had an old Belknap guide, and I’d been scribblin’ some notes on there, and where we’d camped on other trips.  But if we didn’t camp where I knew that we camped last time, I wasn’t sure, necessarily, where the next camp was, what was around the corner.  And then got down below Saddle, on the way to 50 Mile.  There’s that little rock island, and you can either go left in the current around it, or you can go straight, and it’s shallower.

Steiger:  There’s kind of a shoal all the way across.

Whitney:  Yeah, all the way across.

Steiger:  Wider on the right.

Whitney:  Right, wider on the right, but really shallow.  And I don’t remember learning about going left there with anybody.

Steiger:  I hardly ever do.  There’s a sneak through there.

Whitney:  That’s deeper water there.  I mean definitely there’s deeper water on the left.  You go out of your way, back upstream, and around the little island, and that’s where the deep water is.  I don’t remember anybody showin’ me to go left.  So it’s later in the day, and it’s lower water, and I’m lookin’ down, goin’, "Wow, it’s really shallow over here.  It’s getting shallower."  The next thing I know, I’m hearing the boat hitting some cobble.  And I’m thinkin’, "Oh, perfect, run aground on my first trip."  So we hung up there for just a minute.  It just kind of slowed us down--we didn’t really hang up, it just kind of slowed us down.  And I came through there thinkin’, "Thank God I made it over this thing."  That’s all I needed was not knowing what the next move was, [unclear] water dropped.

Steiger:  On Day 2 or whatever it was.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Which it would have been Day 2, too.

Whitney:  Yeah.  So that was pretty much the most eventful thing that happened on the trip that I can remember anyway.

Steiger:  That’s a pretty mild event.

	So you worked for Fort Lee for a couple of years?

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Because you started workin’ for Fred sometime in [unclear].

Whitney:  In ’84.

Steiger:  So you worked for Tony for ’79 through ’83.

Whitney:  Right.  And then he sold in the winter of ’82, and then that’s when Del Webb bought Fort Lee Company and Sanderson.  So ’83 was the first year there with those guys.  And we were in that warehouse, in the same warehouse.

Steiger:  But still using the Fort Lee equipment and all that?

Whitney:  It was a combination.  All those guys, Jerry and Tony and Bill Diamond, they all had modifications on that single frame, that uni-frame that was in the back.

Steiger:  Big tube in the middle.

Whitney:  With the center tube in the front to fill in the doughnut.  And then black river bags strapped to that, to the outside.  And it was just people and rubber up front, and everything in the frame in the back.  It was great.  It was a lot of fun.  Thinking about everybody’s comin’ out of <Salt Lake> and <Kanab> and <Fredonia> and <Flagstaff>, it was just--it was a great time.  I didn’t really appreciate everything that you guys had done with ARR, with double frames, until I started workin’ for Fred.  But it was great workin’ with Walt Gregg and Jim Norton.  And then there was the BTS--that’s where I met you, at the BTS.  That was ’82, I think.

Steiger:  Yeah.

Whitney:  That was a great trip.  That’s what sort of--you really make friends with people who you’re going to see for the rest of the summer.

Steiger:  That was a really good trip.  Gotta hand it to ol’ Crumbo.

Whitney:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Was that like the first one of those?

Whitney:  And Curt Sauer, he was the head of the river unit.  They hadn’t done one for a long time, I don’t think.  I don’t think there had been one....  Workman was on the trip.  That’s a trip that ought to be--we ought to figure out everybody who was on that trip and what we did and where we went, because we did that great [unclear].

Steiger:  I only was on the bottom half of it.

Whitney:  Right.  Dick ran--was it an ARR boat?

Steiger:  Yeah.

Whitney:  And then you came in at Phantom.

Steiger:  Yeah, I don’t know what was up with that, why there had to be that exchange.  I just remember Fred callin’ me and sayin’, "You gotta go on this trip."  And I was like, "Park Service trip?  Nah."  I go, "Nah, I’m not goin’ unless you pay me."  (laughs)  He was like, "No, I can’t.  This is for your own good, to train you."  I’m like, "No, you’re gonna have to pay me somethin’."  "Okay, ten bucks a day."  "All right then.  I’m not doin’ it for no money."  I got there and it was great.

Whitney:  That really was a great trip with all....  Bob Euler was on that trip.

Steiger:  Steve Carothers.

Whitney:  Steve Carothers.

Steiger:  [unclear]

Whitney:  Don Elston, I think.

Steiger:  Crumbo, Karl Tomoff [phonetic], Bill Breed.

Whitney:  Bill Breed.  And Martha and Suzanne and Pete Weiss.  I think Karen Byerly was on that trip too.  Maybe Ruthie was on that trip.

Steiger:  Yeah, I’ll betcha she was.  Crumbo was on that.

Whitney:  And Workman.  There’s a great run that we had in <Hermit>.  No, where was it?  It was in Sock!  I think it was in Sock.  And I think Martha was paddle captain, and I can’t remember who else was there, but Workman was in there, and I was in there.

Steiger:  In the paddle boat.

Whitney:  In the paddle boat.  We wound up gettin’ sideways and did a tube stand, upriver.  I just remember being near the back of the boat, and I just found myself standing straight up on the tube, with the downstream tube behind my head.  And it just hung there for a second, and everybody’s in the water, and I realize I’m just standin’ there, and I’m probably goin’ in, but I’m not gonna jump out until the boat starts to come down on top of me.  And I just kind of stayed there for a second and pushed my head against the tube, and the boat came back down right side up.

Steiger:  And so you hauled everybody back in?

Whitney:  Yeah, I hauled everybody in.  Then we got down and we camped at Cremation.  I remember Peter Weiss sayin’, "So you stayed in that boat?"

But we did that great hike from Stone Creek to Galloway.  We went up and over and around.  Dennis Silva and Gary...

Steiger:  Gary Bolton, yeah.  There was another motorboat, too, wasn’t there?  ’Cause there were a couple motorboats.  Was it a Western boat?  There was at least one other motorboat, wasn’t there?  Was that ARR boat the only one?

Whitney:  I think it was the only one.

Steiger:  Really?

Whitney:  I think so.

Steiger:  [unclear]

Whitney:  I don’t remember a Western boat.

Steiger:  I’ve been on a couple of ’em, so maybe it was....  Yeah, you would remember that.  Hatch, Crate?  I could swear there was another motorboat, but I don’t remember.

Whitney:  I think that was the only one, because I think when Dick left and you hiked in, and you took over the boat, it seems like that was the only boat that was there--I think.  But that’d be a good....

Steiger:  That’s kind of embarrassing, to not even be able to remember that.  But it was sure a fun trip.  So you were workin’ for--that was Del Webb then you guys were workin’ for?

Whitney:  That was Del Webb.

Steiger:  The Fort Lee had melded.

