FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Andrew L. Wolf

Interview number NAU.OH.28.43

 

Interview with Andrew L. Wolf who is a special representative of Businessman's Insurance Company and has been in <Flagstaff> since 1932. The interview is being conducted by Susan Rogers on January 8, 1976 at the Hotel Monte Vista Room 410 that is Mr. Wolf's office. Transcribed by Susan D. Olberding.

 

Subjects Covered on Taped Interview

 

Tape 1, Side 1

Born in <Maryland>, 1909

Early childhood

Came to <Flagstaff> in 1932

Went to school at Teacher's College

Atmosphere

Social events

Played football

Spirit at games, Dr. Hill and Grady Gammage

Faculty members discussed and described

Rules and regulations on campus

Dean Tinsley

Places where students got together

Milking cows

Maintenance crew

Different courses offered

Different courses on campus

Tape 1, Side 2

Teacher's College, con't

Homework and assignments

Library

Clubs

Athletic organizations

Town Jacks

Chain Gang

Getting job in insurance business

How he met his wife

Children

Pow Wow activities

Howard Pyle mentioned

Early skiing in <Flagstaff>

Making skits

Development of Snow Bowl

Tape 2, Side 1

Snow Bowl Development, con't

Depression

World War II

Navajo Army Depot

Bootlegging during prohibition

Crimes during 1930s

Fires at the mills

Snowfalls, 1935, 1949, 1972

Tourism

Different tourist courts mentioned

Sale of Indian Arts and Crafts

Different minority groups at the college

Different performers coming into area

Andy Devine, Sliphers, Lampton, Coltons mentioned

Tape 2, Side 2

Outlaw characters

Joe Kellum

Rimmy Jim Giddlings

<Oak Creek>

Ranger at <Grand Canyon>

Various adventures

 

Begin Tape 1, Side 1



SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Andrew L. Wolf who is a special representative of Businessman's Insurance Company and has been in <Flagstaff> since 1932. The interview is being conducted on January 8, 1976 at the Hotel Monte Vista Room 410 that is Mr. Wolf's office. The conductor is Susan L. Rogers representing the Flagstaff City/CoconinoCounty Public Library. Mr. Wolf, when and where were you born?



ANDREW L. WOLF: I was born September 16, 1909, three miles north of <Cumberland Maryland>.



SUSAN ROGERS: You want to tell me a little bit about your childhood and then how you ended up in <Flagstaff>?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, my home was on a fieldside farm in western <Maryland> and we operated the farm, raised crops, operated a very small retail dairy, and so I grew up on the farm, working as I grew older, managing and raising the crops and all the things that go with it and operating the dairy. I continued doing that until December, 1931 when I moved, together with my brother, from the farm in <Maryland> to a ranch at <Kingman Arizona>. We leased a dairy and we operated that dairy until September 1932. In June of 1932 they had all the bank failures including the one that had our money and so this put us in a pretty bad financial condition, so my brother left and went back to <Maryland> and I stayed on and operated that dairy ranch until September, 1932 when someone came along and wanted to buy it. I sold it to him and then subsequently, by way of conversation with a girl that I was dating who had graduated from Arizona State Teachers College here in <Flagstaff>; at her suggestion I contacted the college about coming here to go to school, and subsequently did so. So I came here in late September 1932 and entered school as a special student because I didn't have a high school diploma. In fact, I only had one year of high school that I had completed in <Cumberland>.



SUSAN ROGERS: Then let's go right into talking about the college. What was it like to go to school at NAU at that time? Did you live in the dorm?



ANDREW L. WOLF: I lived in Room 9 at Bury Hall for most of the time. Part of the time we lived in what were the married couple cabins. I was not married but there were cabins in which the married couples lived. What they called "cottage city". That was where, well...just east of the women's gym. It was a fantastic experience because it was a small enrollment, 525 students or some such. You knew them all within the first week of being there and it was kind of like a big club. Nobody had money, but everybody had fun. So it was a joyous experience and it was a small school, we knew the professors, and whatever was going on, everybody was in on. Whether it was a play or a football game or a basketball game--everybody was in the swing of it.



SUSAN ROGERS: What were some of the big social activities that you remember?



ANDREW L. WOLF: At college?



SUSAN ROGERS: Yea.



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, generally in the fall of the year there would be first of all there would be a student mixer where all students gathered. At that time the only gymnasium they had was the women's gym. Everybody gathered in that gym and got acquainted and had a dance. There were a number of dances held through the year, most of them were held in Ashurst Hall which at that time was a big auditorium without classrooms. A number of the dances, I'd have to think a little bit, there would be the Sweethearts Ball and that generally took place around Valentine's Day--everything that they did was just a world of fun--student band...so, there were a number of dances, a number of parties--I suppose that would give you some idea of what we did then.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK, you were on the football team, right?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yes, I played football.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about what the spirit was like for football games and what teams you played?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, I would not have gone to school...let's put it this way. I first made myself known to Doctor, who was then Dean, Bellwood. Now he's deceased, became president of the College, you know. I talked with him and told him that I'd like to go to college but I would only go on condition that I would be allowed to play football. Now, you see, I had not been in high school, and I had not played high school football and I knew nothing about football but I wanted to play. And so they agreed that they would let me play football and...but it was not provided for in any way. There were no scholarships, there were no...I paid my own way. And so I did play football and we had a freshman program and I guess it was the second or the third game before I was allowed to play at all. And from there on, I guess, I never failed to start a football game when I was playing and I went on to the...well, I was two years in the freshman program because I had to get through my high school eligibility. When I came on the varsity, I think in the second year I made all-conference mention, and in my senior year I was captain of the team. As to the spirit, well, one of the biggest games we played, I guess, was in the fall of 1932 when the Lumberjacks played the University of Arizona at Montgomery Stadium in <Phoenix>. At that game, they beat the Wildcats by a score of 7-6 and you ask what kind of spirit? Well, Dr. Grady Gammage was at the game, and Dr. Hill was head of the English Department and I think she got so excited during the game that she jammed Dr. Gammage's hat down over his head! Everybody went to the game, the students turned out for the game. On one occasion, when I was a sophomore, I got a job at <Grand Canyon> and worked up there in the summer time as a Ranger and became acquainted with all the people at <Grand Canyon> and that fall, when we were having a home game we got a wire signed by about forty people from <Grand Canyon> who wanted a special section reserved for them to come down and watch the game, because I was playing and they wanted to come down and see the game. So the spirit was good, both in the school and in the community, which included places like <Grand Canyon>.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me about some of the different faculty members that you remember, that maybe you had?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, Dr. Hill, of course, was one of the queen bees. She was just a tremendous person and on one occasion I know that I was kind of being slipshod in one of her classes and I think I'd taken a test and had gotten a 4--they reversed the grading--a 4 was almost failing and I went to her and said I'd like to drop this course 'cuz I'm not doing good enough with it. And she made me sit down and said, "Now, Mr. Wolf, this is not the way to go about getting an education and you're too capable to drop a course on the basis of what you're telling me, and so we're just not going to let you do this. And we'll give you special examinations to make up the work and you apply yourself and you'll get through this course." Which, of course, I did. This is the kind of person she was. Dr. Osborn was head of the Athletic Department and also head of the Industrial Arts Department and just a fabulous person. He died a few years ago. H.O. Byrd(?) was in charge of the Industrial Arts department--he's the fellow who made a bunch of these grandfather clocks one of which is in the library over at the University. Dr. Peterson who was one of the early legislators of the state of <Arizona> taught Civics and his son was killed in the early days of the War in England and <Germany>--went down in a fighter over the English Channel. Just a magnificent person. Then, of course, we had...Dr. Gammage was then president of the School and following his resignation, he moved to <Tempe> and took over the <Tempe> presidency. And they hired Dr. T.J. Tormey who was a very fine man and he carried the ball until, I guess, the early days of World War II. Dr. Bellwood, I mentioned him already, was just a fabulous man and a good friend and a really fine person. He also became president of the School, subsequently. We knew Coach Rudy Lovick(?), who was here in 1932 and 1933, and then he went to <Tempe> and became the head coach at <Tempe>. Following him was Coach Mark MacIntosh(?) who was a very good coach, he stayed three or four years, no he didn't, he only stayed a couple of years, and then Garrett Arbolbeedy(?) and he's the one under whom I finished up. Garret Arbolbeedy(?) was an All-American end, graduated from the University of Southern California. Dean Minnie Lintz was the matron of Morton Hall and...we called her Lady "B", Mrs. Beckwith was the matron of Campbell Hall. Great women, just ran those places like a mother hen. Then, of course, you couldn't ever go by talking about great people you knew up here without mentioning Mother Hanley who ran the dining hall. Contrast then as now, you dare not go in her dining hall for any meal except breakfast without--the man had to wear a tie. Sundays for dinner you had to dress. You were assigned a particular table; there was a head of the table, you had your place at the table, that's where you sat each time, and the head of the table saw to it that all the food was passed around the table and just as formal as can be. The napkin at the plate, you put it back in the holder when you finished the meal and you rose from the meal and departed the dining hall on a signal. So there was lots of formality and moderate discipline that has gone by the wayside now, but it was a nice way to be a student.



SUSAN ROGERS: What about some of the rules or regulations in the dorms?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, the girls generally had to...see, I guess, there were different levels of regulations. The freshman girls had to be in, I think, by 9:30 or 10 o'clock, and the upper-class women could be in the dormitory, I believe it was 11 o'clock. And if you brought a girl to the dormitory after hours, you had to ring the bell, and the matron would come and let you in and it was sure your obligation as the escort to stay there and take whatever eating out you were due and got! Then, of course, there was no such thing as men allowed in the dormitory beyond the formal waiting room. So that was the moral code of the time. Also, I believe when I first came, there was a rule against smoking on campus; there surely was a rule against having liquor on campus. Excuse me a minute...



SUSAN ROGERS: Ok, you were saying about smoking...



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yea, as I remember smoking was taboo on the campus, having whiskey on the campus was taboo--I suppose those were the limitations on that kind of activity.



SUSAN ROGERS: Were there any rules for the guys dorms?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Rules for the men's dorms? No, they were pretty wide open except that you couldn't bring women in to the dormitories and you were supposed to, of course, keep your room cleaned up. There would be 'room inspection' regularly by the head resident. One of the people--you asked about important people on campus--one of them was Dean Tinsley. Bill Tinsley. He was the head of the dormitory in which I lived, Bury Hall. Just a magnificent man. Anne Tinsley is his second wife, she's still living here, he is dead. So there were not too many regulations for the men.



SUSAN ROGERS: What about places where the students hung out? Were there soda fountains or anything like that?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, the big casual, drop in place was what they called College Inn. I believe it is now occupied by the Mormon Church. Right across the street from Campbell Hall--a little small building. It was operated by Bert Cobb(?) and his wife for a long time and he sold it to Jim Massey(?). The Massey family operated it. That was the drop in place for all the students for coffee and bull sessions and date making and the whole works. And then downtown, of course, one of the big places was Miguel's Spanish Inn down on South San Francisco Street and whenever anybody had money and wanted to go out for dinner that's where ninety percent of the time that's where they went, either alone or taking a date or whatever--they'd go there and have Mexican food. And then, periodically, the Miguel's would put on a big dance so everybody'd go to it. See, there were no cafeterias on the campus and no stores of any kind on the campus and so you'd have to go off the campus. The big deal, of course, if you ever got enough money, was to go to a show, the Orpheum Theatre, occasionally there'd be a big party--if you were in town, New Years party here at the Monte Vista Hotel was kind of an accepted procedure.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you ever go to the bars?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, you see, there were no bars, in 1932, this was the Prohibition era. The bars, I guess, opened up in '33, or '34, or '35, somewhere in there. Then a few bars began to develop. Well, the students for the most part just didn't have the money to go to a bar, but there wasn't much...I mean, among those who did get money--they didn't hang around the bars very much. The nearest they'd come, the Museum Club operated as a bar, and a dance hall, and they'd operate and have a dance like on Saturday night and alot of times, the students would have enough money to go there. But that would be about the limit of visiting the bars.



SUSAN ROGERS: I understand there was a barn on campus. Did you milk cows?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Ok, want to tell me a little bit about those activities?



ANDREW L. WOLF: There was a barn, I guess, located at about where now is the Student Health Center. It was a considerable distance from the Dining Hall and there were no buildings between the Dining Hall and the barn, and there was a herd of milk cows, some of which were accumulated by students coming like out of...the White Mountains country who didn't have money to pay tuition or room and board, and their folks would make a deal and bring up a cow, or two cows, as payment for tuition. So these cattle, these cows, had to be milked and they were milked by hand, morning and evening. In fact, the job that I got, see when I started to school, we were on a quarter system and the first quarter ended in December and I had spent all my money and had been to college and so I was ready to leave and I went to Dean Bellwood to tell him goodbye and he said "Why are you leaving?" and I told him I was out of money and I had gotten what I wanted and I played football and I'd been to college and it was great and thank you and he said "Well, why don't you stay and finish up?" Conversation went on and he arranged so that I could stay and get all my high school credits and go to college and live on the campus and get a job. And the job that I got was milking cows. Have to get up at 4 o'clock in the morning and go out and milk 14 head of cows before breakfast and get the milk ready, and I guess we'd deliver it, to the Dining hall. Raw milk and we'd deliver that milk to the Dining hall. Put it on a truck most of the times and haul it up and in the wintertime, with snow on the ground and roads weren't plowed, I think we had a sled that we'd tug it along and bring it up to the Dining hall. Yea, so I milked cows for the remainder of that year and I guess all of the next year and for that, milking 14 head of cows, I got the grand total of room and board. That's how I paid it. Room and board at that time was classified as being worth, I think, it was $21 a month. Milking 14 head of cows every morning for thirty days earned me $21 a month toward room and board.



SUSAN ROGERS: Now were there any other animals or was it just cows?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Just cows. There were no horses--lot of things happened about the cattle. I know in the spring of the year, Bob Cree was one of the guys, one of the big men of the School--he was in charge of campus maintenance. Whatever needed doing on the campus--building a cupboard or tearing down a wall--Bob Crees' crew would do it. And on one occasion, we had a bunch of cattle that we needed to put out to pasture and we hauled them over to south of <Kingman>, down on the Sandy down at Wicki-up. Put them on pasture down there. That was quite an adventure taking those cattle down there in an old Ford truck. So, those were the only animals that we had.



SUSAN ROGERS: What other jobs did you have through college, then? Did you have to work the other two years?



ANDREW L. WOLF: I don't know just how I got off that milking cows business, but that proved to be quite a chore. You know you get up and milk the cows at 4 in the morning, and then you'd eat breakfast, and then you'd go to class, and in the football season this became quite a problem because you'd go on football practice like 3 in the afternoon, have your dinner, then you'd have a date, and then you're supposed to study and then you're supposed to get up at 4 o'clock the next morning and milk those damn cows. It got to be a little laborious! Somewhere along the line, I got a job on Bob Crees' campus maintenance crew and it was quite flexible because he would plan his work according to the hours you had that you were not in class. So I graduated to that and that's the only other job I had. I kept that one through-out the remainder of the time I was in school.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me about some of the difference classes you had. What did you take and how much homework was required? What kind of discipline.



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, one of the things we did right early, was I joined the National Guard. National Guard was the way that we made some money because you'd go to drill, what was it--every week, every Tuesday night they'd to National Guard drill and you got a dollar and a half or two dollars or something for each drill and that gave us enough extra money that when they'd have Registration come along they'd have forty or fifty dollars and that would buy our Registration and most of our books and so on. And we used to say that we'd majored in National Guard and minored in Physical Education and Industrial Arts. But I took...one of my majors was Business and I did minor in Physical Education. I didn't take a real heavy course because I really didn't have any intention of ever being a teacher and I wanted mostly to get alot of variety of courses which did me alot of good, but in one way it hurt me because if I'd concentrated in one particular area I would have come out better later on when I needed to show that I had certain kinds of courses and I didn't have them. But I took courses in biology, geology, archeology, and I guess I studied anthropology. And a number of courses like that I'd take one course. We were on the quarter basis--I'd take one quarter just to have some idea of what it was all about. Of course, you had to fulfill the requirements of the major which were all the Business courses--Business Law, Accounting. Of course, English you took, that was always a big thing. I took Debate and I did pretty good in Debate. I also took part in Theatrics--had a part in a couple of plays. Then when you get into your Education courses, they were all...you had to dig into those, but alot of the courses I took I pretty much had a pretty general knowledge, because you see I was born in 1909 and went to school in 1932, so I was 23 years old and I'd operated a business and I knew about many things in a general way. History, I liked History, Dean Tinsley was the History teacher and I made pretty good grades in that. Fact, I guess I got some kind of an award for scholarship of the athletes earning the Lumberjack "A"--the "A" Club. I, over the four years, I earned some kind of a prize for having the best grade average in my class. But it was a pretty general kind of thing--whatever I thought I'd like to know something about, I'd take it. Excuse me...

End of Tape 1, Side 1, Begin Tape 1, Side 2



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you feel like you had a lot of homework?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, there was a pretty good volume of it. You always had homework to do in connection with English courses--you'd have to put compositions together. There was a lot of report making in some of the History courses, so you'd spend a lot of time...you knew it was there, but I never did feel like it was an onerous task. You had to go through it, you had to get it, in order to know what the class was all about. Sometimes you'd be lucky in that, Dean Tinsley, for example, in History courses...he had a whole bunch of books, any one of which you could read, but you had to be ready to give a report on a particular date. I know that on one...it was an oral report. He'd just go through the class and say "what happened? What book did you read?" "Well, I read this book." "Well, what happened at this time?" And, if you'd read the book, you'd know the answer. And if you hadn't read the book...And I know that he asked; one book that I read about halfway through, and he asked me one question and it was a question the answer was on the last page that I had read in the book and I knew it perfectly! That kind of thing, and reading, understanding it...we had the Library in what is now the Administration building, upstairs, and going back to the great people was the Librarian at that time--Miss Ida Jean Wilson and she was a great big heavy gal, but just a wonderful person.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was the Library kind of a meeting place?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, of course, they maintained that quiet that libraries have to maintain. It was a study place, it wasn't much of a social gathering. You'd go there and dig out a book and go to work and get your reports out of that, sometimes you'd check them out and take them to your room. Yea, there was a lot of studying, a lot of homework, you had to do.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me some of the clubs that were on campus at that time?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, the Chain Gang was the biggest one that I was affiliated with and I guess they still have the Chain Gang as a thirteen(?) club and I was initiated into that, I guess, when I was a sophomore and was president of it and held membership through the four years. Other than that, I was not a real great club man but there were a lot of sororities and a lot of fraternities and I'd be just grasping at names if I tried to give you a recitation of them. These Greek fraternities...



SUSAN ROGERS: There were quite a few at that time?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yea, there was a good smattering of them. Some of them were oriented toward a particular kind of study like, I guess there were several that were Business clubs, some that were...well they pertained to certain areas of study at college and I'm just not wise enough, or didn't participate with them enough to be able to give you much on that, but there were quite a few.



SUSAN ROGERS: Ok, what about athletic organizations that not only developed on the campus but maybe in <Flagstaff>, too.



ANDREW L. WOLF: You mean like support, like the Town Jacks?



SUSAN ROGERS: Right.



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, one of the biggest thrills I ever got was at the first meeting that I attended. At the end of the football season when the Town Jacks had a banquet honoring the football team and it was right here in the Monte Vista Hotel and I just thought that was the greatest thing that ever happened, you know. Coming from those <Maryland> hills, you see, I was a country boy and while there's lots of schools and universities back there I didn't get involved with them, didn't know anything about them, so this was big stuff to me, very heady. So the Town Jacks were very loyal and they would come to the practice fields, every afternoon there would be, oh, 50 to 75 of the Town Jacks sitting in the stands watching the practice go on. You know they didn't just come to the game they'd come... by God, they knew all about you. How good you were doing and what you weren't doing, and so there was a lot of real good, close rapport that way. Then on the campus, there was the "A" Club that's all of the athletes who earned the athletic "A" award, you belonged to that. I suppose that would be the big athletic club.



SUSAN ROGERS: So then what did you do when you graduated?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, I told you that I had worked at <Grand Canyon>. I worked at <Grand Canyon> the summers of 1935, 1936, 1937. I graduated in the spring of 1937. It took me five years to get my three years of high school and four years of college. So I went to the <Grand Canyon> for the summer of 1937 and then in November, I worked there through the end of October, then on November 12, 1937, I went to work with my present job with Businessmen's Insurance Company. I had gotten interested in the insurance business in an odd way. The previous winter, 1936, Christmas vacation. I didn't have enough money to leave town to go anywhere, I didn't have any place to go if I had the money and I made arrangements to stay on the campus during the Christmas holiday season when school was closed and then I came to town and I got a job with the contractor who was building what is now the Federal Building, right up the street, it was then being built to be the Post Office. I was digging a ditch across the street to put a water line in and a fella that I knew named Bill Huey(?) and he was heading for the Post Office which was down here where 'Tres Jolie'(?) beauty shop is and he greeted me. After a bit, he came back up the street and was reading his mail and greeted me again as he was coming back and walked over to me and says, "Hey, Andy, I want to show you something. You know I work for Businessmen's Insurance Company and here's the Company's bulletin they put out each month and it shows that I have been the top salesman for the Company of all the salesmen in the Company for the month of November, I wrote more life insurance than anybody else." And I said, "Well, gee whiz, Bill, that's fine--what's it mean?" And he says, "Well, I made $1500 in commission besides what the Company made. I wrote $80,000 worth of life insurance, I was top salesman for the Company, now I'm going to go home and get my wife and baby daughter and we're going to go out in the woods and gather pine knots for the fireplace." This is 10 o'clock in the morning and right quick, the picture flashed before my mind, boy, here I am in this ditch for 50 cents an hour and I ain't going nowhere. I'm going to be here till noon and then I'm going to come back at 1 o'clock and work till 5 o'clock and here's a guy that made $1500 last month, and just because he wants to do it, he's going to go out and get pine knots and spend the day with his family, and I thought that has to be good. And I said, "Bill, how do I get in the life insurance business?" He said, "You serious about it?" I said "Yeah." He said, "Well, you come up to the apartment tonight and we'll talk about it." And that's the way I started out. So, we had done that last, like in December and January, talked about it, and that summer I went to <Grand Canyon> and during the summer he kept in touch with me and told me to come see him when I got back from the Canyon, and I did. And that's how I started in this business. And if you want to know about my success in the business, it was magnificent. From the 12th of November until the 1st of January, or 31st of December, I made $6.50 commission. That's really a great beginning!



SUSAN ROGERS: How did you meet your wife?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, that was in the summer of 1937 and I met her at the <Grand Canyon>. I was a Park Ranger and, I guess the date was the 8th of August and I was asked that day to drive a car to entertain a special guest, a VIP from Washington, DC. His name was Dr. Fisher(?) and his secretary who were touring the National Parks. And he was to be shown the Rim Drive in a government car with government escort. So I had been in <Flagstaff> the night before and got back to the Canyon at like, 8 o'clock in the morning, and went to work and got this car and went over to the Bright Angel Lodge and there was introduced to Dr. Fisher and his secretary who was Betty Hartz. So I planned to take them on the Rim Drive west to <Hermit's Rest> and then east to visit the Watchtower and, of course, the secretary is a pretty good looking chick and I was trying to figure out to get her in the front seat with me and the doctor in the back seat as the special guest. As we walked to the car and got ready to get in and I opened the back door and Miss Hartz said "Dr. Fisher, you get in the back seat." So he got in the back seat and she got in the front seat. Well, that's the gal that I eventually married, like a year later.



SUSAN ROGERS: How many children do you have?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Four. I have three children and one son.



SUSAN ROGERS: What's that mean?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, that's my son right here (pointing to pictures). And I have three daughters who are up here (pointing to pictures). This is one of them. Here's the family group when David was about 8 or 9. The oldest one is that gal up there, and the one on this side is here and the third one, in fact, she has Scoliosis, and she's home right now. She's 26 years old, had back surgery, and is recuperating and will be doing so for about a year with a body cast. So this is my family, two of my grandchildren, I have a third grandchild, a girl. The grandchildren are the children of this one here (pointing to a picture), number two daughter.



SUSAN ROGERS: Ok, you want to tell me their names so we get that on tape?



ANDREW L. WOLF: The names. Well, the first one, when we knew she was coming...going back just a little bit...the chief Ranger at <Grand Canyon> is the man who introduced me to Dr. Fisher and Betty Hartz, his secretary. The chief Ranger's name was Perry Brown and I always liked the name Perry and so when we knew our first child was coming, we decided we would name the child either Perry Alice or, if it was a boy, Perry Andrew. So it turned out to be a girl so her name was Perry Alice. Alice, I thought if she grew up and didn't like the male name of Perry, she could change it to Alice which I thought was a beautiful name, also. Of course, she would fight you to a standstill about her name and she is still "Perry." Number two is Andrea Louise and she refers to herself always as "Andy Junior." Number three is Stephanie and she is known as "Tappy" and number four is known as David Louis, Louis being my middle name. When he was born, my number two daughter, Andrea, came to me and said "Daddy, I want you to remember that I'm Andy Junior." Didn't want me to louse things up by naming my son Andy Junior. So that's the gang--Perry, Andrea, Tappy, and David.



SUSAN ROGERS: Ok, now how did you get involved with the Pow Wow?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, it was, of course, the thing to do. I wasn't here in the summers of 1935, 36, 37--was out working somewhere, but I knew about the Pow Wow. 1938, I guess, when they put the Pow Wow on in 1938...the guys who had run the Pow Wow committee at that time which included Tommy Knoles, asked me if I wanted to work. I would and did and I believe they paid me $5 a day and I worked as a timer in the rodeo booth. And I guess I worked there in 1939, also doing the same thing. After the Show in 1939, the Pow Wow committee invited me to a lunch and asked me if I would like to be on the Pow Wow committee. I felt that was quite an honor and privilege and I agreed to, and so they put on the committee. Being on the committee, you kept on doing the same things you'd been doing before, but you no longer got paid. So, that was the difference. That's how I got started with the Pow Wow. I got started doing the announcing for the Pow Wow by just being there. They had a very excellent announcer for the night show, Howard Pyle, former governor of the state and national director for the safety council now living in <Tempe>, retired, and Howard was an announcer with radio KTAR. He had a magnificent command of the language and voice. So he was doing all of the night shows descriptions. The day shows were kind of whoever did it and they just didn't have anybody doing worth a damn. Not everybody can talk into a microphone, so one day I started doing some announcing 'cuz I was working in the booth at the time. It was coming out good and they said "you become the announcer." Well I did the announcing of the rodeos from there on and I can't tell you the year this happened, like maybe '42 or '43, somewhere in there. Then the night shows, Howard Pyle continued to do them until he was appointed by President Eisenhower to Eisenhower's staff and he had to leave here. He was here the second night of the Pow Wow until about 9 o'clock when he had to leave and go catch an airplane to leave, and so they turned the description of the night show over to me in the middle of the second nights' show. I started doing the night show and have done that ever since. I've been chairman of the committee and I guess I'm chairman of the committee now and I guess we're going to put the show on again this year.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to ski?



ANDREW L. WOLF: How did you say that-"did I used to?"



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you still?



ANDREW L. WOLF: I ski. I haven't skied for the past two weeks. Yes, I ski. In fact, I started, I was in the gang of about three guys who started skiing in <Flagstaff>.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK. That's what I wanted to know. Now did you have something to do with the Snowbowl getting organized?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Skiing in <Flagstaff> started...yea, I got interested in skiing right away, in fact, while I was attending high school; making up three years of high school credit, one of the classes I took was Industrial Arts. The project I took on was the making of a pair of skis out of hickory and you just shaped and bent the boards and morticed? the hole through and your bindings were leather straps. Anyhow I made the first pair of skis...



SUSAN ROGERS: How did you bend the tips?



ANDREW L. WOLF: You shape them. See I made this out of flatboards, you did all the work, grooved the center. There were no such things as metal edges, nobody knew anything about edges. So, you'd groove the center, mark the top to make it pretty, shape the front end, and then to get the curve, you'd have two projects. One is to get the up curve in the front end and two is to get the up curve on the length of the ski, so it was arched a little. I guess the camber? I did that with the cooperation of the power house which is long since gone, but at the power house we had live steam and I made a boiler of some kind, made some kind of container and made an arrangement with them to get live steam. I made a brace so that I could wedge...first of all I steamed the end of the ski, steamed the whole ski and then I made a brace and started bending it to get that curve in front and then I did the same thing...put a 2 by 4 under it and shoved something under the thing to get the middle to come up. So you just did it with steam and it took days, and then you took it out and left it all sit in those blocks so that it would hold its position while it dried. And that's how you got it. How skiing began--there were three of us--Frank Brickey(?), Nate Randall, and a guy named Paul Rust(?). And each of them had some skis, and they'd gotten them somewhere. And I think the four pair of skis we had represented fifty percent of the skis that were in <Flagstaff> at that time. There just weren't many. And we began, on Sundays, driving out to these hills and putting on these skis. You'd walk up the hill and get the skis on and I think we found some poles somewhere and you'd just head them right straight down the hill. Nobody knew how to control. You just headed that way and if you made it--you always headed so you'd have a run out, you know, where you'd come to a stop. You couldn't turn, nobody knew how to turn, the only way to stop would be to fall down or run out of a hill. So we began to do that and spend our Sundays. One of the guys came in one day at the end of a Sunday and all at once he went blind with snowblindness, and so he had a heck of a time for a few days. But that's how we began this thing. In the spring of 1935, I guess it was, or the winter of 1935, Mark MacIntosh, the then Coach, wanted to have a Winter Carnival out here and he was going to have it at the City Park. The days he was to have it, it was weather like this, you know, warm and pleasant, and there was no snow, so that fell apart. We found then, by going up on Hart Prairie, which we could now get into because there was no snow. On the north side of Hart Prairie, there were snow banks. On the north side of those hills which you can see from Hart Prairie Road and we would go into those hills, climb to the top of the hill, put on our skis and slide down, because they had that long easy run out. One Sunday, we never had food, you know, so you'd nearly die and we didn't have any money for food and the Dining hall was closed and if we stayed for dinner we wouldn't have time to go out there, so we passed up our lunch to go skiing. On one occasion, we found the Michelbach cabin, it was open, and we went in and built a fire in their stove and there was some bacon grease, I guess, in a can. So to get some kind of food or belief of food, we got the stove hot and dripped the bacon grease over the stove and inhaled the...But that's how skiing began and we finally got a few more people involved. Then when I got out of school, I think I was in the 20-30 club, and I think I was president and we organized during that time, the Winter Carnival to be held at Hart Prairie and we persuaded the Supervisors to plow the snow off the Hart Prairie Road and that was one hell of a job. They thought they were wasting taxpayers money to plow snow so a bunch of damn fools could go play in the snow. So we did that, there was an old cabin up there that we could use at Hart Prairie, it's now long gone. We used that as a kind of headquarters and we advertised around town and got people around town who had skis and we'd get together 15 or 20 pairs of skis and we'd let people have them for 50 cents. And they'd take a ride or two, so everybody got a chance to ski, and that's how we started. And again, it was that get to the top of the hill and slide down. In doing that, there was a guy named Ed Groesbeck who was with the Forest Service and he was a pretty good skier and he got interested with it and he decided that if skiing was to go in <Flagstaff> you'd have to get up the mountain and this is how the Snowbowl evolved--through the efforts of the Forest Service instigated by Ed Groesbeck and early instigation by the 20-30 Club and prior to that was a group of little guys that I was one of. So you say "was I connected with the Snowbowl?" only to that extent. Another winter, when they were building the road up to the mountain, the first year they got it built as far as Scissorville(?) park. You go up the mountain and there's that little plateau and you can go through that park and drop down into Hart Prairie again and the other one winds up through the aspen. We moved a cabin up there, this is still the 20-30 Club, we moved one of these old cabins and set it up there at Scissorville Park and we had a 20-30 Club convention and the activity was to go to Scissorville Park for a Sunday of skiing and that's what we did. When they got the thing built up to the Snowbowl and built that lodge, this is the one that is now referred to as Hart Prairie, that area, not where the lodge is now, they had a beautiful lodge out there. So the 20-30 Club, instead of continuing, we got a bunch of the guys who were involved in skiing and organized a Ski Club and turned over the function of the Ski Club and I was in that; it was the early days of the Snowbowl until Al Grasmoen came along after the War in 1945, '46, somewhere, and bought the thing. As a Club, we had even sold bonds to the businessmen of the community...

 

End of Tape 1, Side 2, Begin Tape 2, Side 1



ANDREW L. WOLF: The bonds we sold were, I think, either two or three percent interest-bearing bonds and they were sold in denominations of $25 and I think we sold 100 of them to get $2500 to buy the first rope tow. When we got it, the Club put it in to operation and then operated the Snowbowl on Saturdays and Sundays. Charged admission, with that source of money we got money to pay back the merchants on their bonds. Then to finish it up, Grasmoen came in and bought the whole operation from the Ski Club. So, that's how that started.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you remember a little bit about how the Depression affected <Flagstaff>?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yes, I sure can. My first acquaintance with the Depression was in <Cumberland Maryland>, 'cuz we were operating our dairy farm back there and all at once people didn't have money. There was the stock market crash in 1929, and people were jumping out of buildings, committing suicide, businesses were going broke and so forth. In <Flagstaff> when I got here, one of the things I suppose that the County had a heck of a time collecting taxes and the school teachers could not be paid in checks, they were paid in warrants that were good and could be cashed whenever the County got money. So there was quite an active business all along by people who had cash on hand who would buy these warrants at a discount and hold them until they could be cashed at the County. I know that the school teachers were affected that way. I know that the college professors--I'm quite sure the year I came here or the year before--they took a ten percent cut in salary because the state didn't have the money to pay them. Generally, there's just a very low ebb of business. Tourism at that time was practically nil because there were no paved roads coming into <Flagstaff>. Highway 66 was just a wide track, no paving on it. When I drove from <Kingman> to <Flagstaff> I didn't travel on one inch of pavement, it was all gravel road and there would be turn-outs if you saw another car coming, you'd have to turn out and let it go by. Jobs, well I know I thought I would get a job, tried to get a job with the ALandT Lumber Company, and they were working then for twenty cents an hour, ten hour days. And if you got a job anywhere--I'm sure I did a number of jobs where I was paid twenty-five cents an hour. And you worked hard at it--it wasn't just putting in time. So there wasn't much money, very little prosperity, jobs were difficult to find, part of the recovery was brought on by, well, two things, first of all was the Civilian Conservation Corps to get the young men, the kids, out of the town where there was more work and put them in camps and there were 2,3,4 of them right out of...probably a dozen of them. I know there were a number of them at <Grand Canyon>, and they were just doing public works in the Parks and in the Forests. So that was the first move to get people out. Then the other thing was the WPA, Works Projects Administration. All of these things were made, worked, and financed by the government. I know that when I went to work at <Grand Canyon> I had a hell of a job--I think I was getting $110 a month for the three months of the summer, big money. People were working year-round for Fred Harvey and they were getting sixty dollars, some of them seventy dollars, a month plus room and board. Anybody who made over $100 a month was big pay.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK, what about World War II, how did that affect <Flagstaff>?



ANDREW L. WOLF: World War II? Well, it took all the young men who were military age and in good health and so there were lots of disruption. But the community did a great job, did the things you could do, everybody worked hard, everybody did what they could to produce things. The big deal was to sell war bonds to get money into the Treasury to finance the War, so the selling of war bonds was a big event. Keeping the mills open. Early in the War...when <Pearl Harbor> hit, for the first ninety days, there were some pretty desolate people. One man I will not mention but is operating a mercantile store, told me that he would like to find somebody who would take over his store for the duration of the War and return it to him at the end of the War with the same inventory that he turned over to him now. And whatever he could make out of it, would be fine. And he was serious, the only thing is, he couldn't find anybody who'd take it. And then in the spring of 1942, along comes the project that broke <Flagstaff> wide open was the <Bellemont> and Navajo Army Depot. Of course, that called for construction and brought in a lot of people and they needed housing and this was the source of building--what they called temporary war housing--what is now Clark Homes. That used to be a beautiful park out there, they had a gun club there and just a real gorgeous area. So they built Clark Homes to house the workers who were building the Ordinance Depot and really, business began to spurt, and going back to this guy that wanted to give his business away, in the next five years, he became wealthy from his business. So the War years brought in many good things, it brought in many bad things, like always. I know that one of the things that happened was the unionization involving Bellemont; the union came in and wanted to set up unions. They had big meetings about it at the courthouse as to whether they would have a union or not, and I think they ran the union organizers out of town. Somebody took some pick ax handles and decided that if they stayed around they'd bash their heads in and so they left, didn't get very far. But, then all kinds of activity of that sort began to develop so economically <Flagstaff> did well because of the War.



SUSAN ROGERS: During the Prohibition, did you know of any bootlegging activities?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Oh, you bet. In fact, you can still go out here in the hills and find remnants of stills. The first that I knew about it was back in the <Maryland> hills. I never got involved with it, but a cousin of mine did and in fact he got picked up by the Revenuers and spent some time in jail. Yea, bootlegging, moonshining, they'd just go out in the hills, put up a still, take the mash and make whiskey and bring it in--it was big business. When I came to school, it was a routine thing, you know, if you were planning a party, somebody would get together some money and they had a bootlegger that had a stand out here right off the Rogers Lake Road and within about a half-mile of Highway 66. He had a stand and we'd go out there and he'd mark it by one of these beacon towers--it may still be there I'm not sure--but that's where you'd go to pick up your bootleg whiskey. Craig Brown's grandfather, right over at Brown's Jewelry, was a distributor of bootleg whiskey right there in the back of his shop. There was lots of bootlegging going on, lots of drinking, lots of people got hurt because they got bad stuff. The bootlegging went on, the moonshine went on, people made a lot of money, it made a lot of criminals, it created a price on illegality, in fact, if you want to philosophize just a little, I kind of think that situation is about like the situation we have now with drugs. They make laws to say you can't do it and this makes it a valuable enterprise, so it's worth killing people for and they make a lot of money out of it. I kind of believe if they'd do with the drugs like they have done with the whiskey, legalize it and make it so anybody can buy it and anybody can sell it. But on the other hand, instead I think what they ought to do is to make it available through state-owned stores and let the state operate the drug business at reasonable rates so you don't need to go out and...you know this hundred dollar a day stuff. So there was lots of bootlegging going on.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any big crimes happening that stick out in your mind in particular?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, I guess one of the most spectacular things that happened was the guy who come through <Marble Canyon> up there by the Colorado River and killed the guy who was in charge of the store and I'm trying to remember the name of the guy who owned the store. His first name was Buck and I guess he took off in pursuit after that guy who just shot him right out of his car while he was driving. Other big crimes, I don't know, oh, I do too...there was a massive murder/suicide not long after I came here. A guy named Jim Walkup, I believe he was then Director of the Chamber of Commerce and they had four children and his wife killed those four children and herself, and that was big news at the time.



SUSAN ROGERS: What year did both of those happen, about?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, they had to be in the 1930s. I knew him, but I didn't know his family. I can't think of any other massive crimes that took place, there's always somebody getting killed and somebody getting shot and in the early days they talked about <Flagstaff> being a place where you had to sleep on the floor to keep from getting shot in bed! But that was just a one on one situation.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK, what about any big fires, floods, or snowstorms in particular?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, the big fires that we had were involved with the sawmills. Mill burned over here at least once, maybe twice, during the years. They were always spectacular events, everybody felt bad as to whether they'd be able to rebuild it and so on. Big fires in town never amounted to much because they always had a volunteer fire department. They just really worked on these fires, so I don't know too much of any spectacular fires. And what else did you ask about?



SUSAN ROGERS: Big snowstorms, in particular.



ANDREW L. WOLF: The first big snowstorm hit in 1935-36. That started out on Christmas morning. I know I was a bouncer at the Museum Club for a Christmas Eve party and I got home from that job about 3 o'clock in the morning. I was staying in the dormitory Christmas vacation. In fact, I guess that's the...well, it was another year. And, when I came home there was a great big ring around the moon and I went to bed and I woke up about 9 o'clock or some such and there was four or five inches and it was snowing. And I guess it snowed constantly, with only minor let-ups like maybe thirty minutes, for a week. And we had six feet of snow. That was the first big snowstorm that I got involved in. In my view, there was no way that we could handle six feet of snow except to let it melt. There was no equipment there were no tractors, there was no snowplows, and that winter the only trucks that moved around town...I was working on Bob Crees' campus crew at that time...and Bob had a Ford truck with dual rear wheels and big chains on it, and with that truck you could move around town. There probably were not twenty cars that could operate in town. You'd see cars on street corners and they'd just got stuck and they left them there and they got covered up with snow.

 

People were moving around town on skis. And that was the first winter that they did something about moving the snow because there was a contractor named, I believe it was McGruder; had a road contract out here and left a Caterpillar and a nine-yard Carryall, that's a big scoop that the Caterpillar hauls. And the City made a deal with that company to hire a Cat-skinner, and he came and hauled the snow off of Aspen Street and he parked it down here, piled the snow up on what is now Babbitt's car lot. And that was the first attempt the City ever made to do anything about the snow in the wintertime, so that was the big one in 1936. The next big one was 1949 and that year, I guess we got...it snowed every day in January, every day it snowed for thirty days and in that time, I guess it piled up thirteen feet of snow. That was a hazardous and hairy year, the City tore itself apart to keep the snow cleaned off. And there were other substantial snowstorms, and the other big one was in 1972 when we had seven feet in five days or something like that. So that would be the three unusually big snowstorms.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know anything about the development of the tourist trade in <Flagstaff>? How did it get started, or has there always been tourists going through here, pretty much?



ANDREW L. WOLF: The tourist trade began with what they called 'tourist cabins', 'tourist camps', and the tourist camp...there was one out here on the Greenlaw property where is now the Americana, on that corner, the bank. There were beautiful big trees in there, a big open park, and Mrs. Greenlaw had built maybe a dozen individual cabins and there would be twenty-five or thirty yards between them. One-room affairs with a stove, generally, and a little bit of furniture and a bed and that's the way it started. Now Greenlaws had that place when I came here. The Nackard property down here, the Downtowner was here, DuBois Motel Inn was the nicest facility in <Flagstaff> when I came here. In fact when I came here, the afternoon I got in from <Kingman>, I went into that place to get a room, and Al DuBois, the owner of it, said "well, are you going to school?" I said "yea", and he said "then you don't need to buy a room, go on over there, they'll give you a place to stay." So, that was there, Knox had a tourist court up here on Santa Fe Avenue, the Hotel was here, all these Hotels were here and functional. People just began to move around and they needed a place to stay, so that's how it started. Then as the roads got paved, the <Grand Canyon> came to the front, people began to move more, it was just an evolution, really, is what it was.



SUSAN ROGERS: When do you think the sale of Indian arts and crafts became big?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Oh, I'd say that became big in the last, what, five years?



SUSAN ROGERS: That recent, huh.



ANDREW L. WOLF: Approximately that, ten years ago. For example, I've got a beautiful bolo that my wife bought for me, and I think she paid $35 for it. It's got two pendants and they're filled with turquoise, it was a Zuni deal, paid $35 for it. I had John Yellowhorse tell me it's worth somewhere around $400 now. So, it's always been a popular thing and people were always interested in it, but it never became big promotionally, as it is now, until, I'd say five years.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK, when you were going to school at NAU, were there any minority groups attending, were there any Mexicans or Blacks or Indians?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Oh yea, sure.



SUSAN ROGERS: About how many, would you say?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, we had maybe three or four, maybe a dozen Blacks on our football team over the years that I played. There were always Mexicans, we never made any fuss about them. They generally associated with their own kind but there was no ostracism.



SUSAN ROGERS: Never any big problems at all.



ANDREW L. WOLF: No.



SUSAN ROGERS: Were there some Indians going to school at that time?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yea, there were...we called him Chief Chapman, he was an Indian. He was a halfback played with us. Ardrey West, he was an Indian, yea, there were a number of Indians. Not a great number, there were always some.



SUSAN ROGERS: How about Chinese?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yea, I think there was one or two Chinamen at school when I was there.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK, but none of these people were discriminated against at that time that you knew about?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, nobody ever made an issue of it. I guess there was a certain amount of discrimination, but there was no such thing as them eating meals separately when we were on a football trip like anybody else. Fact, I think generally, the discrimination ended in <Flagstaff> very early, they used to have discrimination, in fact they used to have a Mexican school--South Beaver was considered a Mexican school, Dunbar School was over where the Community Center is now on the south side and that was all Negro, but they got rid of that early in the 1940s. They did away with the Dunbar School and did away with Beaver as being the Mexican school.



SUSAN ROGERS: How about any famous people visiting <Flagstaff>? Do you remember any famous people who came through <Flagstaff>?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Prominent people?



SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, maybe painters, musicians, scientists, or even local people who became prominent?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, Mrs. Greenway owned a ranch out at <Williams> and Theodore Roosevelt was a partner, had been a partner in that ranch. Artists? Who was the big violinist way back then? We'd get them in under some of the student programs, some of the big artists come here and put on special events. I can't really name the names now, that's not my bag. Well, people who became famous--Andy Devine, would you want him? He lived here, his father was a deputy sheriff or some such thing.



SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did you know him?



ANDREW L. WOLF: I've met him. He had gone from here when I came, but I met him in connection with the Pow Wow. He lived here, went to school, and played football up here, was a special pet of Lady B, Mrs. Beckwith. Who else? People who were famous in the science world included Dr. Lampland, Dr. V.M. Slipher and Dr. Earl Slipher, they were famous people. Dr. Colton who established the Museum of Northern Arizona was a prominent man. Outstanding in his field, Mrs. Colton right with him. I suppose that would maybe take care of most of...



SUSAN ROGERS: Ok, now did you know any of those people personally that you can describe them to me or did you just know of them?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Oh, I knew Dr. Colton. Talked to him a number of times.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about him?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, he was a man who wore kind of a goatee beard, not too big a man, very soft spoken, kind of tippy-toed around, a gentle person. Very devoted to the history of this country, archeologically and geologically; really condensed the information about both the country and the people including the Indians and their culture, and as you know, what the Museum has become and you look at that and it all came from the imagination of Dr. Colton and people with whom he brought in to do the work. A fine man. Dr. V.M. Slipher, I knew him quite well, he was a big guy, pretty tough old boy, pretty famous personality, and he conducted this observatory in fine style, he was quite interested in the community, and like a number of others, bought up a lot of land around here and became wealthy on account of the rising values of land that he had acquired for a nominal price simply because he had some money. V.M. Slipher, I bowled with him every year, he liked to do the things I liked to do which is hunt geese and birds, fish, he's the man who conducted a lot of the studies about Mars and went to all points of the world when Mars was getting a point nearest the Earth. Together, and with them, they aided tremendously the evolvement with these cameras...in other words, the work that paved the way for going to the moon was done substantially right here. They discovered the planet Pluto out of this observatory just before I came here in 1931. Clyde Tombaugh...in fact, Clyde Tombaugh is a man I do business with, sold him insurance. All these fellas are very mild people, they're not big outgoing people. Quiet spoken, they know what they're doing and they do it well and unobtrusively. And who else do you need to know about? Some of the characters?



SUSAN ROGERS: Sure.

End of Tape 2, Side 1, Begin Tape 2, Side 2



ANDREW L. WOLF: Well, I'd guess you'd have to name some of the outlaw characters as being prominent people. Man that you'll hear about is Joe Kellum and Jess Kellum, they were big raw cowboys. Joe Kellum was quoted as saying "every winter when all these fellas go off and live in <Phoenix> all winter, I'm out there branding their calves." Building up his herd. He was a bachelor guy, he was common-law marriage with one of the English profs up here, Miss Boyer, he built houses right down the street three blocks down here, she lived in. I don't know whose money it was, but they lived there, kind of the talk of the town. Joe was also squiring another gal at the University and on one occasion, give him credit, he bought Miss Boyer some very beautiful material to make a dress and they were going to go to a dance. Joe took her to the dance, this other gal was named Bess Chapel, and they get to the dance and Miss Boyer is all dressed up in her new gown and so forth and Bess Chapel shows up without any escort or with somebody else and damned if she didn't have the identical dress. He'd gotten them both the same material to make a dress, that was big talk in the community. And then, Joe was later...I guess Jess Kellum was sued for breach of promise and the trial made big news, it was kind of a raunchy disclosure of their personal lives. I knew personally a lot of guys that I thought were characters, but they were not outstanding men in the community, but they...I don't need to say too much about them. Who else do you want me to talk about?



SUSAN ROGERS: Anybody else you can think of...



ANDREW L. WOLF: Billy Sweitzer, father of Bill Sweitzer over here at the hardware store, he was one of the early-day characters and a very prominent citizen--hard-nosed and hard-working. He was very close friends with Rimmy Jim. Rimmy Jim was out here, east of...between <Flagstaff> and <Winslow> at Meteor Crater. Rimmy Jim was quite a character, I think he'd been involved in his youth with the Hashknife gang around <Holbrook>. I could spend a little more time thinking about some of these people, but I...



SUSAN ROGERS: Let's go ahead and move on. I just have one last question, because time's coming up. Did you used to go down to <Oak Creek> a lot, the college students?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yea.



SUSAN ROGERS: Just about like they do now?



ANDREW L. WOLF: I think so. It was a popular rendezvous and when they had special parties they'd take a bus and go down there and involved swimming and picnicking. <Oak Creek>, of course, was not littered or complicated like it is now, there were some campgrounds, but they were not much developed, so you'd use them and enjoy them and leave them and you could fish the Creek, have it pretty much to yourself most of the time. Trout season used to begin on Memorial Day and would end the 30th of September and the season was closed from September until the following Memorial Day, so the opening of trout season was always a giant event, you know. Everybody on <Oak Creek>, everybody catching fish, and they would stock the stream, it'd be a popular thing to go down ahead of the opening date to look and watch and see where the fish were. Yea, I'd say <Oak Creek>'s always been used. A lot of the students...I know my first journey down there was in September, October I guess it was. It was a rainy night. We left here on Saturday afternoon, three of us, and we camped out in <Oak Creek> and it rained and I happened to have a cowboy bedroll with a great big tarp and we used that to cover all three of our beds. Once you got a fire going why it made a great evening, but until that it was cold and wet. When I came here, the road into <Oak Creek> was just being built, it wasn't paved. Just being built, so it started from about then, as it became accessible and usable. In fact, on that particular trip, we tried to go in through <Oak Creek> and come up Schnebly Hill and we couldn't make it, it was too wet and too muddy and we had to go back. <Oak Creek> has always been a place for college life.



SUSAN ROGERS: That just about covers all my questions, unless you want to tell me about any of your <Grand Canyon> adventures when you worked up there? Can you think of anything you want to say about that?



ANDREW L. WOLF: Yea, that was quite a...it was interesting work, an interesting place to be. In fact, I always wondered why they bothered to pay you to work there. Meeting the tourists was an everyday adventure, working with them. I graduated, or part of my time I worked there as a patrol officer, night patrol around the Village in a car. And on one occasion with Perry Brown, we had to run down a guy who had been working for the Fred Harvey Company and he'd gone off his rocker and we were driving out toward Rowe Well which was a satellite bar/dance hall four or five miles from the <Grand Canyon Village>. We were driving out that road and came around the bend in the road and here was this guy standing right in the middle of the road and looking up at a tall pine tree. So, I got out of the car and eased over to him and he's telling me he says "look at her, isn't she beautiful?" And I said, "where is she?" And he said, "right there in the top of the tree, she's my mother, and isn't she beautiful?" I said, "She sure is, and maybe she thinks you ought to go in out of the rain. We'll take you for a ride." So we got him in the car, and kept talking like that and we had him between us on the one seat, turned him over to the Santa Fe Railroad police and they put him on the train the next day. Took him to <Williams>, and at <Williams> transferred him to a train going east to <Kansas City>, and somewhere going through <New Mexico> he got away from the officer and went into the restroom on the train, opened the window, and climbed out. Killed himself. So that was one little adventure.

 

Other adventures that took place, two or three times I had to take a mule and go into the Canyon on what they called a drag-out, where somebody had hiked into the Canyon, completely exhausted and couldn't get out and we'd have to go in and pile them on a mule and bring them out. This kind of thing took place. On another occasion, I wasn't in on this chase, but it happened while I was there, somebody had done some robbing and got into the brush and Perry Brown and together with a guy named Slim Kyte who built all the fences on the highways in <Arizona>. He was a guide at <Grand Canyon> working for Fred Harvey Company and they got this guy out in an open field and they were chasing him, he was running. Slim Kyte just dived off the truck and bulldogged him, brought him in. There were some interesting, kind of rugged events take place up there. One of the guys I worked with was Bert Lauzon, he was a ranger, Bert Lauzon is the guy who joined the Powell party going down the River. He joined them at <Bright Angel Creek> and went on and finished the rest of that trip with them. Bert was quite a character, very dry and droll, fun, interesting. There were always things happening, but they were kind of in the normal routine of carrying on the business, nothing real exciting. Most of the people were the funny part of working up there, course it was a great place for a single guy, only reason you didn't date every night is because you couldn't stand it. One night, I lived in the ranger dormitory, I guess there were maybe six rooms, and I was on night patrol and I had to work till about two or three o'clock in the morning, so I came into the dormitory and my room was the first room up the hallway, and two doors down from me was a guy who was the park naturalist, and just unlocking his door. And I said, "Herb, are you getting up or just getting in?" He says, "Just getting in. I've got to be up at 8 o'clock and go to work and God, I don't know how I can stand it!" That's the way it was, you'd meet all kinds of people, good ones and bad ones, ornery and pleasant.

 

On one of the things I did at <Grand Canyon>, I laid out of school the spring quarter of maybe, 1936, and with two other Park Service employees, we made a backpack trip and we were going down the <Bass Trail> and we intended to hike around the Big Thumb and come back into <Supai>. We were preparing to do that. We'd gone across the Big Thumb and taken a supply of food down another trail on the west side of the Thumb and cached it in a cave and then came back up and came back to the <Bass Trail> and started down. And I guess we were out three or four days, five days maybe, this was in March, and of course, we got pretty raunchy, and one of the things we found...we were travelling on that part of the Canyon they call the Esplanade, it's a big, flat plateau, pretty easy travelling when you once get to it, and we came on to a place with a bunch of pockets in the rock, like big bathtubs. Some of them had water in it, one of them had about two feet of water in it, and we'd been out three or four days, so we decided we would take a bath. That water was cold! So we rolled a bunch of big rocks together and then piled a bunch of wood on top of the rocks and set a fire and then we just piled wood on those rocks and got them to where they were starting to bust and then we raked the fire away, shoved the rocks into the water, and heated it up. Then we all got in and took a bath. Then, two nights later, started out a rainstorm...we'd come to the head of what is called Forster(?) Canyon, and at the head of Forster Canyon is a great talus slope comes right down and it comes right to the edge of a 1500-foot wall, straight down. The evening we got there, one of the guys went across this talus slope, but during the night it rained and snowed. And we woke up in the morning and there were big rocks breaking loose and rolling down across that thing so we decided we'd go on as far as we'd dare going across that and decided that was a stupid thing to do and besides the snow loused up our travel. So we decided to come back out and we came up a few miles west of a place they call Pasture Wash. At Pasture Wash was a telephone and we were able to call the Canyon and get somebody to come out and pick us up. So that was quite an adventure, and what we were doing was going in there...they wanted to kill off the wild burros which were, they called them exotic to the area, in other words they were not natural but they were brought in and left by prospectors, and I was the rifleman. I had my rifle and a supply of ammunition. We found some and I think we killed one or two. We also found those little horses, little miniature horses, stand about this high. We found them, they were just inbred horses. They're still there, nobody ever goes in there anymore, but they're still there. 'Cuz a guy named Jack Tooker(?), he was intrigued with them, and Jack Tooker was a Santa Fe engineer and he organized an expedition and went in there and supposed to have gotten out one or two of these little horses. I don't know how in the hell he ever got it out of there, but they're in there. Very small horses.

 

Some of the people at <Grand Canyon> I just know by hearsay were Captain Bass. Captain Bass had a camp down on the River at Asbestos Mine. Jack Fuss, here in <Flagstaff>, spent a year with him, so he can tell you all about that. Captain Hance, another one, they all were great storytellers, and of course, they string the dudes along when they began to show up. Had all kinds of funny stories to tell them. I know I picked up one and I used it quite effectively one time. This spring that I laid out, and went on this trip down in the Canyon, when I came back it was still a month or so before I could go to work as a Park Ranger and I got a job with Fred Harvey driving the bus to get me by that time. At the Hermit Rim, I believe it's still there, you know there's an archway as you leave the parking lot and go down to the <Hermits Rest>? There's an archway and there's an old bell hanging from a big heavy wooden beam? And I was driving the bus one day and there were two girls in the seat right behind me, and as I would say things to people, well, these girls were always kind of bad-mouth me a little bit. Not mean about it, but they were just a little bit ornery and prodding me and so forth. And everybody in the bus knew it, so we got to the <Hermits Rest> and I told them what to do and turned them loose, off they went. Got back on the bus ready to leave and I started up the motor and I'd parked just in front of that big archway. All ready to go, and I said "oh, by the way..." turned around to the people and said "Did you all get the souvenir ring?" "No, where do you get them?" And I said, "All you have to do is ask for them. Gee, I'm sorry I forgot to tell you about the souvenir ring." "Can we get them?" I said, "Well, it'd be a little difficult to unload everybody, but why don't...let's count people...how many 15, 16 or whatever it was..." And I said to this girl right behind me, "why don't you go down and get 16 souvenir rings." "OK." Out the door she goes and she just gets to that bell and I hollered at her, "Hey, do you know where to go?" She said, "No, where do I go?" I said, "well, you reach down and you pick up that rock and hit that bell sixteen times and get sixteen souvenir rings." The only other person I pulled that on was my wife. So from there on, those gals were in their place. So lots of things happened. It's been an interesting world, it's been a great place to live, great place to raise my family, you talk about skiing, I taught all my kids to ski. This number two daughter, Andy, when she was 12 years old, won the women's state championship in competition up here and then she won it again when she was 14. She's a great skier, good competitive skier. I used to take the kids to <Sun Valley> and I took them to <Reno Nevada>. I took them to <Salt Lake> to <Alta>, so that's taken a lot of the time and I worked with them going to those places. <Flagstaff>'s been a great world, I kind of think it's like living in the middle of a national park where everything's available and you ought to pay to live here instead of getting paid to work here. So what else do you want to know?



SUSAN ROGERS: Well, you've answered all my questions, I think maybe that's about it.



ANDREW L. WOLF: What are you going to do with this now?


