FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Kidd Quinn

Interview number NAU.OH.28.88





Kidd Quinn, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1928 and worked in the wholesale grocery business. He purchased land in the Doney Park area and grew pinto beans. He was active with the Bean Growers Association, worked as the first president to the Soil Conservation District, as a deputy sheriff, and as a probation officer for youth. Interview conducted by John Irwin on April 2, 1977. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, May 2002. 



Outline of Subjects Covered In Interview 

Tape 1, Side 1 

Born in <Trezevant Tennessee> 

Parents 

Thurmond Arthur Quinn 

Nora Quinn 

Moved to <Los Angeles> in 1922, <Arizona> in 1923 

Worked for Arizona Grocery Wholesale in <Phoenix> 

Transferred to <Flagstaff> in 1928 

Property owned in Doney Park 

Bad winters 

Farming and cattle 

Potatoes raised around Hart Prairie 

Growing pinto beans 

Depression of 1930’s 

Other property owned 

Grocery wholesale closes 

Bean elevator and Bean Growers Association 

Problems growing beans 

Drought, Weather 

Snow in 1948 

Oakies coming through <Flagstaff> during the Depression 

Deputy Sheriff 1942

Tape 2, Side 1 

County Extension Service 

Soil Conservation Districts 

First president in early 1940 

Built terraces 

Planted wind breaks 

Water conservation 

Stock tanks 

East <Flagstaff> 

Worked with Frank Gold, county attorney 

Changes in <Flagstaff> 

Growth of the college 

Mother Hanley 

Hunting quail in <Phoenix> area 

Probation officer working with youth 



I'm talking with Mr. Kidd Quinn, who now lives in <Camp Verde>, but who was a former resident of <Flagstaff>. This is April 2, 1977. 



JOHN IRWIN: Mr. Quinn, can you tell me where you were born, and who your parents were? 



KIDD QUINN: I was born in <Trezevant Tennessee>. My parents were Thurmond Arthur Quinn and Nora Quinn. My parents were both dead, my father died when I was two years old, my mother died when I was four years old. I was raised an orphan. I worked and lived with different relations, taking care of chores, and worked for a living since I was six years old. 



JOHN IRWIN: You went to high school? 



KIDD QUINN: I went to high school in <Trezevant Tennessee>. I went to the Trezevant High School. 



JOHN IRWIN: You were raised then by relatives? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, I was raised by cousins, relatives. 



JOHN IRWIN: What did you do after you got out of high school? 



KIDD QUINN: After I got out of high school, I worked around the community there, around home for a couple of years, and then I went to <Los Angeles California>. 



JOHN IRWIN: What caused you to leave? 



KIDD QUINN: I left… my parents both died with tuberculosis. Back them days, they called it consumption. But they both died with tuberculosis as we know it now. I figured if I stayed there, I would die with it, probably at an early age, because my father was twenty-six years old, and my mother about the same, when they died. I come west to avoid any future health (unclear). 



JOHN IRWIN: How long did you live in <California>? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, I went into <California> in '22. I come over to <Arizona> in the fall of '23. I thought it was a little too foggy and damp over there. I thought it would be better, I thought I’d like <Phoenix>. I come to <Phoenix Arizona>, in the fall of '23. I went to work for the Arizona Grocery Wholesale House, which is a wholesale house for Pay 'N' Pick It Stores at that time, in '23. I worked there until the next spring, and then I, of course, naturally got anxious to go back over to <California>. I had a couple of cousins over there. I went back over to <Los Angeles>, I stayed over there a couple of more years, then I come back over into <Arizona> again in the fall of '26. Come through <Flagstaff>, and went on up to the White Mountains and camped out a week or so up there at the old McKay Ranch. We done a little huntin' and went on down into <Phoenix>. I was in <Phoenix>, got in there about two o'clock in the morning, went downtown to the old place where I used to work. I was gonna go on back home and make a little visit, but my old boss, he got a'holt of me, he said, "No, you've gotta come back to work." He offered me a good job, and so I went back to work the next morning. He said, "You be in the next morning at seven o'clock." Jobs was hard to find them days, too. I went to work for the Arizona Grocery Wholesale again in the city shipping department. I worked there for a couple of years. Then I was transferred to <Flagstaff>. They bought a wholesale house in <Flagstaff>, and I was transferred up there as warehouse foreman in <Flagstaff>. 



JOHN IRWIN: About what year was that? 



KIDD QUINN: In the spring of '28. They bought it in '27, and they had one man up there, and it didn't work out, so they wanted me to go up. I went up in the spring of '28, taking over the warehouse, and operated as warehouse foreman 'til they closed in '39. 



JOHN IRWIN: Were you the only person to operate that, or were you in charge of it? 



KIDD QUINN: I was in charge of the wholesale: the delivery and the trucks, and all the taking care of the stock, unloadin' everything that come in, see that the stock was taken care of, and the checkin' out of everything that come in and went out, I was in charge of it. 



JOHN IRWIN: And this was for all of northern <Arizona>? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, we delivered from <Springerville>, <Prescott>, <Seligman>, <Jerome>, <Clarkdale>, all through here. Later on we got the Safeway Pay 'N' Pick It Store opened in <Jerome> and <Clarkdale> and <Cottonwood>. 



JOHN IRWIN: That was a big responsibility. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. Pretty good job them days. Yeah, it was. Them days. You didn't sleep much, I tell ya'. 



JOHN IRWIN: What did you do in the winter when the roads were especially bad at that time? 



KIDD QUINN: Roads was bad. In the spring of '29, I bought a little place out in the country, a ranch. I bought beans and potatoes and things, and [I thought], "Well, these farms out here make better money that I ever seen back home." We farmed back there, and we got a hundred dollars a year out of it, in the fall of the year, to buy shoes and clothes and things. We thought we was doin' pretty good. So them fellahs up there, I could see that they had a little better opportunity. So I bought a place out there, my wife and I, went out there and filed a little homestead. 



JOHN IRWIN: Where was this? 



KIDD QUINN: That was out east of Doney Park, the east portion of Doney Park, just east of the old Koch Field. We kept that for two or three years, built a home on it, and then somebody come along and wanted it worse than we did, so we just sold it. And then later that year, I went on down on the Leupp Road and bought a place called Turkey Tanks. I had a few head of cattle and some horses. We moved down there and made that our home. And I went back and forth from there to work. 



And you asked what I done in the wintertime. There was times in the winter, maybe thirty days sometimes, that the road wouldn't be open. And I had my father-in-law that stayed down there with us. He come out and stayed with us. He was lookin' for a place to stay, so I said, "Well, that's no better place." So he was out there with my wife at the times that I couldn't get home. I stayed up in town. For maybe thirty days sometimes, I couldn't GET home. I've seen thirty days that the Leupp Road never opened a'tall. That was when we had lots of snow. We don't have that anymore. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did you have a car, or did you have horses? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, I had horses that I used at the ranch to work with, but I had a car. I always had a car to go back and forth. I generally had a pickup. Generally always kept a pickup because then I could haul stuff back and forth. And we built cisterns and we worked ten hours a day, six days a week, and when I bought THAT place, I know nine o'clock at night I'd be down building the cistern, plastering the cistern. My wife would be holding the lantern down there for me to see to plaster the cistern at nine o'clock at night. Then I was back in town the next morning at seven o'clock to open the warehouse. It was rough, but we enjoyed it. 



JOHN IRWIN: What did you raise on your acreage? 



KIDD QUINN: We raised, well, a lot of corn to feed the stock. Raised beans. And of course we'd always have a patch of hay. I always raised enough feed to feed my cattle through the winter. I built up a bunch of cattle where I'd feed forty-five or fifty through the winter. Then I'd get my calf increase all that year, and then in the fall you'd sell off your cull, older cattle, (unclear), and any calves that you wanted to cull out. You had to keep it down to about forty, forty-five head, for your permit. 



JOHN IRWIN: That's a large responsibility. Did your wife do a lot of work? 



KIDD QUINN: She helped look after. She was seein' after the thing, and my father-in-law was there. And then a lot of time, my brother-in-law, he'd always come in, in the fall of the year, lookin' for a place to stay. I figured it was better to have her brother out there than it was to hire somebody. So lots of times he was out there, and would look after things. Most of the time I'd always get home back and forth, but sometimes when it'd get SO bad that I couldn't get back and forth, I'd stay in town. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did you raise potatoes also? 



KIDD QUINN: No, just a few for our own use. I never did raise any potatoes to sell. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did other people around you have a large operation there? 



KIDD QUINN: No, not after that. There was only one or two places that raised potatoes then. In the earlier days, they did raise lots of potatoes. And up on Hart Prairie, and up around the mountain there, they raised potatoes, a few of them. An old friend of mine, Lija Baker, which he's been gone a long time, you may remember. Donna, she just retired from teachin' school down here at <Sedona> here, about a year ago. That was his daughter. He was a very fine fellah, and he used to raise a lot of potatoes. I bought a lot of potatoes from him. And an old fellah by the name of Fair, he used to raise a lot of potatoes up in Hart Prairie, and up in there, that we bought potatoes from. And Mrs. Corey, the old Corey Ranch, right there where you turn off to go up to Ski Bowl, to the lift now, that used to raise lots of potatoes. Bill Corey lives in <Flagstaff> now. He was just a boy at that time. 



JOHN IRWIN: Right, I know him. 



KIDD QUINN: Bill used to work for me over in the warehouse once in a while. I was always kiddin' him. Now, once in a while, I see Bill and I said, "Hey, Bill, (unclear) one of 200-pound sacks of sugar. I can't handle them no more." (laughter) 



JOHN IRWIN: Did you have any problem with the short growing season, where your acreage was, or was it low enough or lower, that you didn't have that problem? 



KIDD QUINN: We had problems with the short growing season. You had about ten days on either end, you'd have to get within that range. And you [were] only just lucky to get by. I've had a hundred acres in beans that was that high, and go out the eighteenth of June. Once, I went out to go around my field, and oh, they were beautiful rows. Went up there Sunday morning and looked and there wasn't a thing. It was just as clean as this floor. It froze. Had to get 'em up. That's the chance you have to take. Then it's too late to plant 'em anymore - you have to just let it grow up in weeds, and then summer fallow it and put it in something for the winter, get it ready for the next year. 



JOHN IRWIN: That would be very difficult if you wouldn't have had your job in town to make a living. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, this was hard. I had to use one against the other. I used my cattle and my job in town. No, if I hadn't had a job, then it’d have [been] a pretty hard go. 



JOHN IRWIN: Were there people that live in the same area that were trying to do it without another job? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, there's people that made a go of it. 



JOHN IRWIN: They did? 



KIDD QUINN: There were people that made money, made it work. 



JOHN IRWIN: What did the Depression do to your business? 



KIDD QUINN: The Depression was pretty rough. Of course we got cut in wages DURING the Depression, but I worked all during the Depression. I had a job all the way through. There was lots of people that DIDN'T have, and I helped lots of people that didn't. It's surprising, you think of the wages they're paying today, I've had people come to me and just thank me for givin' 'em a job at eighteen dollars a week, three dollars a day, they worked ten hours a day, and just tickled to death to get a little something to do. But we managed to get by. 



JOHN IRWIN: But others in the area perhaps had to sell out? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, there was people come and go. The earlier part of the Depression, in 1919 and through there, it cleared out the biggest portion of that area, Doney Park and in there, because there was people that homesteaded in there that they just moved out, because they'd mortgaged their places and they lost 'em. They just had to leave. But then in the twenties and thirties, the Depression, we didn't have too many that completely lost. They managed to get by some way. The people that didn't work, a lot of 'em would cut wood, they'd haul wood and sell it to people in town, and pick up little extra jobs to kind of pinch hit. I know a family there, one family, I know when they got married, they married and raised a family, and he hauled wood. He homesteaded on a place, ‘proved up on it, built him a home, raised a family and put 'em through school. And he hauled wood mostly. He hauled wood and chopped it with an axe. We didn't have chain saws. I can hear his old axe now as I go to work early in the morning, hear him over back in them cedar hills, as I go to work. I could hear his axe choppin', I could hear him, and I'd know who it was. 



JOHN IRWIN: That's a lot of wood! 



KIDD QUINN: But he hauled lots of wood, and he made money. But he's gone now. In fact I've been to see - he's got a son working for Babbitts over here now. A highway patrolman, right in this area, and got in a bad accident right here. I thought he was gonna lose him. I knew him all of his life. In fact, I recommended him to the highway patrol. They come and asked me if I'd recommend him. He was the only one in <Flagstaff> that got on during the time that he had made application for that job. Then he almost got killed. I felt pretty bad about it. But that's the way things go. 



JOHN IRWIN: Yeah, it's neither here nor there. 



KIDD QUINN: He's in pretty good health now. He's working for Babbitt over there and doin' pretty good. 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, how long did you have your acreage, or do you still own it, your land out there? 



KIDD QUINN: That particular acreage down to Turkey Tank, I sold that in '45. That's when I resigned from the soil conservation, state office. I sold my land, because according to the laws and the bylaws that we set up, if you didn't own land and operate it, you wasn't eligible to set on the committee, see. So I sold that, and then I resigned and turned it over to my next successor. But then right away I bought some more. I was in town at that time. I moved in town, because I had a daughter and I had to look for a place to get her to school. It was too far out there, and I moved up in town in '44, and had a place in East Flag, which I still own, a filling station out there that I had leased out. Then I bought another place out there, which I own now. And then just a little later on I bought some more acres that's over the hills. I own a little over 400 acres up there now. 



JOHN IRWIN: Oh, so you've almost always been a landowner out there. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, I've been a landowner up there practically ever since I've been there. Yeah, right after. 



JOHN IRWIN: Let's go back to, I think it was 1939, when the wholesale.... 



KIDD QUINN: We closed the wholesale house in '39. 



JOHN IRWIN: Why was it closed? 



KIDD QUINN: Safeway decided to quit the wholesale. They sold the wholesale business in <Phoenix> to Associated Grocery. They closed out this warehouse, all the outside warehouses, and just closed them out. They delivered their stuff from the wholesale house. They kept a wholesale house and brought their stuff in wholesale just for the stores. They quit the wholesale business. They quit selling to wholesale. And that's why they closed out up there. And that's what they're doin' now. Then they trucked the stuff from <Phoenix> to the stores, and they're still doing it, they're still truckin' their stuff to <Flagstaff>, Holbrook, <Winslow> and all. You see them big Safeway trucks that trucks out of the wholesale house that I used to work in when I was down there in city delivery. But they quit sellin' wholesale. They sold out the wholesale business and just serviced the stores all together. That's why they closed up the outside wholesale house. 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, were you very upset? You must have been, when (unclear). 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, I was a little upset, because I'd been there eleven years, and I had my land, my holding and home out there that I had built up, a bunch of cattle. They wanted me to go back to <Phoenix>. I said, "No, I won't go to <Phoenix>, I'll stay here. I'll work it out." So I went to work there, and after that, I went on out and fixed up my place for a while. And then a group of farmers realized that they had to build up the quality on pinto beans, to get something to get the rocks out of 'em. So we built a bean elevator out in East Flag just east of that Barker Hotel building that's there now. The old foundations are still there. They built a bean elevator there and got some rock pickers and big machinery in there. They come out and wanted to know if I would come up and manage it for 'em. So I went up and managed THAT for a couple of years. 



JOHN IRWIN: This is a cooperative? 



KIDD QUINN: Yes, it was the Bean Growers Association, owned by about four or five different farmers out there, successful farmers that put it in. They come out and asked if I would operate it for 'em. Of course they knew me and I bought stuff from 'em for years. So I went and operated it, and we made a success of it for as long as.... And then the war come along (unclear) like, and everything got (unclear). Right after that I went to work for the sheriff's office. So they sold it out to Chet Anderson. Chet bought the machinery out, and moved it up in HIS building up there, and run IT for a long time. During the time I was operatin' that, I was government inspector for the beans. It's just like for the government, where they'd ship during the war. Some beans went to England, different places overseas, I guess. But they had to be inspected, government inspected, and I'd have to take samples and send 'em to <California>, to <Los Angeles>, to get 'em graded. After I left that, I turned it over to Chet Anderson. 



JOHN IRWIN: I didn't realize that beans were such a big crop around here. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, beans was a good crop at that time. They made good money on beans. I know one fellah up there, one year his bean crop paid him around $30,000 that one year. He farmed and I knowed him since he was just a young boy. He come out this way and bought a place. His father had a place, and he went to raisin' beans. He was a good farmer. Of course his uncle was a farmer out there, and was a good farmer, so he had a good teacher. His income was around $30,000 that year. 



JOHN IRWIN: Where was the best place to raise beans around <Flagstaff>? 



KIDD QUINN: Most of the best beans was raised in Black Bill Park, from Henry Hutchison's land on down there, Floyd Copeland and all that in there, on that hill, and up towards Timberline Estates and up in there. It was a little higher, and it was a little freer of frost than some of the lower places. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did you have any problem with droughts? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, you had the drought to fight too, as well as the frost. You had the frost on both ends, and then the drought in the middle of the year. 



JOHN IRWIN: It's a wonder that you were able to raise anything. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, you had to do a lot of managing to raise it. You had to prepare your land and store your moisture. That's what it looked like we're gonna hafta start doing now, to store our moisture and our water and everything else, the way it's gettin' to be. 



JOHN IRWIN: Was there a long-term drought during the Depression, as in other parts of the country? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, not particularly that I can remember of. We used to get a lot more rain than we get in the last few years. We did get more rain than we get in the last few years. Now the last eight or ten years, we haven't HAD any rain to speak of, and haven't had any snow. Maybe fifteen years it's been since we have had any snow up there. Back in the thirties, and up in there, forties, we had lots of snow. I remember one year we had big snow, I think the winter of '48. Believe it was '48. We had snow that piled up so high out in East Flag - I was with the sheriff's office at that time, lived in East Flag - the school bus went down Main Street to pick up the kids. And they had Mr. Price contracted to keep the snow off the street. That was Lyle Price that lives in <Clarkdale>, up here in <Cottonwood> now. He called me about seven o'clock. He gets in the car to come in, the snow was so deep he couldn't go straight down with the dozer to push it out, he had to get crossways and push it up this way, all the way down the street. Some of them guys that stay out to the bars at night and come in late, and they'd pull their car in on the road and leave it in the street, I'd have to get out at seven o'clock in the morning - they'd call me and I'd call the wrecker and have 'em pull it out. They had to get down the street to get the school bus down. 



JOHN IRWIN: No, we don't have snows like that. 



KIDD QUINN: No, you don't have anymore. No, that was somethin', because the dozer could not clear it. They had to clear it and push it one side or the other, down the street. Just opened one street down there where that school bus could get down through there and pick up the kids. 



JOHN IRWIN: That's a lot of snow. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, there was a lot of snow then. 



JOHN IRWIN: One more question, before we go on to your career with the sheriff's office. Do you recall, during the Depression, the Oakies coming through <Flagstaff>, as described in, say, John Steinbeck's novel? 



KIDD QUINN: Oh, not particular. Of course there was always someone comin' through. I hired 'em once in a while. Some of 'em comin' through there would be hard up, and I'd hire some to work when I was in the warehouse. 



JOHN IRWIN: Were they good workers? 



KIDD QUINN: Some of 'em worked pretty good, and some of 'em wouldn't. 



JOHN IRWIN: Were they generally on their way to <California>, or just drifting place to place? 



KIDD QUINN: Most of 'em, yeah. Most of 'em on the way to <California>. 



JOHN IRWIN: They had families? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, they had families. You'd see a lot of 'em. I didn't have contact with too many of 'em. 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, can you describe a little bit about your work with the sheriff's office? What year was it that you began? 



KIDD QUINN: I went to work first, extra. I worked for '41, '42, all through there. Then I moved up in town in '44, and then I worked steady then, from then on. But I worked with the sheriff's office from about '42 on. But then I done other work too - I worked extra. 



JOHN IRWIN: So this was on the side? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. 



JOHN IRWIN: Who were the different sheriffs that you worked for during those first years? 



KIDD QUINN: I only worked with Peery Francis. He wanted me to come in and work for him, and I was his chief deputy after I went to work for him. 



JOHN IRWIN: Do you think that he was a good sheriff? 



KIDD QUINN: He was a good sheriff. There was no better sheriff. 



JOHN IRWIN: What were some of the job responsibilities that you did as you were sheriff's deputy? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, the responsibilities were, you're a public servant. Actually, you take care of any complaint that come in. During that time, the city only went to the top of the hill, up there, up where the Straw Hut Pizza is now. That was the city limits. And then up to the Holiday Inn was the city limits the OTHER way. All of East Flag was OUT of city limits. It was my job to take care of all of East Flag. I got all the calls, 'cause I lived out there, and I'd take care of everything that come in East Flag. During that time, the city only takin' care IN the city, takin' care of misdemeanors. The sheriff's office had to handle all felony cases. The city only takin' care of misdemeanors. Any felony cases, why, the sheriff's office had to take charge of. And any call that come into the sheriff's office, whether it was in the city or OUT of the city, it didn't make any difference. If it was in the city, they call the sheriff's office, we went on the call. We would answer the call and take care of it. 



JOHN IRWIN: So you were also serving more or less as city police too, for felonies. 



KIDD QUINN: Well, we was just a servant of the people, the whole community. We worked with the city police, they worked with us. The highway patrol worked out of our office, taking their calls out of our office. They worked off of our radio, all the time we was there. They never went out and had their own radio 'til after we left the sheriff's office. After we went out of office, they got their own radio and set up out at the highway - got a new office out there and got their own set-up. 



JOHN IRWIN: How many deputies were there to do all this work at that time? 



KIDD QUINN: Oh, at that time, I think we were only about five altogether. 



JOHN IRWIN: For all of <Coconino County>? 



KIDD QUINN: Had one in <Williams>, one part-time at <Fredonia>, and a part-time deputy at the <Grand Canyon>, and the rest of us taking care of the office there. Later on we had a part-time deputy at <Sedona>, Will Steele's father, Bill Steele. 



JOHN IRWIN: How could you possibly cope with such a large geographical area, when you had to (unclear)? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, we was on duty twenty-four hours a day. 



JOHN IRWIN: You were? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, any time. I can remember I was called out one night four times from midnight 'til morning, to take care of accidents along the highway. We'd take care of accidents along the highway just the same as the patrol did. If there was a bad accident, I'd just get home, just to get in bed, and the phone rang again - another accident. I'd jump up, put on [my] clothes, and head out again. That's the way we worked then, but they don't do that anymore. 



JOHN IRWIN: No. Then you would also … , if something would happen out at <Tuba City>, you would also have to get in the car and go out there? 



KIDD QUINN: Any civilian in <Tuba City> (unclear), because <Tuba City>'s on the reservation. They would take care of most, but any civilian accident in <Tuba City>, we would have to take care of it - any accident that was a civilian. 



JOHN IRWIN: You must have spent a great deal of time traveling around. 



KIDD QUINN: Yes, was in the car most of the time - a lot of the time. In fact, we didn't get to stay home much. 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; TAPE 1 SIDE 2 IS BLANK. BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1.] 



KIDD QUINN: The Extension Service is actually a different group from us altogether. Mr. Charles U. Pickerel happened to be one, the director of the Extension Service of the University of Arizona, was picked on that board by the legislature for one of the board members to okay the applications for these districts. And the way that we use the Extension Service is for - they're under the University of Arizona - and for information, like we needed to know something that they perfected in the field, you know, such as the growing of things, which is their line of work. 



JOHN IRWIN: You could go to them? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, go to them for information that we wanted to know. Like we wanted some information about something we wanted to put out, out here, or something. You go up there to Bill Brechan, he could tell you all about it because he studied it. But they had no connection with the soil conservation. We got the soil conservation districts set up. I forget how many in the state - every county we had one there, and we put in one for <Oak Creek Canyon>, which was in <Cottonwood>. Charlie VanGorter [phonetic] was over here for years. They've closed now, they don't have one here anymore. It's all operated out of <Flagstaff>, I think, or most of it, over the whole area. But during that time, after we got that set up, we decided to create a state association of soil conservation districts, which at that time we called it the District Supervisors Association. They've changed the name since then to State Association of Districts. 



JOHN IRWIN: What was its function? 



KIDD QUINN: The function of that was to get the association, which all the districts would get together and have a meeting every so often. Once a year we'd have an annual meeting and discuss our different problems, and try to benefit each other from the others' experience. That was the idea for the state association. And every state in the union has that now, and it's a big organization now, the State Association of Soil Conservation Districts. And at the time we got that formed, we worked two or three days down there, writin' bylaws and gettin' it all set up with what we got up. And I was appointed, at that time, by the state land commissioner, as the first president, to act until time for election. Then we set up a time for election, which was the next step - fall, I think. Then that fall when election come around time for election, then I was elected for a two-year term. 



JOHN IRWIN: This was in the 1940s? 



KIDD QUINN: It was in the early forties. I would say, I believe, about '42 - somewhere along there. And I served as the first president of the State Association of Soil Conservation Districts, which is now, still, a big organization. They have an annual meeting every January in <Phoenix>, every year. And we have five or six different ones that's been president of it now. We have past presidents at that association. That's our old friend Frank Dyberg [phonetic] over here was the second president, right after me, and he's already gone. 



JOHN IRWIN: What were some of the accomplishments, you feel, of the one for the <Flagstaff> area that you helped form? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, we built terraces. We built lots of terraces. As you go out through Doney Park and Black Bill Park, you'll see groves of trees along the road, around them places. Russian olives and Chinese elm. We brought them in from <Albuquerque>. The soil conservation had a nursery in <Albuquerque> at that time. We brought a lot of them in, and I got these different people to put 'em out - little bitty sprouts, back in them times. They're great big trees now, and the soil, at that time, the wind used to blow in the spring of the year and go across there and just black out the road, almost. You couldn't drive through there, you'd just have to block the road, prit’ near. But now, you see that on the other end of Black Bill Park, you'll see some of those trees up there, and the soil is built up this high on 'em. All in through there. I got them trees in, got 'em to put 'em out. And then we got terraces built. All them fields that kind of slope, and we built terraces every so often. We had an engineer in the district who would go out and run out these terraces, "This is where to run 'em on the contour, to hold the water, to hold soak." And then for sub-soilin', different recommendations that done a lot of good. Raised their yield a lot. 



JOHN IRWIN: Would an individual landowner have to come to you to ask for help? 



KIDD QUINN: He'd come in and make application. He'd come in and make application to the district for aid in terracing his land or whatever he wanted. 



JOHN IRWIN: Was it a loan, or was it a grant? 



KIDD QUINN: No, the work was done through the district. We didn't charge anything for the work that we done. Our district work, done it free, gratis. But at that time we had a couple of tractors and terracing equipment, and we would hire 'em then, the tractor, for terracing, to make those terraces. We would loan 'em to 'em, rent 'em to 'em, and they'd pay us for whatever the rentage was on the equipment. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did a great many landowners take advantage of this, would you say? 



KIDD QUINN: Practically all of 'em. Nearly everyone in that area taking advantage of it was terraced, emplaced with terraces. Where the water was going down, if you'll notice, just as you go out on Black Bill Park, the road'll turn and goes up to Timberline Estates. There's a big wash right on this side. It's smoothed out, kinda like that. That was, oh, I don't know how deep. We went out there and concreted the bottom of that. We got a bunch of concrete, I hauled it over and parked it at my place out in East Flag there. A lot of old cement we had at the conservation service in <Albuquerque>. We hauled it over here, went out there, and took it and beat it up - it was all lumpy - beat it up and mixed up a lot of stuff and piled it all in there, and stopped that. Henry Hutchison owned it at that time. Go in there and stopped that wash and filled that whole thing up. You see on the other side of it, you could drop a car off in it. That was just above the road. And that wash is still there. They've paved that road now, up to Timberline, but that one on the south side, we put that in there years ago. It's rough, but we concreted the bottom of that thing there for, oh, quite a ways, to stop that wash. It was comin' down agin' the highway there, and it really was washin', because when it'd get them hard rains up there agin' the mountain, it was for miles it'd come down. It really would come. You'd get a hard rain in the summertime, and hail, then [it'd mail?]. Boy, she'd really flood. And those terraces, we got all that land up there terraced, and it would hold it back, see. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did the district only apply to individual landowners? In other words, what relation did you have with the Forest Service? 



KIDD QUINN: At the time we first started, there was no provision to work with the Forest Service, but we seen a need for cooperation WITH the forest for places that comin' off of the forest onto the land, and off the land onto the forest. So the legislature made a change in the provision in the laws, and got the law changed to where we could work with the Forest Service and work on that. Now, we've got laws to where they work with anything, anyplace. They work in the cities, work with building parks and things. In fact, they're building a state park over here in <Cottonwood>, across from the other side of the river there. They've got a big project over there last year. They're building a big state park over there. The soil conservation's got a big hand in that, runnin' that all out and gettin' that all set up. 



JOHN IRWIN: I didn't realize that. 



KIDD QUINN: You can go across over there and see it now. They've got it laid out, and they've still got a lot of work to do, but they've got a big state park over there. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did the district mainly help the farmers, or what about the ranchers? 



KIDD QUINN: Farmers AND ranchers. Helped the ranchers in anytime. Anything you could do on the ranches. But at that time, it was farmland, to try to preserve the farmland. 



JOHN IRWIN: What little there was available. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. 'Cause we was raisin' lots of beans then, and you have lots of wind in the spring of the year, and them whirlwinds would come and go across there and just see the dust fly, take it out. 



JOHN IRWIN: What about water conservation? You must have been involved with that too. 



KIDD QUINN: Well, the water conservation, that's where the terraces come in, where we was preservin' the water by buildin' these terraces up, and makin' 'em put 'em on the level, to where you could hold the water back, on these terraces, every so often. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did you also build dams and that sort of thing, and reservoirs? 



KIDD QUINN: No, the soil conservation never built a dam, I don't think. Ponds and stock tanks was up to the - used to be the Triple A. I don't know what they call it now. It's the Agricultural Conservation, I think they call it now. That's where the government then would pay each rancher so much per foot, for different stock tanks, to distribute the water. Where you had a bunch of cattle that'd all come in here and water here for miles, they would pay 'em to build a tank over here, where they wouldn't have to come on in to graze, they come around this… they graze it all down right now, see? Where it's distributed to different areas. That's where the government (unclear). Agricultural Conservation, I think it's named now. Something like that - I forget. I served on it a long time - it's hard to remember, they've got so many initials. 



JOHN IRWIN: So you do feel the soil conservation districts have done a great deal of improvement? 



KIDD QUINN: Oh yeah, they've done a lot. 



JOHN IRWIN: Northern <Arizona>. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, they've done a lot in northern <Arizona>. During that time that they was farmin' - of course right now, it's not doin' as much good as it was then, but it's broadened now to where they can go into different other areas and help in the community projects and things like that, see, 'cause there's not much farmin' goin' on anymore up there. They was just about (unclear) set 'em up in houses. 



JOHN IRWIN: There certainly is a change in that. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, do you have anything else to say about the soil conservation districts that you'd like to include, about your work with them? 



KIDD QUINN: There's only one thing that I always keep in my mind. You talk about preserving the land, I often remember, the statement was made in one of our meetings, down … we were having a big meeting at the Adams Hotel once, and I had O.C. <Williams>, the land commissioner, as my guest. He got up and he made a statement which I often think of, "We're here, trying to preserve our land. We've got to stop and think. We say we own this, we own that, and we own that. We don't OWN anything. It's just loaned to us for a while, and we're here to try, in this movement, to try to preserve it for the future generation, to where it'll be something here for them, years to come." I often think of those remarks he made, and how true it is. 



JOHN IRWIN: Those are good remarks. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. 



JOHN IRWIN: Another question, was there any work done up on the reservation through the districts? 



KIDD QUINN: No, not at that time. The Agricultural Conservation [does] do work on the reservation now. It's been included now. In the last few years, it's been included to where the Indians set on the board and set on the committees, and they do a lot of work on the reservation. But I don't think a district could do any work on a reservation. They may be now, but there wasn't at that time. 



JOHN IRWIN: I have another question about East <Flagstaff> and its growth and development. When did you first move into the area of East <Flagstaff>? 



KIDD QUINN: I first moved into East <Flagstaff> in '44. I bought a station there which is known as the Delta Tire Corrals. You probably know where it is, just past Whiting Brothers Motel, that corner there. I owned that and run a station there. 



JOHN IRWIN: That was in '44? 



KIDD QUINN: That was in '44, yeah. 



JOHN IRWIN: What was that area like at that time? Not many people lived there? 



KIDD QUINN: Not very many, no. From '44 on up to '48, on up to '53, I think. I lived there. We moved into town then, but that's when we used to have to fight the big snows out there in '48. I had one street right in back of me that was Main Street that went straight through. But then they had the streets all cut there, but there wasn't near the population that it is today. There was just a very few houses. It was on the building increase at that time. They were selling lots. Mr. George Babbitt owned the biggest portion of that, at that time, and they were selling lots. Rita Quackenbush had the sales of the real estate, selling lots [to different people]: buy a lot and build a house. 



JOHN IRWIN: Why was it incorporated so late into the city limits? Did the citizens actually fight against being incorporated? 



KIDD QUINN: No, I don't think they did. As I remember, I don't think they fought agin’ it. There might be some of 'em that did, but .... 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, it's certainly so much different from West <Flagstaff>, in the way the streets go, and the lack of zoning for the early years. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. 



JOHN IRWIN: At the time you lived there, were you very worried about that, that there were not good zoning laws and that sort of thing? 



KIDD QUINN: No. No, it didn't bother me. 



JOHN IRWIN: Of course there's been a lot of new business that’s moved in. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, (unclear), 'cause I was right up on the highway there, I was right on the front highway at that time. 



JOHN IRWIN: Was the lumber mill there at that time, Greenlaw? 



KIDD QUINN: Greenlaw Mill? No. Greenlaw Mill hadn't been in there since .... Well, Greenlaw Mill was tore down in the teens, I think. 



JOHN IRWIN: Oh, that long ago? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. It was the results of that Greenlaw Mill out there in the early twenties, I guess, there was a lot of houses out there from that then. Lots of people lived in the houses there, back in '28 and along there, lived out there. But that old mill place, it was just a place where the old mill used to be. But I don't know just when that mill was tore down, but it was no sign of any mill there, even in the late twenties, so they must have tore that down there in the early twenties, somewhere along in there - tore it out. 'Cause there's lots of [unclear] back into the hills, back in them cinder hills where they had the tram roads and such like. I can show you trams back in there yet, through them cinder hills, where they run them log trains back in there and got logs. Evidently went to the Greenlaw Mill, 'cause that was the closest mill. 



JOHN IRWIN: Another question, that whole area was called Sunnyside, was it not? 



KIDD QUINN: The only place called Sunnyside was from where Americana, back in that area, back from the Americana, back to the mountain, back in that area there, that was what was called Sunnyside. 



JOHN IRWIN: More people lived in that area? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, that's where they first started settlin', back in that area. Right where the Americana was, was the old Greenlaw home. That's where Mrs. Louise Beamer and Mary Draine and all of 'em was raised. That house was moved out of there and moved up on Fourth Street. It's up there, just above that government building that's on there now. Lawson Day bought that house and moved it up there. Don't know whether he still lives in it or not, but he has a place over there on West Street - you know where he lives. He got to dealin' in junk and stuff, and he's made money at it. 



JOHN IRWIN: Another question, in your working with the sheriff's office, did you work very much with Frank Gold? 



KIDD QUINN: Oh, yeah, I worked for Frank Gold a lot. Frank Gold was a VERY good friend of mine. 



JOHN IRWIN: Do you recall any interesting anecdotes or anything about him, or what kind of man he was? 



KIDD QUINN: Well, Frank Gold was a very fine man. I never went to Frank with anything, he was county attorney a lot of times when I was in the sheriff's office. I never went to him with anything, but what he give me 100 percent cooperation, always. Even after I was juvenile officer, Frank Gold - and I worked for Frank Gold a lot when I was juvenile office, 'cause he was the register of vital statistics for the state of <Arizona>, for <Coconino County>. He'd call me up LOTS of times to come over and sign some birth certificates and things for different ones. We'd have to name some babies. Frank was a very fine fellah. 



JOHN IRWIN: Would you say that all the county employees worked well together, or mostly well together? 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. I had cooperation with every county employee all the time I worked. When I was in the sheriff's office, and when I was a probation officer. I couldn't ask for any better cooperation with anybody. Everybody worked with me, cooperated a hundred percent. 



JOHN IRWIN: Do you attribute that to partly <Flagstaff> being a smaller town than it is now, that you knew everybody, and easier to work that way? 



KIDD QUINN: Might be. But everybody in the courthouse, from the assessors on up - everybody cooperated 100 percent. 



JOHN IRWIN: That's good. 



KIDD QUINN: Everybody who's important in the county: supervisors and all. 



JOHN IRWIN: Another question, would you consider - we're just about done - when thinking over when you lived in <Flagstaff>, to what it is now, what strikes you the most as being different, or what feelings do you have of change? (pause) Other than the obvious thing that it's grown larger. 



KIDD QUINN: It's just grown larger, and there's more growth into the college area. I think that has made <Flagstaff> more interesting all the way through, because they've got a lot more college. I can remember, when I was in wholesale, used to deliver grain to the college when they had a little dairy herd up there on the college ground up there where that big high campus building is, I guess. There was lots of times we'd haul stuff up there where they had the little dairy herd up there, when Mother Hanley fed the whole bunch. That's been a long time ago. That makes a big difference, because the college, the growth of <Flagstaff>, I think the college has contributed an awful lot to it. I think. 



JOHN IRWIN: It certainly has grown huge, compared to what it used to be. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, it sure has. 



JOHN IRWIN: Did you work directly with Mother Hanley? 



KIDD QUINN: I just knew her. 



JOHN IRWIN: I guess everybody knew her. 



KIDD QUINN: I knew of her, and I had a friend that used to work up there and cooked for her, years back, before I ever went to <Flagstaff>. I'd come up in the summertime, she'd go up there every summer and cook with Mother Hanley. I knew her, and knew the family. She used to be one of my customers when I was in wholesale. We used to supply a lot of the grocery needs, wholesale. 



JOHN IRWIN: One last question: What did you like to do for recreation when you weren't working on all of your jobs? Did you like to go out and hunt and fish? 



KIDD QUINN: If I had any time for recreation, I liked to hunt. But I never liked to fish, I've never fished. 



JOHN IRWIN: I guess you couldn't take too much time to go out and hunt. 



KIDD QUINN: No, I never had any time. But I loved to hunt, I used to. When I lived in <Phoenix>, I used to do a LOT of huntin' - quail huntin'. I used to do a lot of quail huntin' when I lived in <Phoenix>, when I was in wholesale down there. Of course we only had Sunday. We worked six days a week, back them days, you know, up to six o'clock Saturday night. 



JOHN IRWIN: That's not much free time at all. 



KIDD QUINN: We had Sunday off. 



JOHN IRWIN: A lot of things get done on Sunday. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, that's right. 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, do you have anything else you'd like to.... 



KIDD QUINN: I can't think of a thing, John. I know I've enjoyed the work I done up there, especially when I worked with the court [as] probation officer and worked with the children. I've had lots of good compliments, lots of boys and girls that come to me and tell me that they think what I done for 'em, they sure appreciate it, to the high heaven. Nothin' else that they could think of that they could do to show any more appreciation for what I done. And I done it a lot of times that it cut my throat when I was doin' it. 



JOHN IRWIN: It's a hard job, and that's certainly good reward. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah. I've had 'em come to me and tell me they wanted to thank me to high heaven for doing what I done - stayin' in there and not lettin' 'em have their way, doin' what I thought was right, and they benefitted by it. I know 'em now. I know one girl that's got a good job somewhere. Two or three of 'em really appreciated gettin' the education which they'd have never got. 



JOHN IRWIN: That certainly is a heavy responsibility for a person to decide a child's future like that. 



KIDD QUINN: Yes, it's more than a lot of people think. 



JOHN IRWIN: Of all the jobs that you've had, which one have you enjoyed the most? 



KIDD QUINN: I enjoyed the probation officer, working with the children - more than I did any of 'em - at THAT time. Of course there's a way they have it now, it's altogether different, because they got the laws changed to where you can't do what's best for them chil'un. You can't do it. They'll hire a lawyer and sell you down the river. See what I mean? They do whatever they get paid to do. That's not right. 



JOHN IRWIN: Things are very much different now. 



KIDD QUINN: Yeah, it is. 



JOHN IRWIN: Well, nothing else to say? 



KIDD QUINN: No, I can't think of anything else. 



JOHN IRWIN: Okay. Well, I certainly thank you. 



KIDD QUINN: Okay. 



