FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Glen Longley

Interview number NAU.OH.28.70

Glen Longley, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1917. He and his father were barbers while they lived in <Flagstaff>. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on September 21, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, July 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in <Utah>, 1904 

    Parents 

    Father, Floyd Longley, miner in <Utah> 

    Mother, Dora Phillips 

    When came to <Flagstaff>, 1917, father was barber 

    Family residence 

    Milton Road, later Mike’s Pike 

    Schooling 

    Training school 

    Flagstaff High School at Emerson 

    Classmates at Training School 

    Pansy Nichols 

    McConkey 

    Dolly Rodriguez 

    Flu epidemic 

    Effects on business, schools 

    Barber business 

    Why family came to <Flagstaff> 

    Father’s health 

    Frank Gold’s health problems 

    Marriage and family 

    First wife, Mildred Dunn 

    Second wife, Frances Hutchinson 

    Served as County Assessor 

    Children 

    Daughter, Nan Sullivan 

    Daily chores as child 

    Stacking wood 

    Mill workers 

    Conditions of housing 

    Old Highway 66 

    Front Street, described 

    South San Francisco Street, described, red light district 

    Prostitute murdered, Dutch Mae 

    South side, described 

    Other ethnic groups 

    Spanish vs. Mexicans (Basques) 

    Sheep herding 

    Personalities in town 

    McGonigles 

    Dolans 

    Babbitts 

    Pat Moran 

    Financial problems, Vic Watson 

    Cattle rustling

Tape 1, Side 2

    Cattle business 

    O.L. Hart 

    Credit problems among homesteaders 

    Michelbachs 

    Doney Park homesteaders 

    Bill Boyd, actor – Hop-Along Cassidy 

    Draft dodgers 

    Social life of community 

    Marler’s Dance Hall 

    Donney Park dances 

    Bootleggers 

    Funerals 

    Van Zee family 

    Weddings 

    City Politics 

    Police 

    Reuben Neill and Jackson 

    Jail 

    Story of prostitutes, came to barbers to get haircuts 

    World War I 

    Depression 

    Tom Pollack 

    Effect on barber business 

    World War II 

    Navajo Army Ordnance Depot 

    Flooding of Rio de Flag, dam 

    Dry years, reservoirs, carrying water 

    Steam heat for city from power plant 

    Other ethnic groups 

    Blacks and William Cady’s lumber mill 

    Orientals 

    Saving money to have bodies sent back to <China> when died 

    Wongs 

    Yees 

    Navajos 

    Helen Sebah 

    Tourism 

    University’s role in community 

    East <Flagstaff>, Sunnyside, controversy

This is an interview with Mr. Glen Longley, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1917. He and his father were barbers while they were in <Flagstaff>. The interview is being conducted on September 21, 1976, at Mr. Longley's home located at 10260 El Dorado Drive in <Sun City Arizona>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [The narrator's wife, Frances Hutchinson Longley, is also present and gives a little of her own background. (Tr.)]

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, Mr. Longley, when and where were you born?

GLEN LONGLEY: I was born in <Bingham Canyon Utah>.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you mind giving the year?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, no. December 26, 1904.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, just a kid! (laughs) Okay, and who were your parents?

GLEN LONGLEY: My parents were Floyd and Dora Longley.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was your mother's maiden name?

GLEN LONGLEY: Her maiden name was Dora Phillips.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, and were they from <Utah> originally?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, no. No, my father worked in the mines in <Bingham Canyon>. It was one of the largest copper mines in the world.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Hmm! When did they come to <Flagstaff>?

GLEN LONGLEY: We came to <Flagstaff> October 17, 1917.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Um, so that was real early. Okay. Well, what did your father do?

GLEN LONGLEY: My father was a barber.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did your mother do any kind of work?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, no.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just raising the children.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yeah.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Um, that was time consuming. Okay and where was your family residence? Why don’t I get that.

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, we lived all over town, you could say. When we first moved there, we lived on South Agassiz, but we didn't live there long. Most of the time, until I was married, we lived down on Milton Road, just, you know, south of the Flagstaff Laundry.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. Oh! Now, was that mill housing?

GLEN LONGLEY: No. Milton Road. No, it wasn't. It was called Milton Road. It's called Mike's Pike now. You know where the Guadalupe Church is? (

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.)

GLEN LONGLEY: The Catholic church. It's right there in that area.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I see.

GLEN LONGLEY: Only it's on what they call Mike's Pike now. It was called Milton Road. I lived there all the time I went to grammar school and high school there in <Flagstaff>, until we were married.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is the house still there?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, yes, the house is still there.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, my gosh. Were there many people living in that area then?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, yes, lots of people living in that area, LOTS of people. And right along there, it was all white people that lived there.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, the Mexican area then was further south?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, the Mexican area was farther east, over closer to the Flagstaff Mill, the Southwest Mill.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: South of O'Leary and down and all that over there, uh-huh. Okay. Now, you mentioned going to school. Which school did you go to?

GLEN LONGLEY: I went to the Training School at the college and I went to Flagstaff High School at Emerson - they called it Emerson High School.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where were the classrooms at the Training School?

GLEN LONGLEY: The classrooms in the Training School when I was there was in the Old Main. That's all there was. There was Old Main and the library - or the auditorium, as they called it at that time. That's the only buildings that were there, outside of the dormitories.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember anyone that was in your class particularly well?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, there in grammar school, you mean?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes. There was a girl named Pansy Nichols. And the Nichols family was quite a family there on the south side. Then there was a boy named - a colored boy. There was about three colored kids that went to school over there. These were the only colored kids in <Flagstaff> at that time, and they went to that Training School. I can't think of his name. I can't tell you. And, let's see.... There was a McConkey boy that was there. Now, that's a tough one to spell.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I'm sure.

GLEN LONGLEY: There was a girl named Dolly Rodriguez, a Mexican girl. Those are about the only kids I can think of right now.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: I see (laughs) that’s pretty good to remember those.

GLEN LONGLEY: That was a long time ago! Part of that was in 1917 and part of it in 1918. And in 1918, just after school had started, the flu epidemic started - the old Spanish flu epidemic that killed so many people there. It was a strange epidemic that happened, well, not only in <Flagstaff>, but all over the <United States>. Killed thousands and thousands of people. You don't read much of it, about the flu. In fact, there were so many people dying in <Flagstaff>, I remember we'd go by the undertaker's - when I was just a kid, we'd go by there, and there wasn't room. The undertakers couldn't take care of the people; there were so many people. There'd be fifteen, sixteen people there in the undertaking parlor - about that. That's at that time. That was November of 1918. And that was just about the time, the end of World War I.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did anyone in your family have the flu?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, they didn't. Strange thing. No one seemed to know where it came from, and all at once, it was over. They closed all - everything was closed - the schools were closed. Everybody that was in the college at that time, they were sealed there at the college, they couldn't leave. They couldn't even go home. The kids couldn't go home, they stayed there in those dorms all the time, there wasn't even school. And the show was closed; the barbershops were all closed. Any public gathering was off limits - they closed everything.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: How did that affect your father's business?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, he just had to quit, he couldn't open the barbershop.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he have financial problems then?

GLEN LONGLEY: No. Well, we always had financial problems anyway. (chuckles) Wasn't any different then than any other time!

KRISTINE PRENNACE: (chuckles) The barber business wasn't a real lucrative business?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, yes, it was, as well as anything else - a lot better than a lot of people were making there in <Flagstaff> at that time. The people that worked, and the Mexican people that worked in those mills, they didn't make very much. They made fifteen cents an hour, what they got paid.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: About how much would a barber make then?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, a barber, well, he was making - he got twenty-five cents for a shave and fifty cents for a haircut.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: And you could do several in an hour?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, yeah, uh-huh. He could make fairly good money.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he have any employees?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, yes, he had one. He had a two-chair barbershop. It wasn't bad as some things.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where was it located?

GLEN LONGLEY: It was located on Leroux Street, right across from the Weatherford Hotel. In fact, the barbershop is not there anymore, but the barbershop that I had, afterwards, is still there. It's across from the Weatherford Café.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, uh-huh, it's just a little bit more toward Santa Fe?

GLEN LONGLEY: Uh-huh.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I know where that is. Oh, so then when did you go into the business?

GLEN LONGLEY: I started barbering in 1922.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, is that with your father?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, I started barbering with him.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: And that's what you continued to do then till your retirement?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Why did your family come here?

GLEN LONGLEY: To <Flagstaff>?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.

GLEN LONGLEY: My father was an asthmatic, and we'd been all over and lived quite a few places in the West. He was trying to find a place where he could breathe, and <Flagstaff> was the place. We moved there from <Fullerton California>, and he stayed there - cured him ________.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Hmm. Amazing, 'cause a lot of people came to <Flagstaff> for their health.

GLEN LONGLEY: For that very reason. I don't know if you know the Flint [phonetic spelling] boys or not - Mike, and what's the other Flint boy? Ted ______? Mike was the asthmatic. That's the reason the Flints came. He teaches in school. His brother's a lawyer now. LOTS of <Flagstaff> people were either tubercular or asthmatic. The Riordan men, they came here, because one of 'em had tuberculosis. The Webbers, and all of 'em. The town is full of people who came here, mostly because of tuberculosis.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, and they seemed to recover from it.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yeah. You've heard Mr. [Frank] Gold. That's the reason HE came. Did you ever talk to him; did you ever interview him?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: No, I didn't have a chance to. He's not well now.

GLEN LONGLEY: Isn't he?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: No.

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, shall I tell you the story that he told me?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yes!

GLEN LONGLEY: He came out there as a young man to <Williams>. He had tuberculosis and they told him he had about six months to live. He said he got off the train and he didn't know WHAT to do. He was standing there and a cattleman came by in a wagon. He looked at him and said, "Kid, you got tuberculosis, haven't you?" He said, "Yes." He said, "Get in the wagon. Put your suitcase...." He said he took him out on his ranch and kept him for six months out there and gave him a tent to live in, and he said he started to get well. And it was from then on that.... I think this was in 1904.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, it must have been real early.

GLEN LONGLEY: Uh-huh.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah and he's what, ninety-eight years old now? (laughter)

GLEN LONGLEY: That's right!

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah that’s amazing. Okay, why don't I go ahead and ask you when you got married.

GLEN LONGLEY: When I got married, I got married the first time in 1923.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was your wife's name?

GLEN LONGLEY: My wife's name was Mildred Dunn.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Weren't they <Flagstaff> people also, the Dunns?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: And you remarried.

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, my wife passed away, and I married Frances less than a year ago.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! (to Frances) Are you from <Flagstaff>?

FRANCES LONGLEY: Well, yes. I moved there in 1935. And just as far as making the connection, so you know who it was, have you had occasion to look at Melvin Hutchinson's history of the university?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: No.

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Well, it was just published in 1972.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yes! I HAVE read part of it.

FRANCIS LONGLEY: He was my first husband. He was a professor at the college.

GLEN LONGLEY: He was head of the journalism course, I think.

FRANCIS LONGLEY: And then I worked at the courthouse from 1936 through 1975 when I retired - except for a six-month period or so when I was away. So I had a lot years around the courthouse.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yes. And who did you work with?

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Well, I worked six years for the county farm agent, and then I spent all the rest of the time in the county assessor's office.

GLEN LONGLEY: In fact, she WAS the county assessor.

FRANCIS LONGLEY: I ______________. I worked for three different men who were assessors: one of 'em for fourteen years, one of 'em for eight years, _________ for about eight - seven or eight.

GLEN LONGLEY: One of these men that she worked for was Derwood McKinney [phonetic spelling], and he lived in <Cottonwood>. I don't know whether you've heard of the McKinneys or not. (

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.)

GLEN LONGLEY: He's a man that you should interview, too. You really should.

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Yes, I think so. His family are old-timers - his wife.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me see did you have children?

GLEN LONGLEY: I had one daughter, yes. Her name was Nan Longley. Her name is Nan Sullivan now. She lives in <Phoenix>, she has three children.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Nice and close then. Okay, oh! There’s something that’s kind of interesting sometimes to get. Did you have any special daily chores or things that were expected of you to do as a child?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes. When we were kids everything was - we used wood to heat the house and to cook with, the old wood cook stove. And we had to keep the wood box full of wood. We either had to chop the wood or saw the wood. At least we were expected to have that wood box full. We couldn't do anything until it was. That was about the only chore there WAS to do - and shovel snow.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) Yes. I want to ask you about some of the big snows.

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, I came there just the year after what they called the big snow in '16. Of course the winter of.... Well, the fall of '17 there wasn't any snow at all. And up until January 9, [1918], it [didn't] snow. The first time the Catholic Church had ever registered Christmas without snow on the Peaks. They had kept a pretty good record, the church had. Then it was normal snows all along until the next big snow in '37. Then we had a big snow in '49. And Frances, when was the seven-foot snow? When was that?

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Really, the one in 1937 was the largest snow [I remember].

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, it was _______. At one time there was seven feet on the level there. When was it?

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Well, it snowed seven feet, but there was enough setting all the time, that it didn't really build up that high.

GLEN LONGLEY: But those were the big snows.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it really difficult for you as a kid to get.... from ...

GLEN LONGLEY: No, we didn't think it was. And we used to go sledding up on Observatory Hill anytime we had any extra time. All the kids were up there. They don't go up there anymore. And everybody walked. NO ONE had an automobile. Well, automobiles wouldn't function in the wintertime anyway. At that time you had to take the battery out of your car and take it down to Babbitts Garage and store it. And you jacked the car up on jacks and left the car in the garage all winter. No one drove a car in the wintertime back when I was [small]. Old Man Mickelbach had a sled that delivered groceries, and that's about the only thing that moved in that town, except the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, the ALandT Mill. They had horses that they did all the work up there. And the Riordans, they had horses and sleighs to come back and forth to town. That's the only people that you saw moving.

FRANCIS LONGLEY: And the rest of us had to walk.

GLEN LONGLEY: We walked! And everybody walked and everybody was thin. There weren't any fat people in those days, believe me! You can get those old pictures out. You go out there and look at the museum, and look at the pictures of different groups. You didn't notice any fat men until along about '22 - fat stomachs began to show up. The automobiles had come, you know, and they began settin' instead of walkin'. And those Mexican people that lived up there by, you know, about where The Gables is, and you know where _________ is, and _________. That's where the Mexicans lived that lived over behind the Dolan house. You know where the Dolan house is? You know where the Pick Quik, that little place, is there? (

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh.)

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, the Mexicans lived all in there. They had little old shacks. Dolan had built all these shacks in there, and there was one water hydrant for about eight houses. That's all the plumbing they had for these people. They walked back and forth, usually only twice a month. They'd get paid - the first and the fifteenth was payday. And the stores were filled 'til nine o'clock at night, and all of 'em walked from up there, and up and down town and back - spent all their money, or what they had left out of the little bit of money that they had.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: You say you can remember walking by here?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh yes, because that's just the street that they walked by, going back and forth.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, the underpass wasn't there at all?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, it wasn't there, no. Now, when I went to high school, I used to go up over that hill where the underpass is now - you went OVER the railroad track. There was a street there. Sitgreaves was there, but it went OVER the railroad track at that time.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh! There was a street there that went all the way through? Huh. (

GLEN LONGLEY: Uh-huh.)

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, did some of the traffic come down Phoenix Avenue? Was that Old 66?

GLEN LONGLEY: Old 66 come across Beaver, there at Beaver Street, down to the corner there where Food Town is, and turned and went down Milton Road.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, so that's why all those motels and hotels are there.

GLEN LONGLEY: [The road to Boleon?], that is there. That was the first motel in <Flagstaff>. That's the reason it was there, because Old 66 went right down where I'm talkin' about, down Milton Road, and turned there at [Yaya's?] or at Huck Finn's. What is it they call it? Restaurant? The street that runs all the way into the college now. Remember, they'd just opened it up.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, Riordan Road now.

GLEN LONGLEY: Riordan Road. Right there and turned up to the mill and went on over the hill to <Williams>, down to 66.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ah! Yeah, now I see how it went that way. So there wasn't any street there like where El Flamingo Motel is.

GLEN LONGLEY: No, no. That was a big pile of sawdust from the mill. All that in there was sawdust. Where the Holiday Inn [is], that was the mill. That was where the mill was. In fact, that's where I learned to swim, was over behind there in the millpond. That's where, when we was kids, we'd go swimmin' over there.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it clean?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, it was not! (laughter) It was logs and there was everything else, but that's where we learned to swim.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Doesn't bother kids anyway!

GLEN LONGLEY: No, not a bit. And we didn't have any bathin' suits. It was all skinny dippin', as they call it now.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me see, what was Front Street like?

GLEN LONGLEY: Front Street? Well, when I went to <Flagstaff>, of course <Arizona> had gone dry and had gotten Prohibition. We didn't have national prohibition, but <Arizona> went dry in 1915. And so the only liquor they had in <Arizona> was bootlegged in from <New Mexico> and from <California>. But Front Street was just pool halls and Chinese restaurants all along there, with three or four Chinese restaurants and two or three pool halls on Front Street. And the Nackards had a dry goods store on the corner there where Joe's Pool Hall is now. And the old Pine Hotel, the Commercial Hotel, and the Bank Hotel. ______________ Front Street.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, ___________. Now maybe 'cause you were living on the other side of the railroad tracks, do you remember much about South San Francisco Street, what that was like? Was it pretty rough?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, at one time, South [San Francisco].... Shall I tell you this? At one time, all South San Francisco Street, from <Phoenix> on down, was prostitution. This was the red light district. All along where the Nackard property is there, was the red light area. And they had the red light area there until - there was one woman who was famous, they called her Dutch Mae. She had a real nice home there, that's right there were the Downtowner Motel is. They found - her throat had been cut - even cut the canary. She had a canary bird, and they cut the canary's throat, and the cat's throat. (women gasp) Then they began closing up the red light district after this happened along about '15 or '16, I guess it was. Of course <Flagstaff> - South San Francisco was ALWAYS the red light area for <Flagstaff> until World War II. There was always houses of prostitution along there.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were there any stores.... Well, they wouldn't be on South San Francisco....

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, there were, sure. Of course there was one good-sized garage. The Pilkingtons [phonetic spelling] had a garage there on the corner of <Phoenix> and San Francisco. There were two Spaniards that owned a grocery store over there. There was little Mexican stores all along San Francisco Street, and then little Mexican restaurants. Not many white people went down there at that time.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: I notice you made a distinction between the Spaniards and the Mexican people.

GLEN LONGLEY: There is a vast difference. (laughter) We speak of the Spanish - most of these people that we spoke of as Spaniards were not Spanish, they were Basque. A lot of them claimed they spoke Spanish. They spoke Basque. It isn't the same language, but if you can speak Basque, you can understand Spanish. Some of 'em were French Basques.... I guess you understand what a Basque is. The Basque people come from the Pyrenees Mountains. The Pyrenees Mountains divide <Spain> and <France>, and some of 'em are classified as French Basque, and some of 'em are Spanish Basque. But most of the Basque people that were brought into <Flagstaff> were brought in to herd sheep because they're excellent sheep people. Sheepmen like Dr. Raymond and people like that brought these Basque in, because they understood sheep. And of course they ended up with all the sheep afterwards - the Asos and the Kohako's and the Speels [phonetic spellings] and all these people were originally just sheepherders.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: They buy out the other people who own it.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yeah.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, let me see what do I want to ask about? Who were some of the personalities in town that you can remember?

GLEN LONGLEY: How far do you want me to go back? Back when I was....

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah.

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, let's see.... The McGonigles - they were mill people. The Dolans. Mr. Dolan was the manager of the Flagstaff Mill at that time, and all his family lived over there. The Babbitts. The original Babbitt men were more or less untouchables. They were such bluebloods that they didn't have anything to do with the common herd in <Flagstaff>. In fact, they didn't educated their children there. Their wives all had their children over in <Los Angeles>, they went to doctors in <Los Angeles>, they educated their kids in <Los Angeles>. It's only about the third generation of Babbitts that <Flagstaff> people became acquainted with. So we didn't know any Babbitts for a long time at that time. One man that ran Babbitts' was a man named Pat Moran. He was manager of Babbitts' for years. Then Babbitts' got in such a financial strait along in the twenties that they owed the bank in <California> so much money that the bank sent a man in named Vic Watson, and he came in to run Babbitts. [He] ran it and got 'em out of debt. The bank insisted on this man taking over the management of the Babbitt Store, and all their investments. As soon as [Vic] got 'em out of debt, they fired him. By that time, he had gathered up enough cattle that he went into the cattle business himself. He was like these Spanish sheepherders - they worked long enough, they stole enough sheep to go into business.

That's the history of the cattlemen, like Joe Kellam. They come in there with nothing, and they gradually steal a steer here, and one there, and they finally end up with a big cattle outfit. Of course the one cattleman that had a fabulous lot of cattle was Les Hart - the old Hart Cattle Company. You've probably....

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

GLEN LONGLEY: But Babbitt gave him so much credit that they finally took over his business. That is, his cattle company, because they just kept givin' him credit, and Les Hart's family, and this girl. She drove a Cadillac, and her mom drove a Cadillac. They spent money like it was goin' out of style. And it was all credit. It was all credit, and Babbitts' finally said, "We've had enough," and they took the place over.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did that happen with a lot of homesteaders?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, it did. Babbitts' took over things, except Joe Kellam. They could never get to Joe Kellam; he was always ahead of 'em. He was takin' from them all the time! (chuckles)

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well and Mickelbachs seemed to make it.

GLEN LONGLEY: The Mickelbachs had _________. The Mickelbachs were tough. Old Man Mickelbach had never had any cattle. He had this little old farm out there by Fern [phonetic spelling] Mountain, and he raised up a large family, and just had a little ol' potato farm. Those kids worked like dogs out there. And then Frank and Albert or Pete, they began puttin' some cattle out there on this place, and they've got quite a lot of cattle now, that Old Man Mickelbach NEVER had.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: He didn't ever borrow or buy on credit or anything?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, no, he just worked like a dog all his life, right up to the last shovel of snow, street in <Flagstaff> before when he died, I guess.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just did anything to make a buck.

GLEN LONGLEY: Did anything to make a living.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's a rough way to go. But they were one of the few people that held onto their land, then, after the Depression.

GLEN LONGLEY: They held onto it that’s true. Of course a lot of those Doney Park farmers out there held onto their land, too, out there. That was tough goin', too.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, they just really, really had to work. Otherwise, they just lost the whole....

GLEN LONGLEY: That's right.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Can you think of any other people? Well, the Hochderffers?

GLEN LONGLEY: I never knew the Hochderffers. They had come and gone by the time I could find out about people, you know. Of course one of the few folks - when I was a kid, we used to go to Lake Mary, swimmin', if we could find somebody to take us out there. The man that run Lake Mary at that time was a man named William Boyd. Bill Boyd finally ended up as movie star. He was Hop-Along Cassidy in the movies afterwards. At that time, he used to go by our house. He drove a Stutz-Bearcat. And that was the greatest car in the world! Everybody drooled over this man with his Stutz-Bearcat. But he only stayed - we always thought that he was hidin' out from the draft, that's the reason he was out there at Lake Mary. That's what everybody in <Flagstaff> [thought]. Of course there was a lot of people around there that was hidin' out in the <Grand Canyon> or places, workin' out there, to keep out from the draft. They'd come from somewhere else.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ah, so they couldn't find 'em to make 'em register.

GLEN LONGLEY: They couldn't find 'em, yeah, that's right.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Let me see what about the social life of the community? Do you remember much about that?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, there wasn't too much of a social life. There was a dance hall on Beaver Street and Santa Fe, just off of Santa Fe, called Marler's Hall. They had a dance there every Saturday night for, oh, quite a few years. And that was actually the.... Now, that was the [common herd's?] social life, you might say. And then in the summertime they had a big dance hall in Doney Park, and that was every Saturday night. In fact, there wasn't any social life except - and there wasn't any bars at that time - the bars didn't come back until '33. There wasn't any bars. Of course the bootlegging joints, where all the illegal whiskey was sold - all they did was just go to those places and drink, there wasn't any social life. So they'd get drunk and go home. (laughter)

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did your mother - did I ask before if she belonged to clubs?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, she didn't.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, did your father belong to any of the fraternal organizations?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, my dad was a Mason, and that was all.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, what about churches?

GLEN LONGLEY: No churches. We didn't belong to any churches.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, do you remember any funerals, like when you were a kid or anything?

GLEN LONGLEY: Funerals? Yes, the one funeral that I remember was there was a - he had been a missionary, Van Zee was his name. He had a family of about five children, and he was out on the reservation. He moved to town so the two boys could go to high school. These two boys were in my class. And there was about, I guess, two or three other children, and this man was back on the reservation, preaching, and the house caught on fire and his wife and three children - one of his boys that was in my room - all burned. I remember the funeral, because I was in school and we all went to the - they turned the whole school out to go to this funeral, because this woman and the three children had burned up in this house. This was the biggest funeral that I remember when I was a kid. Of course I wasn't too prone to go to funerals.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: No, no, it's not something.... But that is interesting that it touched the whole town pretty much then.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, it did, yes.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember much about weddings or anything?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, not much.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Small family affairs?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, none that I can think of.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. Let me see what about city politics? Do you remember much about, oh, city officials?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, not as a kid, I don't remember much about 'em. As I grew up and was in high school, I remember some of the policemen and how they ran everything.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, they were pretty powerful?

GLEN LONGLEY: There was only two. The City of Flagstaff only had a night policeman and one.... The chief of police and one other policeman was a man named Reuben Neill. He had _________ with Jackson. Reuben Neill and Jackson. Jackson was the night man. They run the City of Flagstaff, police-wise. They had their little old jail there in the back of the city hall there on the roof.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh that was right by you, then.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, right next door to me. And I remember one time when they opened this big.... In fact, the one wall that was in my barbershop ran on back and was the back wall of the jail, in the city jail. Our back door, when it was open, you could hear the people in jail. And they had opened this large warehouse over by Food Town, and so they just held a big dance over there. I remember two beautiful prostitutes came to this dance. They weren't supposed to be there, but these two good-lookin' women, and they were skunky drunk. They got to cussin' everybody in this place, and it took about four sheriffs and city police - they carried these two women out. They were fightin' and pullin' their hair, and fightin' these policemen. They took 'em to jail and they put 'em in the city jail, and they were there in that jail about a month. And they could sing - these two girls could sing like nobody's business. And they put lace curtains up on the back of that jail window and had all pictures and everything in the cells that they was in back there. And they sang night and day, all the time (laughter) - didn't bother these two gals ___________. I knew what they was gonna do when they got out anyway.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: I was going to ask you before what kind of contact the city had with any prostitutes. That was unusual.

GLEN LONGLEY: That was unusual.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: But usually they just all stayed there around....

GLEN LONGLEY: They stayed down.... Of course they'd come up when.... In the twenties, all women began gettin' haircuts. It was along about '24 when women cut their hair off. There wasn't any long hair. There just wasn't any long hair. This prostitute used to come to our barbershop to get haircuts. They didn't go to the beauty shops; they went to the barbershops to get haircuts. They always used to tell us, "Now, if you want any whiskey, come down to our place. We've got good whiskey down there." They didn't promote their real business, but they promoted their liquor business. "Come on down. We've got the best liquor in town. We get it from the chief of police."

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh!

GLEN LONGLEY: That's what they used to tell us! "We've got the best liquor in town."

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, let me see. Oh, now you had just barely gotten here before World War I broke out?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, it was going on at that time.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh that’s right. Okay, I was thinking of the end. Do you remember very much about how it affected you or <Flagstaff>?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, yes, I can remember all the men being drafted, as a kid. The troop trains would go through, and you could hear the men hollerin'. We'd run down to the depot, and the whole train, troops would go through. The same way when the war was over - they began coming back from the east coast, and I can remember one boy that I ran around [with], his name was Frank Chin [phonetic spelling]. At that time, I was in the seventh grade. And we went down to the depot, we heard there was a bunch of trains, troops coming in. His cousin got off the train, and Orin Compton [phonetic spelling] got off the train, and the blacksmith's son, named Wilson, got off this train. The three of them had been all in the service together.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's amazing. You can remember that coming back home. Okay, so we talked about Prohibition. What about the Depression?

GLEN LONGLEY: The Depression came along in '29. That's when the market broke. <Flagstaff> didn't feel much of it. Of course they had that one bank failure in <Flagstaff>, I think along about '32 - Arizona Central Bank closed. But it was just shortly after Roosevelt closed ALL the banks. When he went in, he closed all the banks and straightened out the bank situation, got the bank insurance. But all over the <United States>, banks were closing by the dozens. And it was just because these bankers were stealing all the money. There was one man there that stole all this money all along Northern <Arizona>. He got away with all of it. They got control of it after that, to where they couldn't [do some of that?].

One of the great bankers there in <Flagstaff> was a man named Tom Pollack.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: I've heard of him.

GLEN LONGLEY: Tom Pollack ran the bank. He was the president of the bank there. He was fabulously wealthy. He built the town of McNary. At that time it was called Coolidge [phonetic spelling]. He built the mill there; he built the railroad from McNary into Holbrook. He owned a couple of steamships. He owned a couple of beautiful racehorses. He lived out there north of where Navajo is out there - what we call the Flats out there. He had a beautiful home out there and a big racetrack and everything, with a private lake. And he went broke, absolutely broke - lost all his money in that deal down in <McNary>.

But the Depression began affecting <Flagstaff> along about '32, '33, and on up until World War II. There just wasn't any jobs for people. People that had been bankers and managers - I remember one man that was manager of Babbitts' Furniture that came around and wanted a job washin' windows and scrubbin' floors - anything. There just wasn't anything. It was a peculiar paradox, that Depression. No one knew why it came, and no one seemed to know what happened to it. But all at once, with all this fabulous amount of money, there wasn't any. And then all at once we got into a war, and here was millions of dollars being spent for the war. And up until that time, we didn't have any money. Where it came from, I don't know!

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, being self-employed, then you were probably very....

GLEN LONGLEY: I was as well off as anybody.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: You were?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, I was.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: People went ahead and got haircuts?

GLEN LONGLEY: People got haircuts, yeah. I can remember people, when the banks failed, I remember one poor man, he was teaching school there, and he came in my barber shop and he only had fifty cents - that's all he had, until he got the next pay. At that time, teachers were paid in a kind of peculiar check. They even had to discount those checks.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: They were warrants.

GLEN LONGLEY: Warrants. And this poor man, he went insane. I often wondered if this wasn't one of the reasons. He had a wife and two children, and he lost his mind. And I often think that that was part of it. He just didn't have a thing.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: That really did hit some people.

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, it was terrible.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, World War II now. How did that affect <Flagstaff> and you?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, I was in the service during World War II. It took most of the young men OUT of <Flagstaff>, but it was the greatest thing in the world, financially, for <Flagstaff>, because at the start of World War II they built this big ordinance depot out at Bellemont. And that storage filled up forty-five square miles out there. It was a TREMENDOUS thing. Stored all the ammunition, they put thousands of people to work building it, and afterwards there was a tremendous payroll there, up until about, oh, two years ago. It was a great thing. I can remember when they was building it. Before I went in the service, in '42, they were building Bellemont out there, and the streets in <Flagstaff> every night looked like the Fourth of July Pow Wow was going on! There were THOUSANDS of people around. There was men working, had maybe two jobs out there. There was so many people working that they couldn't even keep track of 'em. Very good for <Flagstaff> - the war was. That's when <Flagstaff> started building. I don't think that <Flagstaff> couldn't have been 7,000 population at that time. And after that, it never quit.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me see. Well, talk about flooding for just a minute. Do you remember it flooding, like over by [your] family residence?

GLEN LONGLEY: On Milton Road? Yes, it did flood. River de Flag, where they built the dam up at Civic Park. That used to come down and flood all that south side, and up around the college, and all that area. I can remember goin' home from school one day, and there was about two feet of water around our house. I had to wade through the water to get in the house. It used to happen that way every spring, when that river.... The river would start fallin' on the Peaks and come down River de Flag. As a kid we used to float a lot of rafts and stuff down River de Flag.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, did they change the course of the river?

GLEN LONGLEY: No, but they built this dam up there, and just the flow of the water never was great anymore, after they built this dam. It held most of the water, and it was controlled.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me see, what about some dry years? Do you remember any very dry years, water shortage years?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, I do. I can remember, I think, one year there we had a real dry year, and there wasn't any.... They had done something to the city reservoirs to clean them out at the wrong time, thinking we was gonna have a runoff, and there wasn't any snow and we didn't have a runoff. So the water was really short. They had the two reservoirs. There was SOME runoff off the Peaks, and that was the only water source that we had at that time. There wasn't any wells or Lake Mary either. So we used to go out, there's a spring up at the Museum of Northern <Arizona>, and we used to get our drinking water up there. And we'd go down to a place called <Lindbergh Springs>, which is down on the Oak Creek Road. We'd go get our drinking water there. We would buy drinking water. Some of the college kids made money going out and getting five-gallon cans, and they'd come into town and sell this water to you. You couldn't wash your car, you couldn't water your lawn, or anything like that. It was a fifty-dollar fine to even be CAUGHT doing that. And people used their bathwater to water their flowers and all this.

At that time, all downtown was heated by steam from the powerplant there. We got our steam heat from the powerplant. They just barely had enough water to even make the steam for downtown.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me see. Do you remember when the black population in <Flagstaff> came?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes. In '22, William Cady [phonetic spelling], Old Man Cady, bought the mill. He bought the one at <McNary>, and he bought the Flagstaff Lumber Company. Cady was a southern lumberman from <Louisiana>. So he began bringing the Negroes in, and <McNary> was, I guess the mill down there was almost one hundred percent Negroes. And he TRIED to bring Negroes into <Flagstaff>, one trainload, and the <Flagstaff> people went out there and stopped the train and made him take it back. They wouldn't let 'em come in. Now, a lot of people don't know this, but they did. The Cadys lived there in <Flagstaff>. The second generation was Bill Cady; ran the mill there for his dad. They kept that mill up until about, oh, six or seven years. All of the help that they had, they brought in from <Louisiana> - most of their help was brought in.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: I was going to ask you if it created some resentment in <Flagstaff>. I imagine if they stopped the train and made it go back, there must have been.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yeah, they didn't want all these colored people. But they finally began coming into <Flagstaff> to work in the mills. You couldn't stop 'em. You could stop a great group of 'em at one time, but they began to [infiltrate]. Up until THAT time, the men that did all the logging out in the woods were Swedes. These were great lumbermen, the Swede lumberjacks. But then these sawyers and the people who sawed all these were mostly Negroes. They began coming in, __________. They made good money, the Negroes did. Most of the Negroes on the south side were mill people.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of the oriental families in town?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, the Wongs. They lived right there on Agassiz when I first moved to <Flagstaff>. They had a little laundry. Mr. and Mrs. Wong ran this little laundry. She had a child every nine months. I hardly ever saw her. He brought her over from <China>. And women just didn’t show, that's all. All the Chinese men were all bachelors, I guess. They saved their money, these Chinese men, saved their money, so their body could be taken back to <China> to be buried. And all they did, they lived in the back of the restaurants, and they played the Chinese lottery. That's all they did. There was no social life for these people whatever. But not Wongs. Mr. and Mrs. Wong raised this family, and they're all there in Flag. Some of 'em are still there in <Flagstaff>. Mrs. Wong - I don't know if you know the manager - her husband is head of all the housing there in <Flagstaff>, for the City of Flagstaff. Do you know John Warren who has a Chinese wife?

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. Yeah, it’s just a big connection, because I know Mr. Warren. I've heard of her, but I didn't connect them.

GLEN LONGLEY: She's a GOOD friend of mine. His wife is a Wong girl. She had a couple of brothers that are still there, in the upholstery business. They were all over, the Wongs. This was a good Chinese family.

And then there's the Yees. Bill Yee is a real estate man there. He came in and married Mrs. Warren originally. And she had two children by Bill Yee. He was a Chinese boy from <Honolulu>. But the Chinese people that ran restaurants, all those people came in, oh, along about World War II and afterwards - the restaurant people that are there now. But the Wongs were the prominent family. They owned the Rose Tree bar. Old Man Wong made a LOT of money, and he left a lot of money to his kids, they were well off.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. That’s interesting.

GLEN LONGLEY: One of the Wong boys married a Chinese girl, had her shipped over from <China>. Then he died and she married a schoolteacher there in <Flagstaff>.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, the one that owns the Rose Tree now?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yes, uh-huh.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, okay. Were there many Indian families in town?

GLEN LONGLEY: Yeah. And there's only one woman, up until they started building Bellemont. They used lots of Navajos out at Ordnance, because they were secured.... Oh, there wasn't any worry about 'em being spies or stuff like that. So they used the Navajos. That's when the Navajos began to come to <Flagstaff> and Vail. And they built Bellemont, and they had a little Navajo village at Bellemont. But there was this one Navajo woman, Helen Sebah, and she came there as a young girl and she never went back to the reservation, only except to see her folks. She did janitor work all over town for all the prominent families in <Flagstaff>. She's still there; she still does the housework for Mrs. Beth Babbitt. She did our housework and did our janitor work at the barbershop, and my other wife had a beauty shop, and she did our work, the janitory stuff, for years.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: How do you spell her last name?

GLEN LONGLEY: S-E-B-A-H, Helen Sebah. You can go talk to HER!

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, because we don't have very many Indians at all. Well, there WEREN'T many. [She'd] be good to get ahold of. What about tourism? Did it really affect your business much?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, yes. The tourism was a great thing. When schools began letting out in <California> and other places, they'd begin to come to <Flagstaff>. All the motels began fillin' up.

But still, the best thing that ever happened to <Flagstaff> was the college - especially in the summertime, the summer school would start. And that, for years, up until World War II, that was the best thing, business-wise, that we had in <Flagstaff>, was the summer school at the college. It brought more people in.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: More permanent, yeah. At least for a longer period of time than tourists.

GLEN LONGLEY: Yeah.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: What about East <Flagstaff>? Do you remember much about its development?

GLEN LONGLEY: Well, Frances… who was that old man who had all that property out there in East <Flagstaff>?

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Ralph Beasley.

GLEN LONGLEY: Ralph Beasley! Had almost ALL the property, outside of what the Greenlaws owned out there. He developed Sunnyside and sold those lots for fifty dollars apiece out there. You could pay five dollars down, and five dollars when he caught ya', and he started this stuff. And this is true. So then after, not really, _______ they quit callin' it Sunnyside, and it became part of <Flagstaff>. What did they finally call it after it was Sunnyside, Frances?

FRANCIS LONGLEY: Well, you see the recorded subdivision plats in the recorder's office as Sunnyside Subdivision and Sunnyside Farms and Sunnyside Hillside, and units....

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2, BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was there some controversy when East <Flagstaff> was joined with __________?

GLEN LONGLEY: Oh, yes! They didn't let us people in <Flagstaff> vote on it - they let those people in EAST <Flagstaff> vote whether they was comin' in, but I always thought I wished they'd given <US> a vote - we would have never LET 'em come in! Because they give us a big sales talk, "Take East <Flagstaff> in, and we'll cut all your expenses of running the city in half. They'll pay all the taxes!" Well, from then on, taxes went up and up and up, because it just took more policemen, it took more fire stations, it took more everything. Water? George Babbitt owned the water system out there and sold that water system to the city for a fabulous amount of money. It wasn't worth five cents! Isn't this right, Frances? Oh, he got a terrible fee for that water system, and they turned around and put new pipes in everyplace. I don't know how those poor people out there even got a bath out of George Babbitt's system. It was a mistake <Flagstaff> ever takin' East <Flagstaff> in. It's never - it's always been two towns. There's always been two little cities there. People in <Flagstaff> resent the ones in East <Flagstaff>, and the East <Flagstaff>, you can see how the school kids are. There's two high schools, East <Flagstaff> and Flagstaff High School - they hate each other. The kids, it's almost bein' like they're bein' a colored man to go to East <Flagstaff>, if you live in <Flagstaff>, you know. No, they've never broke the barrier.

KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me see, I can't think of anything else. I guess we've gotten to the end.

GLEN LONGLEY: Okay that’s fine.



