Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

P.T. Reilly Interview

Interview number: 53.40



[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A] 

This is the River Runner's Oral History Project, and we're here at P.T. Reilly's house in <Sun City>, and present are P.T. and P.T.'s wife, Susie, and Karen Underhill, and me, Lew Steiger, and Mike Morgan's running the camera. It's September 28, 1994, at about 10:30 a.m. 



Steiger: What interested you in the historical aspects? 

Reilly: Well, to be honest with you, I wasn't interested in the historical aspects at first. As soon as I went through the Canyon, Dock Marston made a habit of getting hold of all the passengers. He was building a case on Nevills, and he contacted all the passengers, and evidently he thought I was a pretty good one, because he and I got to corresponding and he really interested me in getting the record. And I think of my early days on the river, when I didn't shoot historical photographs, I could kick myself seven ways. I was after scenic stuff and action stuff. So I got some pictures, but I didn't get the pictures of the stuff that was inundated by <Glen Canyon Dam> -it just made me sick, I could have had all the stuff in those sites, and now it's down at the bottom of the reservoir. I didn't get it. I saw it, but what the hell. I took a few petroglyphs. When that article comes out in Utah Historical, you're gonna see a few of 'em. Incidentally, of all the people that have gone through my photos in the last couple of years, nobody took a single one of those photos I'm using in this article, not a single one! 

Susie: When you say Dock Marston contacted passengers, you mean when you first made a trip with Norm Nevills through _______________ <San Juan>. 

Reilly: Yeah, after the first Nevills trip, Marston made a habit to contact everybody who went with Nevills, because he was trying to build a case on Nevills. Nevills had a stinky little habit of making sure that nobody equalled his wonderful record, and he ran everybody's boat, all of his boatmen's boats, at least one rapid. And he took my boat ... below <Nankoweap>, starts with a "K." 

Steiger: <Kwagunt>. 

Reilly: <Kwagunt>! After Nevills got killed, when I ran with Frank, Frank let me lead the party through. I ran the first boat through <Kwagunt>. Then he did the same thing to Frank Wright on Duby [Deubendorff]. That was one of his stinky little tricks that he used. Everything that Nevills did, I began to see the reasons for it after Dock got ahold of me and began corresponding. We talked about this and that. I saw right away that old Dock knew more about the river than anybody I'd ever bumped into. I could tell that Norm didn't know beans about it. He put on a heck of a show, he acted just like a sideshow. He told all these tremendous stories, and they were all far-fetched and misbegotten and never took place in the first place! (chuckles) But I could see Dock's point of view, so the two of us kind of developed a special relationship that.... Dock was making suggestions to me, and I told him what I'd found here and there. Soon I was taking a lot of pictures as a suggestion, and Dock must have copied three or four hundred of my black-and-whites. He had a set-up in his home that he could shoot duplicates. They're in the Huntington now. 

Susie: Was it he who got you interested in the history of the river runners? 

Reilly: No, Norm really got me interested in the history of the place, mainly because of his wild stories, hell, I began to read the stuff that had been written, and I saw that the early runners were amazingly inefficient. I saw Powell's deficiencies, and I saw Stanton was a con man. He had a great crew, Stanton's crewmen were as good as you'll ever find, in my opinion. The early river runners, George F. Flavell [phonetic spelling], and Nate Galloway were the really great runners. Then after I found the 1903 trip that was previously unknown, I became interested in the historical aspect of it, with Dock's help. He egged me along. I didn't realize it at the time, but he just kept on making suggestions and everything, and I rose to it, and before long I was taking on problems that I had just blithely passed by before, and solving a good many of them -some of them never have been solved. 

Steiger: Well how did you track down the 1903 trip? How did you end up encountering that? 

Reilly: Well, that was quite interesting. I was a member of the <Los Angeles> Chapter of the Adventurers Club, and a mutual friend brought a guest up there, and his name was Arthur Sanger [phonetic spelling], and he introduced me as a fellow who'd run the Colorado River, and old Art Sanger, we shook hands, he said, "Why I did that back in 1903!" The bells started running around, and I knew that nobody in recorded history had recorded a 1903 trip. So I asked him a lot of questions, and it turned out he had a diary. I wrote Dock right away that I'd found a new traverse, in 1903. 

Susie: ____________________ fly down tomorrow. 

Reilly: And Dock said he'll be down right away. So we had old Art Sanger come out to our house. He came out in a driving rain. We lived in Studio City, in the hills in back of Studio City then. We had dinner together and both Dock and I copied Art's log. I wrote it up in Desert Magazine, I think you've probably seen that. 

Steiger: What was your opinion of Marston? Sounds like he was pretty knowledgeable both about the river and about the history. 

Reilly: Dock was. He went right to the original source. He was an ornery old goat, and you couldn't trust him, but he knew. (laughs) Dock and I had many years of a fruitful relationship. What broke it up, he double-crossed me. And I told him off about it, and that ended it. 

Steiger: Well, you said that he was making a case against Nevills. Why was he so interested in doing that? 

Reilly: Because Nevills fired him. 

Susie: That's the whole answer. 

Reilly: After the 1948 trip, Nevills liked to be the big cheese of every trip he made. He wanted people to "ooo and ah" over him and everything. Dock had a picture of him taken as a skeleton. In those days, there was a skeleton above Basey's [phonetic spelling] Paradise there, and Randall Henderson printed a picture of Dock looking at one of the guy's ribs. Of course that was an Indian burial that ________ had been dug out of the ruin right there. People today might not even know there's a ruin there, but that's what it was. That, and the fact that everybody that could take pictures and ran, we always gave Norm Nevills a handful of pictures involving him or that trip. Old Dock laid it on the line to him. He said, "If you want these commercial pictures, they'll cost you...." I forget what he said, ten dollars a piece or something. And, oh! Norm never had any money, and he hit the ceiling. So that settled it right there. Dock and Norm split, finally. So I was living with Norm at the time at <Mexican Hat>, taking care of his boats and boating with him. Norm said, "What would you do?" And I said, "Well, write the little bastard a check and forget about it." So he did. And from then on, Nevills and Marston were deadly enemies. Of course Nevills got killed September 19, about three weeks after his last voyage hit <Boulder City>. It was a little after two weeks after he and Doris and Joan had been our house guests in <California>. I was in supervision at Lockheed, and I took Norm and Doris through the plant. Oh, that was a big spot (chuckles) in Norm's life. He'd never been in anything like that, see all these big barrels for the [cunny?] sitting there. Of course at that time we were down kinda low, and there was no swing shift to speak of, except in tooling. I was amazed at what impressed him the most. What impressed Norm the most, I took him through the foundry, and the guys were pouring these large [kirk site?] dies, and he saw these guys pouring this molten metal into these plaster female forms, and he was just amazed. When we got through, I asked him about what impressed him the most about the tour, and he told me that. I just couldn't believe it. Of course Norm didn't know beans about tooling. 

Susie: Tell about when he first came into the airport. 

Reilly: Oh yeah, when he first set his ship down -he and Doris and Joan flew in and landed at Lockheed Airport, and the tower called him out where he wanted to go. And he said, "I don't know, I'm looking for my friend Pat Reilly." And hell, the people in the tower had never heard of me! They guided him into Sky Roamers for a tie-down. Then he had my telephone number and he telephoned me and I came over and got him. Turned out, when I took him to the plant, there was a Mormon officer on the gate, and they saw he was from <Utah>, and he assumed Norm was a Mormon (chuckles) which he wasn't! Oh, sure, take him right in. And he said to Norm, "I assume you're strong in the faith?" And Norm was smart enough to say, "Well, I've been accused of never being strong in anything." (laughter) Anyway, the guard pushed us right on through, and no problem there. Well, now what do you want? 

Steiger: Well, when it comes to your reputation as a historical statesmen, I think one of the things that people appreciate, one of the things that makes your reputation, is your meticulous attention to detail. And that's really shown in your logs. Your trip logs are incredibly valuable, because they're so precise, and because you actually did take the time to record all that stuff. Did you make those logs just on a daily basis? 

Reilly: Right at the time. 

Steiger: What got you started doing that? Or is that something that you do on other trips and stuff? 

Reilly: Any trip I've ever made, the same thing. 

Steiger: In the river, or just anywhere? 

Reilly: Well, on the river especially. But I've hiked in the Sierras, and we've been up to a lot of places in the Sierras, and flights and everything. Sometimes, especially on flights, I would make notes at times and write 'em up later, but __________ later. But all the essential stuff was made right at the time. 

Steiger: What is it that motivates you to do that, or has motivated you to keep such detailed records? 

Reilly: I don't know, I guess I'm just a natural-born record-keeper. I never thought I'd ever commercialize on 'em, or hand 'em in, but I can see that the record of the river, if anything ever needed an objective recording, it was the people on the river! God, it was pathetic! 

Steiger: You mean the whole situation during the forties and fifties? 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Susie: No one kept any records, or knew where they'd been. 

Reilly: They didn't keep any records, they didn't know what they were doing, they were just having a good time, and "living for the moment," you might say. They didn't know what anybody had done at a certain spot before them, or anything. When I went down the river, I knew what people had done at various places before me. And that meant quite a bit to me, and I tried, depending on the stage of water.... Nevills never wanted to run over -if he had his choice, he would never have run over 14,000-15,000 second-feet. 

Steiger: He liked it to be 14,000-15,000? 

Reilly: Or less. Nevills was a low-water man. And I saw right away that that was a hell of a way to go. After Nevills died, and I was setting my own schedules, I tried to guess the peak, and I tried to be on the river during the peak. In 1957 I run the highest water ever run -127,000 second-feet. And she peaked on us, we were right above President Harding. 

Steiger: Do you think that Nevills liked low water [because] his boats influenced that? 

Reilly: No, I don't think he thought that much. I think it was what he was used to. 

Steiger: He just felt safe? 

Reilly: He felt safer. Norm was a complex guy. He'd have been a good case for [psychiatrist Sigmund] Freud! But he didn't really have any deep motivation. I think he wanted to give his passengers a good time, and to do that he wasn't above Docktoring up the old stories. I've heard him tell some awful.... 

Underhill?: Exaggerations? 

Reilly: Exaggerations. Have you ever heard Dock tell the story of Cave Springs? He had Stanton talking to the men there -this is the way Norm did it. He was talking to the crew and he was facing the river and the guys all had their backs to the river. He's trying to tell them that Brown's body floated in on the tide. And somebody reached out to grab it, and the tide took it back out and floated it down the river, and had the dudes just looking bug-eyed at him. Of course that never happened, but they didn't know it. I just listen to stuff like that and (thfffppptt) shake my head and Frank and I would look at each other, and that was all there was to it. 

Susie: Did Norm ever run a rapid wide open? 

Reilly: Very seldom. Nevills seldom.... He looked everything over. He looked Badger over, and Soap. He looked 'em all over. Norm had one main motivation: He never wanted to take a trip down where his boatmen ran every rapid, and he saw that every one of his boatmen didn't run one of the rapids. 

Steiger: You know, Frank Wright talked about that too. I wonder.... 

Reilly: Frank's a good man. 

Steiger: It seems as though Nevills must not have foreseen the present times at all. Did he actually believe, you think, that he would forever remain the only guy that ever.... 

Susie: Oh, absolutely. 

Reilly: Yeah, absolutely. 

Steiger: So you guys, when you were doing this, did you have that impression too, that river running was just never going to be a big deal? 

Reilly: Well, none of us could foresee that it would become the dude operation it is today, the commercial operation. 

Steiger: Along these lines, to get back to some of these questions that Karen laid out here: This one, How did you differ from the river runners who preceded you? You touched on that by saying that certainly people of your time, that those guys from the late thirties through the early sixties weren't paying any attention to the historical record. Besides that, how were you different from the guys who preceded you? 

Reilly: Well, that was real easy. In the first place, I had read enough about previous voyages to know what So-and-So did at such-and-such a place. Of course everything varies with the stage of water. And that's why I always went to the higher stages. I was the only one to go for the higher stages. All the other guys, they all -Nevills set the stage. I don't know what Flavell and Galloway would have done if they would have.... I think they would have come out topside, if they'd run it later. But in their day, I think they were certainly tops. I admire both of them very much. The Kolbs were just laughs. Emery Kolb wanted to update his pictures once, and he kept track of me on the river -I guess through the Park -and 1955 or 1956, he telephoned as soon as we landed and got in there. <Phantom Ranch> was different then from the way it is now. And we came in, Slim and Dotty Patrick [phonetic spelling] ran the whole thing, and we took over the whole thing. They had a pool there, and we were the only ones down there. Now it's just full of dudes and they're sitting around drinking beer all day long. But Emery telephoned me when I was at <Phantom Ranch>, and he wanted me to take him down the river. And I said, "Why do you want to go down the river at your age, Emery?" And he said, "Well, I want to update my pictures." Well, Norm had told me the trouble he had with him, in 1938, I believe. He took him down on the last half, and Emery liked to give demonstrations of his memory. He'd go through a magazine and thumb through the pages and hand you the magazine and tell you what's on every page. He gave little demonstrations like that. Well, he didn't [act that way?] on the river, and he shot some film, according to what Norm told me, and he laid a magazine down and forgot it. And he accused Nevills of stealing it, which, hell, Nevills had no use for the damned film. Nevills didn't even own a movie camera. He wouldn't know how to use it if he did! Anyway, the least thing I wanted was to take Emery Kolb as a passenger, because I knew what he was after. And I said, "Well, Emery, I've got some excess footage that I haven't had time to make any movies. If you want, I'll bring this by and let you see it." And he said, "Oh, that'll be great." Of course it wasn't great, because it didn't have the little man [picture?] directing things, which is what he wanted.

Anyway, Susie and I took a bunch of footage, and after this last dude show, we ran the film in a studio where he showed this picture to the dudes. He hemmed and hawed a little, but he wasn't in it. "Well, you gotta have a little bit of this, and a little bit of that." So I just gradually shifted out from under it, convinced him that he should charter a trip and shoot his own footage, get what he wanted. Well, he wasn't about to do that. 

Steiger: He wasn't about to go down there again? 

Reilly: That's right. Well, he didn't know it, for one thing. 

Susie: He didn't recognize __________________. 

Reilly: You see, Emery's brother, Ellsworth, he was the one that was the dare devil, who would do anything, and Emery was the one that.... What Ellsworth did scared the hell out of Emery, and he was sitting there wringing his hands, and Ellsworth was out just having a good time and didn't know any better. 

Susie: (inaudible) 

Steiger: Really?! Ellsworth must have been a pretty modest guy, because when you read his book, Through the Grand Canyon, he makes it out that Emery was the expert boatman and Ellsworth is always talking about how [he, himself] turned the boat over and got the cameras wet. And he's always talking about how Emery is the guy that really could row. Is that true? 

Reilly: I'll tell you one thing, that I utterly believe: Ellsworth was a lot better brother to Emery, than Emery was to Ellsworth. 

Steiger: What makes you say that? 

Reilly: Well, from the way the brothers acted toward each other. 

Steiger: Ellsworth took care not to say anything bad about Emery. 

Reilly: Never said anything bad about Emery. Ellsworth was a kind of a character in his own right. He wound up, he had an apartment over a garage in Montebello -that's a suburb of <Los Angeles> -and along the walls he had a mass of pictures of nude women. Old Dock visited him out there once. He said it was the damnedest thing he ever saw. 

Susie: Didn't Frank Dodge tell what kind of a boatman Emery was? 

Reilly: Well, Emery was a chicken boatman. Frank Dodge was a visitor in our home, and I could tell the way Dodge talked -he wouldn't come out and say anything out-and-out bad against Emery, but he was real hen house, and Dodge could tell it. Emery was supposed to be the head boatman for the 1923 expedition. He ran down <Upset Rapid> and he got into the big boy there, and he dumped. And he climbed up on the topside of his boat, and Frank Dodge swam out and pulled him and the boat to shore, towed them to shore. 

Steiger: Frank Dodge was standing on shore and he swam out and got him? 

Reilly: Yeah. Swam out and towed Emery, on top of his boat. That's how <Upset> got it's name. And he pulled them both into shore. 

Steiger: Now wasn't Ellsworth on that trip too? 

Reilly: No. 

Steiger: Or on the 1923? 

Reilly: That was the 1923 Birdseye expedition. Ellsworth wasn't on it, only Emery. 

Steiger: Well, Ellsworth must have been on the top half of that. 

Reilly: No. 

Steiger: Didn't he go through Cataract and all that? and maybe not through <Grand Canyon>? Because I had the impression that he was involved in that. 

Reilly: Birdseye started at <Lee's Ferry>. 

Steiger: Okay, so the upper half -I know that they had surveyed the upper half.... 

Reilly: You got the 1923 with the 1921 expeditions fouled up. 

Steiger: Because Ellsworth was a part of that. 

Reilly: So was Bert Loper. 

Steiger: But you never actually met Ellsworth then? 

Reilly: I never actually met Ellsworth. 

Steiger: I wonder what Marston thought of him. Did he know him at all? 

Reilly: Well, I don't think Marston ever knew him, except for that one visit to his apartment in Montebello, when he saw all the nude women on the wall. He recognized that Ellsworth had a problem, but he didn't go into it. Ellsworth is buried at <Glen Canyon>, right there with all the other -so is Emery. 

Steiger: Well, that seems only fitting. 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Steiger: I have to say, having just taken all these cameras, all this stuff down here -and I know we're drifting, Karen, we'll get it back together here -I was amazed, I have to think of those guys, going down there in 1911 with a bunch of camera equipment that had to be a lot harder to maintain than what we have today.... 

Reilly: They didn't have anything like what you have, though. 

Steiger: That they could just get through there and come up with some useable film, I have to __________. 

Susie: It was amazing. 

Steiger: Now you guys, I mean the same thing, as far as films and movies and river running go. 

Reilly: No, we had it pretty simple. All the stuff that I shot, that picture that you got, Tommy Cox [phonetic spelling] shot about 90-95 percent of it, and I shot the rest the following year. Tommy used a Bell and Howell, and I forget whether I used a Bell and Howell or my present Bullox [phonetic spelling]. One of the other, it doesn't make any difference anyway. 

Steiger: Well, it obviously held up pretty well. 

Reilly: But all I had was a camera in a waterproof case and my film in another case, and my light meter, and that was all there was to it. I didn't know enough to have stuff like you guys have. 

Steiger: Well, less is more sometimes. Now, when it comes to the river runners that preceded you.... Now, let me get this straight: Powell, [you] didn't think much of him. 

Reilly: I don't think much of Powell. 

Steiger: As a river runner, or as a scientist, when it comes to Powell? 

Reilly: Well, neither one. I think in the case of Powell, he was clearly trying to shoot himself into the public recognition with the other surveyors. The other three guys had gotten big government contracts, and Powell saw the opportunity for it, and he took the river trip from <Green River Wyoming>. 

Steiger: Stanton? 

Reilly: Well, Stanton was an engineer who was primarily used to spending other people's money, and he sure spent some on that. Now, Stanton had a heck of a good crew. Some of the men that Stanton had, they were just fantastic men. 

Steiger: Who, specifically, and what makes you say that? 

Reilly: Well, every one of 'em was a good man. See, I never did take you people down as far as <Diamond Creek>, did I? Or you take me down. The last bunch, I guess I took John Hoffman [phonetic spelling]. My only baloney trip, I ___________ Stanton inscription down there. 

Steiger: At <Diamond Creek>? 

Reilly: At <Diamond Creek>. They'd never even heard of it before. You've heard of it, haven't you? 

Steiger: You know, I don't think I have -or if I have, I certainly haven't seen it, and I don't know where it is, or any of that, no. 

Reilly: Well, you got a good mental picture of <Diamond Creek>? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Reilly: Well, instead of pulling in there at the mouth of the little stream, pull in at the top part of the canyon, tie up there. 

Steiger: Way high up in the drainage, the highest place you can pull in at. 

Reilly: The highest upstream part of Diamond Creek Wash. As you're going down, it's a right-hand drainage, but it's dry. Go up there about a hundred yards, and on a rock, there's an inscription. When Stanton sent his cook out, and one other crewman, and they chiseled their names. And I showed that to John Hoffman, he was just ga-ga over it. 

Steiger: Okay, now, when you say the right-hand drainage, you mean the right going downstream? 

Reilly: Always. On the upstream, it'd be the left side. 

Steiger: As you're walking upstream, the extreme left side. 

Reilly: About a hundred yards up there, there's a rock about, oh, yeah high. We got some pictures of that, haven't we? 

Susie: Yes, we have. 

Steiger: I'm going to go track that down the next time I'm there. 

Reilly: Oh yeah. You ought to take your camera along. There's a good inscription. 

Susie: ____________________________ and the inscription, he's standing by it. John Hoffman took it. 

Reilly: John had never seen it. 

Steiger: Yeah, well, I hadn't heard of it either, so that's a pretty ___________________. 

Reilly: These modern guys, they don't get very far from the river, you know. They're takin' dudes down for a price. They rush 'em through, unload 'em, go back for another load, and rush 'em through again. They don't run rivers! On every one of my trips, I took a couple of days and made it a point to go up one long tributary or another one. I've been up more tributaries in <Grand Canyon> than all the rest of 'em put together, and some of 'em made eighty, ninety trips -some of 'em over a hundred, probably. 

Steiger: Well, that's a pretty good tradition. I think there's some outfits that still do that. I think you must have instilled that in Martin. 

Reilly: I did, quite a bit. I took Martin and the 1962 party up to what I call the Juno Ruin in <Lava>. I wrote that up somewhere. 

Steiger: And found Harvey Butchart's Time magazine. 

Reilly: Yeah, I found Harvey's magazine. I toted it out, I still have it here. 

Steiger: Oh you do?! 

Reilly: Yeah, it's in my room someplace. His address label on it. 

Susie: Probably ________________. 

Reilly: I read old Harvey's log, and I figured I got all of his logs. Unfortunately, I gave 'em to <Utah>. But I figured you people had 'em anyway. Do you have Harvey's correspondence with me? 

Underhill: We have all of Harvey's correspondence _________________. 

Reilly: He made copies of his letters to me too, huh? I didn't know whether he did that or not. He used carbon so damned weak that you could hardly read 'em. 

Steiger: He came and actually saw us off, but we're digressing here. So Stanton, I have to admire him for hangin' in there and taking those pictures, but I guess when it comes to.... Wait, we were back on the crew. Who else on that crew stands out on the Stanton crew? That guy Harry MacDonald? 

Reilly: MacDonald was the old jack Mormon who really pulled 'em through. He supplied the know-how. He was from <Kanab>. Dock and I went out and interviewed his daughter. She lived north of <San Fernando> -I forget the name of it. Not Selmar -a little place up there. And we interviewed her. Old Harry was quite a guy. He was just an old <Kanab> boy that was used to roughin' it. He was Stanton's strong right arm. Every time Stanton got in trouble, which was pretty often, MacDonald would bail him out. He's the one that put the boat back together after they mashed it to splinters in.... 

Steiger: <Grapevine> or Sock. 

Reilly: Sock Dulliger [phonetic spelling]. They landed on a ___________ and it gutted up little bits of the piece, and MacDonald put the thing back together again and they continued downriver with it. 

Steiger: And then lost in Horne [phonetic spelling] Creek, and MacDonald was so mad he quit him there? 

Reilly: Yeah, walked out. No, it wasn't <Horn Creek>, it was.... What's the big one next to <Lava>, the worst rapids on the river now? 

Steiger: Well, now it's <Crystal>. 

Reilly: <Crystal>! 

Susie: Yeah, <Crystal>. 

Reilly: MacDonald walked out at <Crystal>. 

Steiger: I would think then, the next worst rapid to <Lava> would have been <Hance>, you know, before 1966. I don't know, but that's what I would say. <Hance> or Duby. I guess it would depend on the water. 

Susie: <Hance> was pretty big. 

Reilly: <Crystal> wasn't anything before the big flood hit, but it was the longest rapid in the river -it was a mile long. We just piled-into it wide open. But after the flood washed those big boulders down and ran the fan out there, good God, no. 

Steiger: But on this crew thing, you seem so certain that Stanton's crew, aside from McDonald, that they were a good crew, and I'm still curious about that, what made them earn your respect so much? 

Reilly: Well, several of 'em came back [to] the Canyon on their own, mining. One thing Harvey Butchart did, he tried to trace the route that one of 'em used to get down into Upper <Lava>. You probably know about that. 

Steiger: And that was how he ended up finding the Juno Ruin? 

Susie: No, __________________. 

Reilly: No, I don't think so. The Juno Ruin was first.... Oh, it's been so long since I've thought about this that I don't remember all the names. But those three rangers, one of 'em got drowned in <Horn Creek>. Come on, you know who they are. 

Susie: Dan Davis was one of 'em that.... 

Reilly: Well, I should have done my homework on this. I didn't think you'd be getting into that. 

Steiger: Well, __________________. 

Reilly: There were three rangers. The head ranger of the day.... Oh, I'll think about it. Maybe I can come back to this. 

Steiger: That's okay. We are getting.... The subject that's of interest now is just kind of a summation of just who stood out for you, of the guys that preceded you; and I guess what you say, pretty much most of the boatmen I know agree with you there, that it was Galloway and Flavell who really knew.... 

Reilly: Galloway and Flavell. They knew what they were doing. I named my second boat Flavell. 

Steiger: Well, and then those guys that took the bear down. 

Reilly: In 1927? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Reilly: Eddie? They didn't know from nuthin'. 

Steiger: Well, they had to be pretty competent to take a bear cub. 

Reilly: No, they didn't know any better. Now that was a good trip to illustrate that going through the Canyon was the heroic thing that Stanton and Powell had built it up to be -Powell especially. I hold that as a black mark against Powell, "Only superhuman people can do this." Baloney! It's amazing how some people with inferior equipment.... Powell had keel boats, Stanton had keel boats. Hell, if there's anyplace in the world you don't want a keel boat, it's in the <Grand Canyon>! And Nevills' great contribution was the wide-beam, flat-bottom boat -something you would never get the Stanton girls to admit is that -and I think Bob Rigg holds the same view, that the Stanton boat was so damned much better than it was. Nevills, when I first ran one of his boats, he took me over and opened the boat up. He said, "Now, don't get anything in the corners, the aft corners, the blunt end, the sadirons. Don't put anything in the corners, concentrate all your weight close to the splash board." Now that's the first person, I'd asked Bob Rigg if he thinks the Nevills' boat was so God damned good, why couldn't you put anything in the corners?! (pause for battery change and tape check) 

Steiger: I think that Bob Rigg has had a change of heart. (laughs) 

Reilly: About what? 

Steiger: About boats -based on this trip. I think that he's startin' to see the light when it comes to dories and just to that.... 

Reilly: I hope he is! 

Steiger: I think so. 

Reilly: He's a pretty smart kid. 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Reilly: He used to be. 

Steiger: I think so. 

Reilly: He's gutsy as they come. 

Steiger: Bob too. 

Reilly: Bob was a good boatman. Bob's dead. 

Steiger: No, Jim's dead. 

Reilly: Oh, Jim's dead, that's right. 

Steiger: So Bob and Jim, it wasn't like Ellsworth and Emery? 

Reilly: Oh no. No, both of them were good boatmen. No, it wasn't like Ellsworth and Emery -nobody'd been like them!

After Flavell and Galloway, the next good boatman, I think, who went all the way through, was Buzz. 

Steiger: Yeah. Frank Dodge wasn't employed as a boatman and they didn't use him as a boatman, but only _____________ times. Frank grew up in <Hawaii>, and he could swim like an alligator, and he was an awful good swimmer, and he swam out and got Emery when Emery climbed up in the boat. But Frank would swim through some of the rapids, just for the hell of it. And he was a good boatman too. What had put him in the top with Buzz and Galloway and Flavell, I don't know. 

Steiger: I agree. Why do you put Buzz Holmstrom up there -and this isn't to say that I'm wondering, 'cause I think I know, but I'd like to hear your take on it too. 

Reilly: Well, he had his personal miseries, but he know how to handle oars, and that's all you can ask of a boatman, Can he handle the oars? And he ran solo. He ran everything except part of <Soap Creek>. I don't you could throw mud at anything that Buzz did. You got much of a book on Buzz? 

Steiger: We're gathering material. I'm not that well versed in him, but we've rounded up his old journal. Brad Dimock, a real active member of our association, and a guy named Binswell [phonetic spelling].... 

Reilly: Binswell? He was boatman for.... 

Steiger: For Martin. He sat down and taped you. We got that tape in our _______________. 

Reilly: Yeah, Vince wrote a deal in this Oarsman deal. Didn't act like he knew Buzz was homosexual. 

Steiger: (in surprise) Oh, I had never heard that one! 

Reilly: You'd never heard that?! 

Steiger: No! 

Reilly: Buzz was queer as a goat. 

Steiger: Boy, Lois Jotter isn't going to like hearing that! 

Reilly: That's why he killed himself. 

Susie: That's why he committed suicide. 

Steiger: It is?! How'd you know that? How did you guys find that out?! I'll be darned, nobody ever heard of that. 

Reilly: They didn't? 

Underhill: Lois talked about him and said she might have been interested in dating him, but he was shorter than she was. So she didn't know. 

Steiger: Lois Jotter said that when she arrived on the scene, of all the guys that she met, he was the one who caught her eye the most. She thought he was really something. But she said he was maybe a little too short for her. (chuckles) 

Susie: Oh, his was a very sad story. 

Reilly: Buzz was a good boatman, a heck of a good boatman. 

Steiger: How did you ever find out that he was.... 

Reilly: Well, he had domineering mother. His mother rewrote Buzz's diaries to suit herself. She thought she was literary. One of the great mysteries of the river, is to find Buzz's original diaries. Now Dock had a pretty good trail on it, and Buzz used a lot of abbreviations. Instead of saying, "I ran the rapids," he'd say "ran rap." He did that throughout his diaries, and Dock went over and interviewed his mother. Of course Dock had a lot of screwy ideas about just about everything, and he said that he could understand Buzz being homosexual, he had a domineering mother and a very weak father, and he was just homosexual, that's all there was to it. 

Steiger: And Dock had unearthed that information? 

Reilly: Yeah, Dock visited his mother, he talked to her. He finally found out that his mother had reworked Buzz's diaries. She made them appear more literary than they were. Buzz used a lot of abbreviations. 

Steiger: I'll be darned. I think that's.... 

Reilly: Why did you think Buzz killed himself? 

Steiger: I always wondered, I didn't know. I'll tell ya', he's not the first. I can think of two or three guys that have... 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

... done themselves in, that figured.... 

Reilly: On the river? 

Steiger: Yeah, there was a guy, just after you. About the time you retired, there was a guy who kinda came on the scene and was a really big strong guy. His name was Dennis Massey [phonetic spelling], he worked for Hatch River Expeditions. He kinda was the "big brother" of everybody that was down there. Everybody looked up to him, and it was like if you were in a pinch, old Dennis was the guy. He would get you through. But he didn't adapt to the changing situation with the passengers and all that stuff, to kind of the "taming" of the river, very well. And he ended up killing himself, and I always thought that it was because he needed that "life on the edge," to be out there where it was a big adventure, and he needed to be kinda "leading the charge." 

Reilly: Never heard about him. 

Steiger: Well, he didn't seem to fit in as things got tamer, and he didn't adapt very well to life out there in -kinda to the civilized world. And I always thought that was the same thing with, the impression that I have had, and I think my peers too, about Buzz, was that after having done this solo trip in the <Grand Canyon> that was such a great adventure and all this stuff, he had a hard time just going and working in the gas station. Not so. 

Reilly: No, Buzz's mother had literary ambitions, and she cleaned up Buzz's journals as best as she could. If you get a supposed copy of Buzz's journal with everything's cohesive in it, and the sentences are complete, you can bet damned well his mother worked 'em over. 

Steiger: Well, she did a good job (chuckles), because the version I saw, I thought was quite lucid and stirring and all. 

Reilly: Buzz had very little education. In the first place, he couldn't write anything very good. 

Steiger: I don't think we can take away from him that trip. 

Reilly: Oh, no one's trying to, that I know of. Of course you can't! 

Steiger: I'm wondering.... 

Reilly: You're wondering what motivated him to do it? 

Steiger: Yeah. He must have, if he really was gay, he must have had a heck of a time, it seems like, especially then. That had to be a lot less accepted than it is in this day and age. I wonder if he ever came to grips with that or anything. He must not have. 

Reilly: I don't think he did. I don't know. I never pried into him that deeply. I wondered if Vince Welch was aware of that when he.... 

Steiger: No, I'm sure not, 'cause nobody's said a word about it. You got tipped onto that by Dock Marston? 

Reilly: Yeah, Dock and I did quite a bit on it. 

Steiger: What-all did you do on it? You guys worked together just to Dockument? 

Reilly: We worked together on just about everything. Every time I'd make a traverse, I'd let him see all my black-and-whites, a lot of the color. Dock must have three or four hundred of my pictures in his files in the Huntington. On the back of my [crewston?] here, there's a little note that -he was real good about it, "Dock has copy." He wrote that on a few. You might have seen some of those. Well, that's how they got on there. 

Steiger: Did you guys come to that conclusion, just based on talking to Holmstrom's mom? Was it conjecture? Or was there stuff in the journals that indicated that that's what was going on? 

Reilly: Well, Dock got deep in it. I wasn't particularly interested in it. I had my job at Lockheed and devoted my vacations to runnin' the river. Dock worked on this all year round. All he did was travel around and interview pertinent people about the river. And he talked to Buzz's mother on a couple of occasions, I think. When I read Vince Welsh's [phonetic spelling] little ditty about Buzz (chuckles), and I had to smile. I wondered whether he knew and was hiding it, or whether he didn't know and he broached the brothers in <Oregon>, and let them know he didn't know, so they just came along. 

Steiger: Yeah, I think this is the first.... I don't think anybody had any indication that that.... 

Reilly: Well why did they think he killed himself? 

Steiger: Just because of what I said, that he was somebody that kind of belonged in a wilderness setting with high adventure in front of him, and he couldn't adapt to the encroachment of civilization. 

Reilly: Well, there's more to it than that. Well, what's your next [question] then? 

Steiger: Well, let's just go down the list. After Holmstrom, just running through the characters of the times: How about Bert Loper? What did you think of him as a boatman? 

Reilly: Lousy! 

Steiger: Really?! 

Reilly: Oh, one of the worst! 

Steiger: No kidding?! I'm surprised at that. 

Reilly: Why?! 

Steiger: Mainly because of Don Harris, who I respect. 

Reilly: Oh, Don's a good boatman. 

Steiger: Yeah. And you know, he.... 

Reilly: Oh, let me tell you about that. Don Harris hated Nevills, Harry Aleson hated Nevills, and Bert Loper hated Nevills. That's why they ran three days ahead of us in the 1949 trip, and old Bert got drowned. Harris and Aleson -Aleson had a ten-man, the first ten-man to go through. It wasn't like Amos Byrd's [phonetic spelling] __________ rubber boat. They'd balonied old Bert into thinking he was going to lead the trip against the hated Nevills. Well, they didn't intend for Loper to lead that trip at all. Every year they'd sandwich old Bert between 'em in his so-called boat, held together with shingle nails. Oh, it was the lousiest boat! How many men can.... See, old Bert went through in 1938, I think. 

Steiger: In 1939. 

Reilly: In 1939? Well, I saw that boat right after it was pulled out of the river. We came by three days later, and the boat was.... I've got pictures of it. He used shingle nails to build it! There was no rock to it at all. God himself couldn't have rowed that boat and made a respectable showing. It was the most terrible, most horrible answer to running a rapid. If a man didn't know anything, you would say he did a hell of a lousy job in coming up with this answer.

Have you ever seen any of those pictures that I've got? 

Steiger: No. Let's see, it was Rod Sanderson that pulled it up, right? 

Reilly: Oh, hell no! Rod had nothin' to do with it! 

Susie: He wasn't there. 

Steiger: I thought he was down there workin'.... 

Reilly: Well, he was, but he didn't go down that far. 

Steiger: You guys pulled the boat up? Or they pulled the boat up, Harris and them guys? 

Reilly: Harris and Brennan [phonetic spelling] and Harry Aleson pulled the boat up and tied it there. They put old Bert's paddle in the cairn. 

Steiger: And then you guys came along two days later? 

Reilly: They came around three days later, and.... It's kind of a laugh: I took pictures of Norm at the boat. And of course he envisioned himself as being [in this] historical photo and everything. As soon as I got through taking my pictures of him, he got in the boat and took off and left me there alone. Well, I took my pictures of the boat and I got some pretty good pictures of it. It was getting almost dusky then, and I couldn't even get a reading on my light meter. My pictures are a little bit grainy, but they'll do. 

Steiger: Oh yeah. Gosh, those are certainly of historical import. 

Reilly: What's the next one? 

Steiger: Okay, moving right on up the line, as far as characters go, we have this question here that lists a whole bunch of people, as far as personalities. 

Reilly: Is that on page one? 

Steiger: No, it's page two of this letter that Karen sent you. But before we just look at the list, what I'd like is if you'd just stop and [tell us] who stood out for you, between the time that you started workin' for Nevills and really, say, the trip that you did in 1964, of all those characters? You talked earlier about these guys that were just out there livin' for the moment and just kind of rattlin' around down there. Who were the individuals that really stood out as being the best of that time, in terms of just boatmen and people and like that? 

Reilly: Well, that's kinda hard to say. In my own warped way of thinking, Norm had three boatmen that were better than he was: Frank Wright, Jim Rigg, and myself. Norm had a habit of every trip, one boatman didn't get to run one rapid, which meant that they hadn't equalled his record. He did it to Frank in Duby, he did it to me in <Kwagunt>, and we didn't like it especially. 

Susie: They were some mighty good boatmen. 

Reilly: Jim Rigg, Frank Wright, and Bob Rigg were the other three -not Bob at the time when Nevills was down -Frank and Jim and me, we were the three boatmen with Norm. If we didn't run the same course that Norm did, he preferred that we not do it quite as well as he did. He got upset as hell -he really got upset. I know I ran Duby right out in the big stuff, and he cheated us terribly in 1949. Fish Eyes came down and shook hands, "Pat, that's a great run!" And oh, God, did that tee Norm off! He glowered and grumbled and wouldn't speak to me for two days! (laughs) 

Steiger: Yeah, that's too bad. 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Susie: _______________________, that's terrible. 

Steiger: What was Jim Rigg like? And what was Frank Wright like, respectively? Just describe their personalities. 

Reilly: Well, Frank was a Mormon. He was a darned good boatman. Frank and I did the cooking for the party. Frank took weather reports in <Blanding>, and he had a big family as a lot of Mormons do, and he didn't have much income so boating for Norm was a boost in income for Frank. I'd have done it for nothing, for going down the river, but Norm didn't know that, so he paid me anyway! (chuckles) And Jim Rigg had the Rigg Flying Service in Glen Junction, so he had plenty of income from that. And he and Norm, that was one of the bonds between Norm and Jim -flying. 

Susie: Yeah, they were friends. Was there any other outstanding boatmen? 

Reilly: Well, I never really had any outstanding.... Martin was the best boatman I had. 

Steiger: Martin? 

Reilly: Martin Litton. Yeah, he was the best boatman I had in the whole Canyon. One year, I forget what year it was, but Steve Fulmer [phonetic spelling] flipped in <Horn Creek>. I had a peculiar way of running <Horn Creek>: I liked coming in on the left and come down that run, that big rock and a slide, and whirl around and just take the big boys on. And Steve Fulmer got confused and he didn't get the boat turned around and he flipped. We pulled his boat in down below. When they came down to <Granite Falls>, Steve asked me to run his boat through for him. I took him aside, out of the hearing of other people and I gave him a little back talk and told him, "God damn it, there's no reason why you can't run this thing, just get your butt in there and do it!" And he did it, and he made a good run. And that was the last of that trouble. He made a good run on every rapid after that. Frank was just a good boatman.... 

Susie: All around. 

Reilly: He wasn't afraid of anything. Frank would run the rapids as they came up, and just think nothing of it. I thought Frank was one of the best boatmen that Norm every had. 

Steiger: This is Frank Wright? 

Reilly: Frank Wright. 

Steiger: What makes you say that Martin was the best that you had? What was he good at? And how was he to be with? 

Reilly: Well, Martin rowed crew at UCLA, and he'd flown airplanes during World War II, and he was gutsy -still is -a little bit intolerant now. I thought we ran, on the last trip I ran with Martin in 1964, they had me all wired up with mics and everything, and they were recording me on shore. I was riding with Martin.... 

Susie: In 1984. 

Reilly: Yeah, 1984. To me, it was just.... It popped out, I told him.... We were going ___________ and a big comber came over from the left, and I told Martin, "Hard left!" Oh, God, did Martin get mad at that! (laughs) He got madder than hell! And he glowered about that and groused a little bit. Of course that came out on the tape. He didn't do it, and we took a big old comber off of his left bow. 

Susie: __________________. 

Reilly: It'd been better if he'd done what I said. (laughter) But Martin is a gutsy guy. Well, I never had a hell of a lot of talent, to be honest with you. Steve Fulmer rowed with me a lot of trips. And we had a guy -forget his name now -I think I gave you the little book that he wrote. He had made one trip as somebody. He was going to show me how good he was, and we were washing dishes down at the foot of Soap, and he picked up one of the pie pans, the damned fool got it upside down. If you get the pan right, you know, with the beveled edge up, they'll come out and boomerang right back to you. And he got the thing upside down, he flipped it, and it just went down, and I just looked at him and said, "Well, what are you going to eat off now? That was your plate." Didn't crack a smile. Of course we had extras, but I didn't tell him that! 

Susie: That's when you took the Sierra Club people. Made the book. Francois' [phonetic spelling] book. He was _________ good. 

Reilly: Anyway, I think Martin was a good boatmen. He wasn't one of the really expert boatmen on the river, but I think he was a good boatman. I put him on the plus side. I never had anybody that was really top flight. Francois never ran a boat, the only time we traveled together, which was when we made the book for the Sierra Club. 

Steiger: I want to get to that, but first, while we're on the subject, you indicated Dock Marston was pretty good. 

Reilly: Dock was a pretty good boatman. Of course you gotta realize one thing: Dock was fifty-five years old before he and I met. When you're getting to be fifty-five.... I think you reach your prime in your thirties, for boating. 

Steiger: I think so too, but maybe that's just because I'm in my thirties! (laughter) I used to think it was about twenty-five. But I think you don't work so hard after a while. 

Reilly: You use your head more. 

Steiger: Yeah, I think so. 

Reilly: I know in 1949, Norm had a passenger -he charged $1,100 a year -and he had a passenger named Peg Harglerode [phonetic spelling] who was shot in the butt with gold nuggets. She asked me how old I was, and I told her "thirty-eight," and she said, "Yeah, and I'm sweet sixteen!" 

Susie: She was four times that, just about! 

Reilly: I told her the truth. If she didn't want to accept it, that's her problem. 

Steiger: Should we go through this list that you have here, Karen? Some of these guys, I don't.... We got this list of people, just asking you to describe the personalities of all these guys. Maybe we should go through this. 

Reilly: Well, that's on page two, the people. 

Steiger: Yeah. Or should we look at page one and see where we're at? 

Reilly: Doesn't make any difference to me. You say, and I'll follow through. 

Steiger: Well, I'll tell you, I can see that Susie's been stirring around with.... 

Reilly: Well, don't figure on anything until twelve. 

Susie: Quarter after twelve ______________. 

Steiger: Well, I'll tell ya', what I came here really wanting to talk about, really curious about -but I don't know if we should get into it before taking a break -the high-water years, those high-water trips of the fifties. 

Susie: Right, that's the most interesting. 

Steiger: Well, it is, and it's real significant, I think, 'cause you really are.... There was so much going on there, the fact that you ran in those years, the fact that everybody else tried to hit the lows, and you and maybe Harris and Brennan, and that's about it, were out there on that big water. 

Susie: That's right. 

Steiger: I really want to spend some time with that. And then, the other thing.... 

Reilly: In that box I've got for Karen, I got a picture of Red Willow Cavern around 120,000 second-feet. Go over and get it, Karen. 

Susie: Well, I have it right there in the book beside you. 

Reilly: Is it? 

Susie: Yeah, it's right near the end, 'cause I made a point, I wanted to show you __________ to see what.... (aside) Right at the end. 

Reilly: I started at the end, Honey -I'm coming forward. 

Susie: Well, not the end -where you've got an open space there. 

Reilly: Okay. (pause, Steiger and Underhill talking in background) Here it is! 

Underhill: Oh, my goodness! 

Reilly: Do you believe that's Red Willow? 

Steiger: Oh, man! 

Reilly: That tells you why the sand is washed, river is washed right to the back of the cave. 

Steiger: Oh, man, that is amazing! That's at 120,000 [second-feet]? 

Reilly: Let's see it a minute. 

Underhill: Is that 1957? 

Reilly: That's 1957. 

Underhill: So 127,000? 

Reilly: No, that peaked when we were down at President Harding. 

Underhill: Oh. 

Reilly: Well, I have it at 125,000. I think I researched the thing.... If you want to see it up close.... (hands book to Underhill) I researched it, and found out how much between -it rose several days in a row -so that's authentic. I got that from the river gauger at the end of the trip. 

Steiger: My goodness! Well, it looks like.... Gosh, there must not have been hardly beach one down there! You get the impression it was just wall-to-wall.... 

Reilly: Have you read my log of 1957? 

Steiger: Yeah! 

Reilly: Well, I make it a point of saying the beaches were all gone -there were no beaches. We had to sack out on the rocks. I know in one of the camps my people were spread out for a quarter of a mile. 

Susie: _________________ B.A. he said, "Now, you have to be prepared to crash land if necessary." 

Steiger: "'Cause we gotta get in." (laughter) 

Reilly: You're damned right we gotta get in! 

Susie: We got in alright. 

Steiger: Well, I've been telling people -you know, I tell people every time I go by it now, I talk about that story that you told us about coming into <Nankoweap>. 

Reilly: That's the honest-to-God truth. I never saw anything like that. I've seen <Nankoweap> at low water, and I've seen it at high water. And I can never figure out how that whirlpool, that God-damned log, got sucked on in. It was at least fifteen feet long, and it swirled and went down out of sight, and I never did see it come up. 

Steiger: And it never came up. Man! 

Reilly: Well, it came up, obviously -it escaped us. How far downstream it came up, I don't know. I know when we were at Boulder Narrows and I took that big picture, and the boulders completely covered that hole, I could have dropped my boat, and my boat was seventeen feet long -I could have dropped that down and it'd have been "plink." And we saw timbers, logs that's up, go over that, and they'd come up maybe two, three hundred yards downstream. I saw that with my own eyes. 

Steiger: Well, backing up just a little bit. What's interesting to me about that is the.... Here's Norm Nevills and Powell and all these guys: the conventional wisdom of the time is that you run the river when it's low. And this is kind of what, to me, sets you apart from these other guys. Why didn't you buy-into that, and what was it that got you out there on the peaks of those flows? 

Reilly: Well, my first shock was in 1949 when the river.... We were taking off on July 12. Norm always set his take-off date on July 12. He didn't care about what the flow was, the snowpack, he set it July 12, and he based his advertising on that, and that was it. Well, I thought that was the wrong way to do it. I took the Water Resources, contacted them and got their publications, and got the snow depth and water content forecasts, and I gauged my take-off date by the peak. In 1957 I hit it right on the nose! Two days after I took off, the river peaked at 127,000 second-feet, and we were down at Harding. 

Steiger: Now why did you want to catch the peak? 

Reilly: Well, all these other blokes had done it at low water, and I knew what to expect at low water, and I wanted something better than low water -and I got it! 

Susie: I don't think you chose to run on water quite that high. 

Reilly: I didn't care how high it was. 

Susie: Didn't you? 

Reilly: If it had been 150,000, I'd have done the same thing. 

Steiger: So what did it feel like to be out there on that kind of water? 

Reilly: Oh, no different. My most impressive time on that high water was at <Nankoweap>, when I saw that whirlpool and that log turned on end and that rapid running upstream on what's the right-hand side, on the <Nankoweap> side, running upside. I gauged it at four. 

Steiger: Maybe we should back up and get you to set the scene for us. [Although] we've already heard about it, as long as we're sittin' here with this tape, just if you would describe the whole scene, starting from scratch. You come around the corner, and there you are at <Nankoweap>, and what are you seeing? 

Reilly: Well, the river was flooded all through Lower <Marble>, coming into <Nankoweap>, and it was just wider than heck. All the [minors?--does he mean minor rapids? (Tr.)] were filled in. We came down to <Nankoweap>, and I could see it was -I always led -and I could see that it was unusual. Over there, there's a mesquite tree over there [where] Nevills had a plank set up at the base, and we always had lunch there. And the water was up to that. I seen the river was way up in the creek bottom, and then I saw this God-awful hole, and as I watched it, this log got closer and closer. It got into the rim of the whirlpool and it stood on end and the damned thing kept on circling and it was drawn down deep. Well, I couldn't believe that, because I'd seen that thing in low water, and I knew the bottom was shallower than that. And I haven't got it figured out to this day, except that the bottom was in continual motion. So that log went down in that hole, in that whirlpool, and I never did see it come up -swear to God. 

Steiger: And how long do you think this log was? 

Reilly: Well, just looking at it, when you're rowing a boat and trying to keep from getting sucked into the same thing yourself, I was about from here to that house across the street, from it. And I would say the log was fifteen or twenty feet long. And it seemed to be about fifteen or sixteen inches in diameter. It was the darnedest sight I'd ever seen. But then it was only natural to try to get over to the closest side, and that was the right-hand side of the river, the <Nankoweap> side. Then I encountered that rapid going upstream, right over close to the shore. It had waves in it three or four feet. I'll tell you one thing: At high water, you see things you never suspect you'll see at low water. 

Steiger: To me, that makes sense, when you look at the <Grand Canyon>, when you look at all the stuff that's been moved out of there. 

Reilly: You're exceptional. 

Steiger: Well, I didn't understand until 1983 -I didn't get it. In the flood of 1983 -well, we call it the flood -it got up to 90,000. 

Reilly: That's a damned-good flood. 

Steiger: Well, suddenly then, you realize that this is the animal that cut this Canyon, is this big river that can move stuff. 

Reilly: It sure moves it too! (chuckles) 

Steiger: Well, so this whirlpool, this hole that this tree disappeared in -now that thing was moving? It wasn't sitting still? 

Reilly: It was pretty stationary, except the water was just going around to beat heck, but it was in one spot. 

Steiger: And staying there? 

Reilly: Staying there. 

Steiger: Did you think you guys could get sucked-into that pretty easy? 

Reilly: I was afraid of it. That's why I rowed my guts out to get over toward the bank. Then I bumped into this little rapid that was going upstream, and that was as surprising to me as the hole, because I'd seen that in lower water, and there was nothing to indicate, to suggest that a hole like that was out there, to form that whirlpool. 

Steiger: So you row over to avoid it, and all of a sudden you're going upstream and you're in a rapid going upstream? 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Steiger: And then what? Did you pull over? Or did you just flush on down and out of there? 

Reilly: No, I.... I have to consult my log to see exactly how I phrased it, but as I remember.... I haven't thought about this for thirty years. But as I remember, it was a small rapid like that, relatively simple, and I just ran what I could of it, and I saw the first good place to pull out on the near shore, and I did. My main concern was getting the other boats to evade what I had to evade, only to give them more leeway and to get them into shore. 

Steiger: And how'd that work? 

Reilly: Worked fine. 

Steiger: At that point in time, what did you think of this plan of going down on the peak? (laughs) 

Reilly: Oh, I didn't regret a bit of it! I thought it was great. The problems are different. The problems are different, and you have to compensate for the difference in problems. That was where I developed the idea -and I think it's a good one -that you have a different technique for different stages of water, from the low to the high. I'll tell you one thing: you sure don't run low water like you do high! (laughs) 

Steiger: Well, it seems like low water, everything's pretty fixed. 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Steiger: In high water, it's moving. 

Reilly: The thing that surprised me in the high-water trip: we were going down to the twenties there -24 Mile Rapid, that was a lollapalooza! I think if I'd have stopped and looked that over, I wouldn't have had the guts to run it, but we piled into it wide open. I had Susie, and I've never taken any chances with her, but I swear to God, some of those waves were twelve, fifteen feet high, and I'd be just full of 'em. The usual character of that rapid was completely gone. Just didn't resemble the old 24 Mile at all. And it was continued down through 25 Mile. We piled right down through the middle of it, and when I came out, I thought, "Well, I was lucky that time." Because I'm an old skin diver, and being in the water doesn't bother me a damned bit, but Susie never did any of that stuff. And I would do something dirty if she got dumped overboard. 

Steiger: That would have been her third trip? 

Reilly: Oh, Susie went through in 1951, 1952, 1953, 1955, 1956. 

Steiger: Fifth trip. 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Underhill: Did you hear rocks moving underneath? A couple of people have talked about hearing boulders and things. 

Reilly: I heard that at <Elves' Chasm> [phonetic spelling]. It was running about 90,000, and the whole bottom seemed to be in motion. You could hear the dull rumble of these rocks clinging into each other. That's when I went back, and I took this picture of Stanton's picture, I duplicated that, where Galloway and where the two guys got drowned. I figured the rocks couldn't possibly be in place, and by gosh, they were! And it didn't jibe with the bottom being in motion, without the rocks squooshing down to take up that space. And I never could correlate that -I still haven't. But I swear to God, I stood there at <Elves' Chasm>, and I listened to that bottom, and I know that bottom was in motion. You couldn't have a rumble like that without the rocks going along, gouging out the riverbed. 

Steiger: Well, I believe it too. I mean, you just look at the Canyon, and you just say, "Well, here's a bunch of material that was moved out of here." 

Reilly: Well, that part's easy. Why don't the talus slopes come down to fill in? See, that's what I proved at the Stanton place, at the Hansborough-Richards [phonetic spellings] drowning. 

Steiger: That they're not constantly doing that. 

Reilly: The talus slopes, the rocks for every.... I've looked at it with a magnifying glass! Every rock is in the same place as it was in Stanton's photo. Now you tell me the answer -I don't know. It's a big mystery. 

Steiger: I don't know what it is either. (aside about taking a break) 

Underhill: I'm just thinking about what <Granite Narrows> must be like in water that high. Did you have any trouble there? 

Reilly: Well, <Granite Narrows> is fantastic. One time -I forget the year, it might have been 1958, and we might have had, oh 70,000-80,000 second-feet, and I pulled in at <Tapeats>, and old Georgie [White] pulled in. And the wheels started goin' around, and I alerted my people, and the next morning, that's the first time I talked to her two main boatmen, Ron Smith and Dick McCallum [phonetic spelling]. And they came down to our camp and we talked a little bit at my camp. The wheels started going around and I thought, "Well, this kind of water, I know what's going to happen to Georgie." So I told my people, "Let's eat early and get the hell outta here." If you know the Canyon as well as I do, right down on the left, before you come to <Granite Narrows>, there's a big bay with a point on it. So we ran down -it was out of sight of <Nankoweap>, it's out of sight of <Tapeats> -so we ran down and got the boats behind this bay where she couldn't see 'em goin' down, and then we climbed up on a point, looking down on <Granite Narrows> and we all had our cameras set. So in about a half-hour, here comes old Georgie. At that time, she had Dick and Ron rowing for her. They piled in that -I think she had three 10-mans tied together, and each oarsman pulled one oar on the outside boats -the damnedest mess! It was typical Georgie. Anyway, they piled in that thing, and it was the darnedest mess you ever saw. They knocked along that wall.... I've got pictures of it. I've got a [better] memory of it than I do pictures. 

Steiger: Is it a movie or stills? 

Reilly: Stills. I didn't take movies on that trip. But suddenly, all these idiots, my three buddies and I, come out on this point, and we wave to Georgie. "Oh, hi! Imagine finding you down here!" And then she realized I'd tricked her, and they couldn't stop, so they had to pile right into it. And I got several pictures of the thing. 

Steiger: In your logs you talk a lot about running into big trips that had left a lot of litter. 

Reilly: Georgie was the filthiest litterbug I've ever seen in my life. 

Steiger: And was that just Georgie, or were there other people that were like that? 

Reilly: Oh no, Georgie and I were the only ones on the river. There weren't all these trips like you have today. See, Frank Wright and Jim Rigg I think ran their last trip in 1952 or 1953. 

Susie: It was a little later than that. 

Reilly: In 1952. And Georgie put her dudes down all through the fifties, and she and I were the only ones on the river in those days. 

Steiger: Before, was everybody else.... Did you have a standard way of dealing with garbage and stuff? How did you handle it? And did Georgie stand out that way, for not keeping a clean camp? Or how'd all that stuff work? 

Reilly: Well.... (pause) 

Susie: Her camps were so littered, he had to clean 'em up before.... 

Reilly: I hesitate to answer that, because, to be honest with you, I don't remember. But I do remember that Georgie left the filthiest camps I've ever seen. If you remember the setting at <Elves' Chasm>, <Arch Creek>, she used to use to carry bacon or ham or something and set it in bacon grease or something -lard. And one of her idiots -that had gotten wet, and they'd taken the thing and they dumped all the grease out on some of that beautiful pink granite, and I was the one that kicked her right in the T-I-T-S. I wrote her a note about that. And on the <Tapeats Beach>, her dudes -they must have gone to the bathroom in groups of three. There was an open trench over there next to the cliff, damnedest thing you ever saw. None covered. Suntan bottles, tin cans, just assorted crap all over that beautiful <Tapeats Beach>. It made me ashamed that they let an old bag like her go down the river. 

Steiger: Well, I think she changed her ways pretty soon after that. 

Reilly: Well, she had too. As soon as the Park Service people got in there, they made her. I wrote her some nasty notes about what I found, and that must have gotten a little bit of impulse out of her. 

Steiger: But was that the exception, the way they treated.... I guess what I'm curious about is if that was more the exception or the rule, if people in general were.... Well, or just had a different attitude about it, because most everybody I talked to: Dick McCallum and all those guys, and Don Harris, and Ken Slide and a bunch of people who were running in the fifties have told me that the way you did it was, you just sink your cans and bottles out there in the middle of the river, and you wouldn't really worry too much about it. Or maybe bury your trash. And as far as dealing with the human waste, you just take a shovel and just go and make sure that you dug a deep hole, and that seemed to be sufficient. 

Susie: See, there were so few people on the river then. 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Reilly: Georgie never even buried hers, never even covered hers up. 

Steiger: But it sounds like -I just wanted to be clear on that -it sounds like.... And I've heard it said before, when we did this trip that Karen and I were just one, what we were trying to focus on was how it's different now, today, than it was then. And one of the things that the Nevills girls, Joanie and Sandy, really made a point -this was before Karen got there -but they said the biggest difference they could see is that now it's a lot cleaner than it was when they first knew it. And I'm just curious about that. 

Susie: Well, I always thought we had such beautiful, clean.... 

Steiger: You guys had a sense that.... 

Susie: Beautiful, clean beaches. I don't remember anything, except ___________________. 

Reilly: It was clean, except for Georgie. 

Steiger: Well, I just wanted to be clear on that. 

Susie: Do you suppose you could take a break pretty soon? 

Reilly: Yeah, let's do it right now! (break) He asked me how old I was, I told him eighty-three. I asked him how old he is, he's seventy-seven. So that was a couple of months ago. 

Steiger: It would have been great, but we can't go backwards. And I understand that you stay pretty busy. 

Underhill: We all understood that, but we missed you anyway. 

Susie: It was nice of you to feel that way. _______. 

Reilly: Well, I'll tell you one thing: Webb would have been a lot of dead wood on that trip. 

Steiger: (chuckles) The depends on who you talk to. (aside about tape) 

Reilly: Are those steel pans inside that plastic? 

Steiger: Inside of here? 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Steiger: These are just batteries that I'm running my audio gear with. And it's just when it.... And we have a pretty good track on here, but this is a digital recording machine, and I get a really clean sound on it. And what I might do is go back and synch this audio up to this picture at a later date. Anyway, so we should get rollin' here.

Maybe we should drag Susie in here, if we could make her sit down. I wanted to start with just talking about the difference between the pre-dam river and what we have now -just talkin' about how effective <Glen Canyon Dam> [is]. I wonder what's a good question to lead that off with. Well, what's the most striking difference for the river, for <Grand Canyon>, that you perceive? 

Reilly: Well, to me, the obvious one is the lack of the annual runoff with no silt. The beaches aren't replenished, so the beaches are constantly eroding. So there are practically no beaches left. And another one that I noticed is the way the tamarisk is running upstream. 

Steiger: Now, there were tamarisk trees before the dam, right? 

Reilly: Way down in the west end. 

Steiger: Not so much up above? 

Reilly: There were none above. None in <Marble> or Grand. 

Steiger: Well now they sure are -they sure are up there. When it comes to safety and, say, river runnin' today, what influence do you think the dam has there? 

Reilly: Well, I don't consider myself an authority on today's running. They run on these....

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A]

This is the River Runners Oral History Project, and this is a continuation of an interview done with P.T. Reilly on 9/28/94. The masters, we have a three-hour [dad?] tape. This is about a four-hour interview, and this is Part 2 of it coming up, and it just overlaps on P.T. Reilly Part 1, same date. 

Steiger: They run on these neoprene mostly, and they're on a schedule. I never ran that way in my life. I guess what I'm fishing for -and I was fishing -is I have a sense that boating was made a lot safer by the dam. I don't think we admit that, and I don't think my peers like to admit that. When I look at us doing this commercially, I wonder if we could have run commercially on 127,000 cfs, if that would have made sense or not. And I wonder if the dam didn't perhaps make it possible for us, because it regulates the river, for us to do business. 

Reilly: Oh, I think the construction of the dam undoubtedly set up the stage for the present-day commercial stuff -no doubt about it. 

Steiger: So before the dam.... What am I fishing for here? 

Reilly: Well, it all depends on what you're after. If you're after a ride with minimum-size boat, you went with the dories or the Nevills type boat. Old Georgie introduced the so-called safety, even though she didn't have brains enough to operate the damned thing right. She introduced the baloney boats in there. 

Steiger: And opened it up to a lot more people. 

Reilly: It opened it up, and it opened it up to less skill. You didn't have to have the skill that you needed with the ______________. 

Steiger: Now why did she get such a big.... Her triple-rig -and I'm fishing for this too, like I think I already know what the answer is. (chuckles) Why did she build that triple-rig, the big boat that she had? 

Reilly: Well, Georgie hated to keep house, she never intended to keep house. And she was married to a guy we called Whitey, and he was a booze hound. And in those days, Georgie never took a drink. Old Buddy was a real boozer. And he used to drive the truck around to pick her up at various places, and he was half drunk when he picked her up every time. She finally divorced him and married a guy she wound up with. I forget his name. 

Steiger: Clark. Or no, that was her maiden name. (aside about battery) 

Reilly: ... and you watch the snowpack real carefully -this is the way I did it. I watched the snowpack and I gauged the water content of the snow. I got that from the Water Service in <Tucson>, and a prognosis. It was normally simple. I never had any trouble, really. Once I established the fact that I liked to run at high water, instead of Nevills' low water, I could hit the peak pretty well. Some years there wasn't much of a peak. I hit the peak in 1958, way down the left end. 

Steiger: Maybe we should talk a little bit about <Glen Canyon Dam> and this article that you got comin' out and just your and Susie's impressions of <Glen Canyon> and the <San Juan>, and that country that's now inundated. How did you guys like that country? 

Reilly: Great! 

Steiger: And how did you feel about it as the dam came in. What did you think about <Glen Canyon Dam>? 

Reilly: Well, I realized it was all political. The Sierra Club finally admitted that somebody made an agreement with somebody else in the government, that if they don't have <Glen Canyon> and one up in <Wyoming>, they would back off on the two in <Marble> and lower <Grand Canyon>. 

Steiger: Oh really? I thought it was.... Really? I thought that they fought over Dinosaur and that they let 'em have <Glen Canyon> in exchange for not building Dinosaur. 

Reilly: No, Dinosaur there was no fight. 

Steiger: Really?! 

Reilly: Did you read that book, This is Dinosaur? Martin had a great deal to do with it. 

Steiger: I didn't read it, but I saw it. It was like the first coffee table, the first photo book. 

Reilly: In that, Martin tells them what they lost, and that sets the stage for the effort to repulse Glen and.... What the hell is the name of the one up at.... 

Susie: <Bridge Canyon>? 

Steiger: <Echo Park>? 

Reilly: <Echo Park>. 

Steiger: There was <Echo Park>, and then there was Glen, and then <Marble> and then Bridge. (interruption about lint) I thought it was that they signed off to stop <Echo Park>. They said, "Well, okay, you can have <Glen Canyon>." 

Reilly: No, backasswards. No, they didn't really put up a decent fight against <Echo Park>. That busted the Sierra Club that Martin ___________ wrote what was the main thrust against it. But they had a real scramble over Glen and the other one. 

Steiger: Well, <Marble> and Bridge. 

Reilly: No, <Marble> and Bridge were together. 

Steiger: Yeah, and <Echo Park>. 

Reilly: No. 

Steiger: <Flaming Gorge>? I understood there was the <Echo Park> Dam that was going to flood <Dinosaur National Monument>. I wonder if I'm getting it wrong. 

Reilly: You know, I'm getting a little bit older -a little bit hazy, in any event. 

Steiger: Well, I know what you're saying, because I remember hearing that the Sierra Club willingly said, "Okay, fine, you guys have <Glen Canyon> -just don't do this other one." But I thought that once they built <Glen Canyon>, then there was a big push also to build <Marble> and Bridge, and that's where you guys came in. 

Reilly: <Marble> and Bridge were together. They're the ones that we beat 'em on. That's when Francois wrote the book. So I took the Sierra Club through in 1964. 

Steiger: Right. 

Reilly: And we produced that book, and they laid a copy on the desk of every congressman and senator in <Washington>. And that's what swung it. 

Steiger: Now, backing up, <Glen Canyon> and the <San Juan> and all that stuff: You guys are down there and you're runnin' that stuff, and you know that country, and you hear that <Glen Canyon> is going to be built. How did you feel about that, and about the Bureau and all that stuff at that point in time? And what did you think were the prospects for these other dams? 

Reilly: Well, I wasn't involved in it for one reason: I had a pretty responsible job at Lockheed, I __________ at two, maybe three plants. When they found out what I was doing, they let me take my vacation whenever I wanted. And I usually got a couple of weeks leave along with it. Well, I couldn't afford to press it. So what I did was to eliminate Glen completely, and I just concentrated on Grand. 

Steiger: Just in terms of doing.... 

Susie: (inaudible) 

Reilly: Well, exploring the side canyons and taking pictures and flying over it and everything. And I regret now that I didn't do more in Glen when I could have, because I saw it. But you see the picture in Utah Historical, you'll see some of the things that I was doing. 

Susie: (inaudible) 

Steiger: So you guys ran Glen, basically then, that was the late forties. And then early-on in the fifties you swung the focus over to <Grand Canyon> and then just kind of.... 

Susie: No, in the fifties.... 

Reilly: I think my last trip down the <San Juan> was 1952. And I took several dudes and Susie and we came down from <Mexican Hat> to <Lee's Ferry>. And that was my last trip on the <San Juan>. 

Steiger: What did you think of the dam as it was being built? And that's not a leading question. I mean, I'm really curious to know, because you run into a wide variety of opinions as to whether that was a good thing or not. I mean, I'm just curious. 

Reilly: Well, that's a kind of a bad question, because there's nothing you can do -an individual can't do anything. All you can do is to observe it, and I reported it. I got pictures on the building of <Glen Canyon Dam> and the bridge. I got it in sequence. Somebody's got _____________ just a hell of a good.... I don't think too many people have ever done that -taken the collective pictures of the growth of the thing, from the time the two cofferdams were put in. I got it from then to the bolster plates to keep the sandstone from peeling off. This _____________ checker board on the sides there. If you get those pictures, you'll really get something. I've even got 'em all separated by trip. But oh, gosh, they'd be something put together. 

Susie: He went out there with [Burn?] when they were just beginning to talk about where ______________. 

Reilly: I got a picture here. You see that one of Susie and Burn? I took a picture of them lookin' down where <Glen Canyon> was to be. 

Susie: They were just talking about it, and then ____________________________ some of the laborers on the dam started across that little foot bridge, and he and Tony, they stopped dead center and couldn't _______. Took 'em six hours to _______ back in this little ____________________. ______________ foot bridge. I tried, I couldn't go. Pat crossed it, but I couldn't go out ten feet over. _______________. But those pictures, when they were first talking about it, ___________________. This is where the dam is going to be. 

Steiger: Well, this foot bridge, do you mean they had a foot bridge just for workers to get back and forth, clear across the whole canyon? 

Reilly: Yeah, clear across the thing. That was six feet wide and it had a one-inch cable on each side about three feet up, and it was supported by three cables across the river. 

Susie: It was horrifying! 

Reilly: Height don't bother me, so I just walked right across it. But Susie got part-way and she had to stop and go back. But they told us some of the workmen would get out there, and they'd freeze, and they'd lie there a full eight hours, and somebody had to help 'em back across. 

Steiger: Well now this was early fifties? They'd already started on it? 

Susie: You have a date on the ___________________. 

Reilly: Wait'll I find it. 

Susie: It's really a rare shot, actually. 

Reilly: Well, I got a picture of it here. That's not the one I was thinking of. Here it is. (pause) [Would] you go across Glen Gorge on that? 

Underhill: Probably not! 

Steiger: Maybe we should get a shot of that. 

Susie: That was worse than being on top of Rainbow Bridge! 

Steiger: (aside about shooting a picture from book) When you look back on the <San Juan> and on <Glen Canyon> before this dam, you were talking about some of the places that stood out in your mind as being really spectacular. What are the places that you remember the most out of that time? (Susie Reilly and Underhill are talking in background.) 

Reilly: Well, it depends on one's interests. I have a lot of interests. I was interested in the rapids, I was interested in the aboriginal stuff, I was interested in.... (background conversation continues) You see, the Navajos had a trail. They came down the river at Naja Creek. Naja means "owl," in Navajo. And it went down the left bank of the <San Juan>, and in low water they'd cross to what we call.... They got a name for it now -I forget what it is. One mile below the mouth of the <San Juan>. And they went up that to the Mormon settlement where they sold cattle and sheep. 

Steiger: I guess there were a bazillion Indian ruins and stuff that were down there, that I guess got.... 

Reilly: Not too many. You see, when the government rounded 'em up and took 'em to <New Mexico>, only one band, __________kanini [phonetic spelling], held out, and he had maybe no more than a dozen. 

Steiger: And they hid out down there in the Glen? 

Reilly: Oh, they didn't have to do much hiding. The country was so wild that nobody would get in there after them.

When Susie and I first went through <Monument Valley>, there was no pavement. There was nothing at <Kayenta> except a trading post and the Indian school. It was just two ruts, and they were damned poor ruts, going all the way from <Kayenta> up through <Monument Valley>, and you didn't hit a graded road until you got to <Bluff>. (background conversation continues) 

Steiger: Man, that must have been something to get out there in that. 

Reilly: Well, it really was. 

Steiger: Actually, when we talked to Georgie, she said that she knew the end was near when.... For her, the big deal was when they paved the road down to <Lee's Ferry>. (laughs) She thought that was the final blow. I mean, that's even way after the dam. 

Susie: Sure changed the things, I'll tell you that. 

Reilly: You'd do me a favor if you didn't mention Georgie, she makes me sick to my stomach -that little _______. I never met a person who was as ignorant as she is, and is just a lousy person. I met that old bag three times in two days, up on top of Mt. Whitney, and she didn't remember me once. First I met her up on Mt. Whitney ... 

Susie: Same day, mind you. 

Reilly: ... with four others on a Memorial Day, and I met her up there. They knew her from the Sierra Club. And then I wanted to get three 14,000-foot peaks in one day. Well, I only got two. I got Mt. Whitney and Mt. Mere. And I was on top of Mt. Mere, and she was leading a bunch of those ditsy Sierra Clubbers. And she always led 'em, just like they had rings in their noses. And she scrambled up, and Mt. Mere is so small on top that there's hardly room for two people to stay up there at one time. And I was up there, taking my pictures. There's a picture of me in there. Another guy and I went up there -maybe Ralph Youngbler [phonetic spelling]. And Georgie came scrambling up, so one of us went down so she could stay up there. Ralph introduced us again. I guess he didn't know that.... And going down, we were about three or four miles down from Trailcrest, going back toward Whitney portals, and we stopped to adjust some backpacks or something, and we was falled out there, and she came down, leading her troop of Sierra Clubbers. "Oh, are you boys going up to Mt. Whitney?" "No, it's too strenuous." She was a flake. 

Steiger: Well, I know there were parts of her that were pretty extreme. I found her pretty charming, though. I only got to sit and visit with her once, but I had a good time with her then. While we're talking about politics, I want to get this straight. So you guys knew <Glen Canyon> was pretty much a done deal from the word "go." There wasn't anything to be done about that. 

Reilly: That's right. 

Steiger: But I'm interested, moving on to the 1962 and 1964 trips, those were a huge deal. I mean, to me they seemed to be a huge deal in the history of the river. I'm just wondering, it seems like, I get the impression from reading the log in 1959 -I don't know if you were consciously thinking about it, but it seemed like.... (sigh) 

Reilly: My log in 1959? 

Steiger: Yeah. It seemed like there was a gap in your career between then and 1962. I don't know if you were figuring on making more trips or not. But I wonder what your reaction was when Martin called.... Just how that 1962 trip evolved. 

Reilly: Well, it was like this: My first two boats, the Susie R. and the Flavell, were made of fiberglass. And that was a new material, and I'd have Chris lay up about thirteen or fourteen fishing ____________ out of fiberglass, and "got my hands wet," so to speak, and learned how to [paddle?] the stuff, before I made my Cataract boats. Well, the material didn't pan out -it's much too fragile. Both of my boats were patched from about two feet of the bow and stern on both beams. And I couldn't stop the leaks. So I scuttled 'em in 1959 at <Pipe Creek>. Filled 'em full of rocks and took a mineral hammer and punched holes in 'em and shoved 'em out in the current--goodbye. So I didn't have any boats. We sent Joe up the trail and he got the pack train down to pack our stuff out the next day, and they did. And I walked up. And so we didn't have any boats.

Martin got antsy for this trip with the Sunset people, and Frank Chambers was a big man in the financial world, banking circles. If an outfit like Lockheed or Douglas wanted to borrow a million dollars, they contacted Frank Chambers. Frank was a high-level banker. And they would whatever -call a high-level squat -and they would hold a meeting, and Frank was one of them, and they would decide who got how many hundred thousand of this. They split it up among the big boys. 

Steiger: Well, just to set the scene, what I'm curious about is, 1962, now did you guys think that <Marble> and <Bridge Canyon> dams were going to be built then? 

Reilly: We knew they were going to fight for 'em. 

Steiger: Already. So part of that trip was.... 

Reilly: Well, Martin was in that, and Martin was torn between two driving forces: he was dead set against the Redwood expansion in Northern <California>; and he was dead set against the dams in <Grand Canyon> -Bridge and the one in <Marble>. So he took Bill Laine [phonetic spelling] the publisher and owner of Sunset magazine, and Frank Chambers, the banker, and Jack Best, and several others. 

Susie: _____________________. 

Reilly: They were high in government. 

Susie: Phil Hyde [phonetic spelling]. 

Reilly: Yeah, Phil Hyde and his wife. 

Susie: (inaudible) 

Reilly: And we made that trip and we gathered the evidence for Francois to write the book. 

Steiger: Well that was in 1964, right? 

Reilly: That was in 1964. 

Steiger: But 1962.... 

Reilly: Well, we were gettin' the people around to where they were getting prepared for it, you might say. 

Steiger: To do this political.... 

Reilly: We knew this was coming up. 

Steiger: You knew the dam fight was coming up. 

Reilly: Yeah. And we knew the Sierra Club had promised to resist it strongly. And you might say the Sierra Club -Dave Brower [phonetic spelling], I can't say enough for Dave Brower. That's another photo I ought to give you, if I've still got it. I got a good photo by Dave Brower. He and I ________ got three-quarter of an inch of letters between us. 

Steiger: Were you talking about the dam fight then? 

Reilly: Yeah, we're talking about leading the trip and the dam site and how to fight the dam and everything. It all came out [as before cast?]. 

Steiger: Well, it was amazing. 

Susie: Phil Hyde was on the 1964 trip, yes. He wasn't on that trip in.... 

Reilly: In 1962, really, I was laying the groundwork for the 1964 trip. 

Susie: Exactly. That's what it was. 

Steiger: But I'm curious, because I had the impression that [the] 1962 [trip] was about politics -that Martin calls up and says, "P.T. we gotta run this trip, because we're gonna go to war against these dams." 

Reilly: _____________. "Martin, we don't have boats." He said, "Well, hell, if you'll get a hull, I will. We'll get this guy up in Rogue River. I can get him to build us hulls, and we can both finish the interior to suit ourselves." I said, "Okay, you're on." So I had a real hot tooling program with Lockheed at the time. I think I was working ten hours a day, five days a week, and eight hours on Saturdays and Sundays. And I said, "Okay, we'll do it." I'd come home every night, and I'd work out in my patio until ten o'clock on my boat. And we got our boats built. And we took the boats down.... 

Susie: I thought you had them built! 

Reilly: No, they built the hull, and Martin brought my hull down to me. And then he and I finished our hulls. We had to put all the interior in: the hatches and the compartments and everything, and we had to deck it over. There were no decks on it -just a plain, open dory is what it was -built by this guy on Rogue River. So we got those built and that's why Martin's boat and my boat were different. That's the boat now that's on exhibit at the South Rim. 

Steiger: What I wonder about -and I don't know if this is true -it seemed like when you did scuttle those early boats, were you thinking at the time in 1959 that you were going to do more trips? Or had you kind of.... It seemed like you were kind of disgusted with the whole affair. 

Reilly: No, I was disgusted with fiberglass. 

Steiger: So you were just kind of disgusted with those boats anyway. 

Reilly: Well, I wasn't disgusted, but I knew that fiberglass wouldn't stand up in the <Grand Canyon>. And I didn't really know one way or the other if I was [ever going to] build more boats or not, but if I did, they weren't going to be fiberglass. And I wanted to perpetuate my design, sort of like you see in the little model there. But they were going to be wooden dories. And that's when Martin got this guy on Rogue River to build our hulls, and he brought mine down to me. Both of us went to work then. We finished 'em as each of thought they ought to be finished, and we made a date, and we made our trip. The boat that's on exhibit at the South Rim _______________ went through in 1962, 1964 -well, they went through in 1962, too, because in the picture they show me with Martin, taking a picture of me sittin' on a rock with my river hat on, was taken in 1962. 

Steiger: How was that trip? How did you like.... How did the hull look to you when it first showed up? What did you think of it? How did you think it was going to be? And then how'd it turn out to be on the trip, and how was the trip? 

Reilly: Well, the boat turned out to be real good, real fine. I was quite happy with it. I didn't think it was going to be too much when I first started out, but after I'd been at the oars for five minutes, I thought, "Hey, got somethin' here!" So every mile I ran the thing, I liked it better. 

Steiger: And how did that trip go? 

Reilly: Easiest trip I ever made. 

Susie: It was just kind of a fun trip. 

Reilly: Real easy trip. 

Steiger: And that was on 50,000, wasn't it? Or was it? Or was it 30,000? 

Reilly: It was pretty high. It was higher than 50,000, I think. I forget what it was. I'd have to look in my logs -that stuff is too long ago. But it was a fine trip, no trouble whatsoever. I know I took 'em up to see the Juno Ruin. I later wrote a little article for somebody on that. Who did I write the Juno Ruins for? 

Susie: Masterkey [phonetic spelling] I think, in Flagstaff Museum. 

Reilly: No, no, no, no. I think I wrote that for.... 

Susie: Journal of Arizona History? 

Reilly: _____________. That's when I picked up Harvey's magazine. He never ________________. I thought, "Well, I wonder if that little bugger just happened to set down, walked over there about eight or ten feet and there the God-damned magazine was in the rocks. So I put it in my knapsack and packed it out. I never have told him about it. 

Steiger: Well, when you started on that trip, on the 1962 trip, did you actually think you were going to whip these guys? Did you actually think that you were going to stop these dams from being built? 

Reilly: It hadn't gotten that far yet. We weren't that involved with the dams yet. It was to more or less get what photographic evidence we could, and get everything we could to support the fight that we knew was coming up in <Washington>. 

Susie: Martin was an official with the Sierra Club, so he was deeply into it. 

Reilly: Yeah, Martin was on the board. 

Susie: He was _________ [rabid?] on the subject. 

Steiger: Well, he was, I know. We kinda give him a lot of credit for.... 

Susie: Oh, absolutely. 

Reilly: Well, you can't give him too much. If it hadn't been for Martin's get-up and go, that thing never would have gotten off the ground. 

Steiger: The Sierra Club push, you mean? That's the impression that I had of it. You know, it's something, we look back on it today, and think, "Boy, it's a good thing they...." 

Reilly: Oh boy! 

Steiger: Well, so how did 1962 lead into the 1964 trip then? 

Reilly: Well, 1964 was frankly to gather the material to build the book, Time and the River Flowing: <Grand Canyon>. Francois was a passenger, and he was an ex-newspaperman from <San Francisco>. And he and his wife Patience, she ran the upper half, and we had this guy that did the pie pan deal I told you about. 

Susie: Phil somebody, who was a ranger. 

Reilly: Yeah, he was a ranger. 

Susie: He was a very poor boatman. 

Reilly: Yeah, real poor boatman. Anyway, we had him starting out in number three position to where he had somebody in back of him, somebody in front of him, so he couldn't miss. And after he spilled the tenth time, he got in back of me, and boy, you couldn't shake him back. He stayed there. If I turned the boat a certain way, he'd turn it that way. Before he got to the spot, it'd just be like.... (laughter) It was funny! We got to laughing about it. Anyway, I think he dumped three or four times in the whole trip. 

Susie: That was a cold trip, early in the spring. Remember the cold weather? And poor Patience went overboard. ___________ fire to keep her warm. 

Steiger: Was that in <Nevills Rapid>? Was that in 75 Mile Rapid 

Susie: No. 

Reilly: Yeah, she went over in 75 Mile. That's where Patience went overboard. 

Steiger: I seem to remember.... 

Susie: I remember it was so cold, we had to build a fire. 

Reilly: We pulled out at the foot of it and built a fire and warmed her up. 

Susie: ____________________ oars in the boat. Wasn't it? Or was that _________. 

Reilly: He never had a layover. 

Susie: Well, then it was that ranger fellow that Martin brought. 

Reilly: Yeah. 

Steiger: It's easy to look back in retrospect and see that as being a very significant trip -which it was. I think my perception of that is that that book ended up making a big difference. The book made a huge difference, I think. 

Reilly: Oh, I think the book is when the whole vote in favor of us.... 

Susie: Super. 

Reilly: No doubt about it. Congress was undecided, and when we put a copy of Francois' book on every congressman's and senator's desk, they thumbed through that thing, and boy, the vote was overwhelming against it. 

Steiger: At the time that you were on the trip, did you have the feeling that this thing was going to work and that it was going to be a big deal? Or did it feel like when you heard about.... I know that you guys were on the trip and you got the word that they were going to turn off the water and stuff, and you guys should abandon the trip. 

Susie: The plane ____________ dropped the message. 

Reilly: What's your direct question? 

Steiger: The direct question is, When you were on the trip, did you have the sense that this book was going to come together and that.... 

Reilly: We didn't know. We knew that Francois had a hell of a job on his hands, and we didn't know if he could do something, or if the Sierra Club could get it published. And I had no idea, I was amazed when they published so many of my pictures as they did. I was amazed that they did the job they did. But I give a lot of that credit to Martin. Martin did a lot of pushing on that. Can't say too much for him. 

Susie: Francois wrote the book very quickly. Pat proofread it for him, and I thought he did a good job. He made it a little bit more personal, the original version of it. And then he had to write it up the way it is now. He did a good job, too, with that ____________________. 

Steiger: I'm wondering what it felt like at that time when you were down there on the trip and you got the word that they were going to shut off the water and you guys should abandon the trip. How did that feel to you then, and what was it that made you push on? 

Reilly: Did I give you a copy of the note they left me? Well, the airplane came down there and located us, and they were hunting us. We were camped about a half-mile below Whitmore, on the right, and they looked at us, and they dropped a note and it said, "We want you to go out the trail at Whitmore, and we'll have the packers come down and get your stuff. Of course we will pay for it. And if you do not choose to go out, one of you wave something white, alone." And Martin had a white shirt. He tore that white shirt off and he waded out in the river up to his crotch, and when that thing came back down the river, Martin was out there waving (chuckles) the God-damned white shirt. So ________ wouldn't have it. And we got back in the boats. We had a camp all made, the wood all gathered and everything. We threw the camp gear back in the boats and we got out that night and we rowed -I think we covered twelve or thirteen miles until it got dark, and I didn't want to run after dark, so we pulled in. And we didn't have any kind of.... So we ate a cold meal that night, and we bedded down on the rocks, and we got out at daylight the next morning. And the next morning, I ran everything wide open, and we ran over fifty miles, I think down to Separation. 

Susie: Tell him the pilot had brains enough to put in that note, "P.S...." 

Reilly: Oh, yeah, the pilot! God bless that pilot. I don't know what his name was, but the pilot of the airplane, the God damned head ranger at Lake Mead didn't have brains enough to tell us anything pertinent, but the pilot put down what the flow was at <Lee's Ferry> that morning, and what the flow was at <Bright Angel> that day. So that gave me a portion to work on, so I knew how fast the river was dropping. So that's what motivated my desire to get the hell out right away, to get as much as we could. And we rowed fifty miles the next day, and we pulled in at Separation, and sacked out there. And that was a day's rowing. You row fifty miles in one day, and boy, you put in a day! 

Steiger: Yeah, especially on whatever that was. What was it, 7,000-8,000 cfs? 

Reilly: Well, it was getting down pretty low. I know when we got down to Emery Falls, the Park Service got the word that we'd be comin', so they sent the plane out, and they missed us going up. And they saw us on the way down. We didn't make any effort to be spotted, because we didn't give a damn whether they saw us or not. And the pilot, we seen him down there and he spotted us, and we knew he'd seen us, because he circled up to where he could get better access to <Vegas>, and radioed in where [we] were. And I got some good pictures of the silt fields, great big banks, forty, fifty feet high with the sand ____. I got some great shots of those. (referring to Underhill's letter) You still on page one? 

Steiger: Well, let's see.... No, I think we're.... 

Underhill: ________ Steiger, page one. 

Steiger: Oh, yeah. I think we've kinda moved over. I think we're onto page two here. And I just would like to back up a little bit and ask a couple of questions about 1958 and 1959. Let's see, 1957, on the 127,000. Okay, 1957, you guys went through on 127,000 and you stopped at Phantom and chained the boats up there on the beach so nobody could get 'em? 

Reilly: Well, two reasons: one, to keep 'em from being washed away; and another one, to keep the dudes from foolin' around with 'em. 

Steiger: Yeah. And when you got to <Phantom>, it was about 120,000 or somewhere in there? 

Reilly: It was higher than that. It was between 120,000 and 115,000. 

Steiger: And you guys were just thinkin', "Hey, this is a little too high to go on through," at that point? 

Reilly: Well, the lack of campgrounds is what got me. All the campgrounds, there wasn't a bit of sand in the Canyon. You can't conceive of the Canyon being that way. 

Steiger: With no sand? 

Reilly: No sand at all. There was just nothing down there. Nothing -get up in the rocks and kick a couple of 'em around to where you can be half-way comfortable. 

Steiger: Well, it's funny that you say that, because that's our big specter now, the thing that's got the environmental impact statement going, and the thing that drives all the river runners is saying, "Hey, we need some sand to camp on," or people will fifty years from now or whatever. 

Reilly: They won't do it unless they get some silt down there. 

Steiger: Do you think just changing the flows will make any difference? Or do you think that silt's going to go anyway? 

Reilly: The dams keep the silt from going through. See, every year on the natural flows, you had the sandbars replenished with silt, which is actually only sand. And they were replenished every year. They got washed out in a flash flood sometimes, they got replenished the next spring in the high water. So there was no problem. I know all the years I ran before the dam, we never had any problem. 

Steiger: Yeah, you hear tell of huge beaches, bigger than football fields, which we don't really see these days. But then, let's see.... 

Reilly: Evidence: I took some of my old pictures -I saw some of these pictures of the way it is now -in 1962 or 1964, and I compared some of those pictures with pictures that I'd made in the pre-dam days, and oh boy! It shows the story. 

Steiger: Well then maybe I didn't get my chronology right. When you let the Susie R. go, was that in 1958 or 1959? Did you not go in 1959? 

Reilly: I ran the river in 1958 and 1959. I scuttled the Susie and the Flavell in 1959 at <Pipe Creek>. 

Steiger: There's something about that trip that was interesting to me: When you turned over.... Boy, I remember reading in your log about that, when you turned over in 24 [Mile]. 

Reilly: ___________ on my part. 

Steiger: Well, what was interesting to me was, you hung onto that boat, you stayed with it. 

Reilly: I stayed with the boat. _________ up. 

Steiger: And had to swim to shore. 

Reilly: When we got down to the foot of the eddy, I thought he had the benefit of the eddy and would make shore. Well, I missed it. He didn't quite have enough, or he wasn't that good a swimmer, and he got carried down through 25 [Mile]. But he made it through 25. And Steven and Carl came down. Carl was boating for me, but he had Steve Fulmer take the oars because he had more experience, which was good sense. And I rode the boat all the way down to Tiger Wash, and I got it to shore then. But I couldn't turn it over by myself. So they finally came down and they turned it over, the four of us turned it over and bailed her out. And one of the oars was still in the.... I had two oars, but my spare was missing. And we found one spare further down the creek. [A good old spur?] 

Steiger: Well, the thing that got to me was, I remember reading in your log about that, and the way I got it was that you went around the turn, and Joe swam ashore below 25. But these other guys, there was a mention in your log about these other guys walking. They had walked down below those rapids. They went on shore down. There was a mention of Carl walking on shore, way down below 25, to see if he could see anybody. 

Reilly: Well, he might have gone down the rocks a little bit, but you couldn't walk down very far below 25. 

Steiger: Well, I was surprised that they were even walking on shore, trying to spot you guys, that they didn't just jump in a boat and go right after you. 

Reilly: Well, they should have. 

Steiger: But they didn't, did they? 

Reilly: No, they finally did. 

Steiger: I wonder what they were thinking. 

Reilly: Well, it was Carl's second trip through the Canyon, his first trip as a boatman. And Steve wasn't a leader. 

Susie: Steve Fulmer, now. 

Reilly: Steve Fulmer wasn't a leader. He was reticent about everything. 

Susie: Just didn't act quickly. They picked Joe up, didn't they? 

Reilly: They picked Joe up. 

Susie: Joe was waving his ___________. Took off this shorts or whatever. 

Reilly: Yeah, Joe took his shorts off and was wavin' them to be sure they didn't miss him, and they picked him up, and the three of 'em came down. They helped me turn my boat over, and then we got two in each boat and we went on down. 

Steiger: Well, that was my one little question there. I was wondering what was going on there. I had the impression that those guys were really surprised about the boat turning over or something, and didn't quite know how to.... 

Reilly: It was carelessness on my part. Did I ever show you that sequence of pictures of me going over? 

Steiger: No, I don't think so. Did we? Because I don't think I saw 'em. 

Reilly: Steve Fulmer took a.... We had a stretch of his film blown up from thirty-five millimeter to little pictures about one-and-a-half by two-and-a-half, something like that. I got about thirty of 'em, shows the whole thing. She [Karen Underhill] remembers it. 

Steiger: That must have been another day, because I think I'd remember if I saw it. 

Susie: (inaudible) 

Steiger: Well now, what do you think is the best water level, or the safest water level to run on? This is right off of the list here. 

Underhill: That may be two different questions! (laughs) 

Reilly: Well, I don't really know what you mean. 

Underhill: I guess what do you feel is the safest water level? 

Reilly: Well, I think the safest water level, everything considered, for the majority of rapids, is about 40,000-45,000 second-feet. You don't have to dodge rocks like you do on low water, and you don't have the problems that you have in high water.

[END TAPE 2, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Steiger: It does sound about right. Although I even think 40,000-45,000 you started seein' some pretty big waves that come and go. 

Reilly: Well, if you have the right equipment, big waves don't do a thing to you. 

Steiger: I would have said 30,000 except now with the new <Crystal>, it's really spooky at 30,000. Everything else is pretty easy, but <Crystal>'s scary. 

Reilly: I've found 30,000 to be fairly easy. But I still prefer 40,000-45,000. 

Steiger: Well, the thing that I remember about 70,000 -I didn't see the 90,000, but I saw the 72,000 in 1983 -what I remember was the eddy lines. And I remember just the difference between -there were a lot of boils that came and went, and the difference between the currents, like where there'd be any eddy in the current, you'd see, gosh, there'd be four or five feet, drop off, and that really impressed me. 

Susie: (inaudible) 

Steiger: Yeah, and it just gets bigger. As the water gets higher, that just gets more extreme, doesn't it? 

Reilly: No, I don't think so. 

Steiger: Really? 

Reilly: I think that's only characteristic of certain stages. And you get a boil going through there, a surge going through there, and it has that effect.

I know I almost got the hell surprised out of me once. We'd had a normal trip -I forget what year it was -we're down about 121-122 [Mile] in there [later corrected to 220-221], and I'd run through a little [pea dent there?] that didn't amount to anything, and suddenly something grabbed my boat and pulled it down. The gunnels were almost awash with the river. I thought, "What the hell is going on here?" And just then it let go and we popped back up. But if it had kept on pullin' me down, I'd have been swimmin'! The boat would have floated, the cockpit was full of water, but it's been almost full of water several times, but I didn't like that. 

Susie: Was that on real high water? 

Reilly: Well, I'd have to look at my logs to say something, but I think it was down around 220, 221, above Bannon Creek someplace. 

Steiger: I know a spot, 224, that's like that, right just below the last rapid above <Diamond Creek>. There's a real swirly spot there. 

Reilly: Well, it could be. I said a little about it in __________ my log -give the mile point and everything. 

Steiger: That's interesting, the higher that 120, the boils weren't so bad, and the whirlpools and stuff. 

Reilly: No, rapids appeared where there were never other rapids. That big one at <Nankoweap>, I've never seen anything like that in my whole river experience. I have to pinch myself to believe it right now. It happened -believe me, it happened. 

Steiger: I do. 

Reilly: It happened just like I say. If I ever came close to rowing my guts out, it was to keep my boat away from that hole, that pulled that tree up and swirled it down. I never have been able to figure out where that tree went, that stump, that log. It must have been fifteen or twenty feet long. 

Steiger: And it just went down and never showed up? 

Reilly: It disappeared. I looked for it as I was rowing on the slower rapid on the right-hand shore. As I was rowing, upstream, up the rapids -down the rapid, upstream. I kept my eyes peeled, and I never saw that log appear. 

Underhill: Was that the closest you've ever come to being scared down there? 

Reilly: No, I wasn't scared then. Being scared doesn't do any good. 

Susie: ______________ he had to. _____________ I stand on the shore and watch, I'd rather have been with him, because of the _________ wash and everything. But you looked so calm. And I remember Francois kept saying, "Looks like it doesn't bother him a bit." Evidently, it didn't. He loved it. When we first took our ______________________. 

Steiger: No, that's fine. 

Susie: I kept saying, the very first trip we had, and he kept saying, "You're a boatman." And I __________ out, and _________________. 

Reilly: I could tell that old George Wing didn't know beans about rowing a boat. 

Susie: We had to find a way to get ahold of the oars, and so we did most ____________. 

Reilly: This was his first trip. 

Susie: And it was the end of the trip that Norm said, "How about <Grand Canyon>?" 

Reilly: He offered me a job. 

Reilly: I remember thinking, "What does he charge to run the <Grand Canyon>?" 

Reilly: I said to Doug, "You mean you'd pay me to take a vacation like this?!" He says, "Hell, yes!" I said, "Hell, yes!" That's how I came to row for Norm Nevills. (aside about battery)

Well, I was a little bit miffed, because he never told about the early stuff, and I finally found out that he wrote another volume. 

Susie: I'd love to read that one too. I want to try to get ahold of that. 

Reilly: You got an earlier volume available? 

Underhill: It is. I think it's called They Came to the Mountain. 

Susie: Yes, that's it. 

Underhill: And those cover the earlier things. 

Reilly: Can you get it in Flag [<Flagstaff>]? 

Underhill: I think so. You want a copy? 

Reilly: I want to get a copy. 

Underhill: I'll make a note. I'm not sure it's still in print, but I'll get you one. 

Susie: We'd appreciate you buying it for us, Karen. Do that. 

Reilly: That one, I'd done so much work in the early Coconino Sun and the Coconino Champion that I feel like I'm going back to an old friend. In fact, that was my only criticism of this book -it didn't have anything about outside of Flag. It's all about Flag. 

Underhill: The other one's a little broader in scope, but every once in a while there's an error here and there (laughs), but not bad, not big. 

Susie: I sure enjoyed it. I haven't read it all, but I've gone through it a bit. So I'd like to read his first book. Pat's mentioned these stories. 

Reilly: Want me to take that book off your hands, Honey? 

Susie: Uh-huh. It's got so much _____________. 

Steiger: Karen, we're kind of skipping all over here. I'm wondering what questions.... 

Underhill: We've been jumping around a lot, but I think one of the things that we've discussed back and forth a bit in letters, is what do people in Lew's generation, my generation, who have no pre-dam experience, what would be the two or three things that someone really needs to understand to even have a beginning concept of what it was like when you were there? 

Susie: Pat, did you hear what she said? 

Reilly: I couldn't get the gist of it. 

Susie: A little louder, Karen, your voice is real faint for us. 

Underhill: I guess I'm still curious. We've talked about some of the differences, and talked about big water and things, but if you were just talking to someone -and you've done this a bit in letter and in person with us -and were to tell someone, "These are the two or three things you need to think about in order to understand what conditions were like" when you were running in the late forties, early fifties.... 

Reilly: I wouldn't boil it down like that. 

Underhill: How would you do it? 

Reilly: Well, people either understand something, or they don't. And if they don't, half the time they don't want to. If you get a person who really wants to understand, you can afford to take them from the ground up and give 'em a good foundation, and some of 'em a variation in the different aspects. And to me, even experienced river people -I've had experience river people fail to understand the differences between extremely high water and low water. They're used to running on this present-day, where you seldom have 25,000 second-feet, and they have no concept of around 100,000. Just talking about two different things. They don't understand what you're talking about. 

Susie: Totally different _____________. 

Steiger: Well, you don't understand the speed, if you haven't been out on there. You don't understand how much faster everything moves, how much quicker. Like Susie, you were talking about how you guys were getting psyched way ahead of time, to make that pull-in at <Bright Angel>, 'cause you didn't want to go below that. I remember that from 1983. I remember we all were having fits -just to get stopped where you wanted to was a major issue. And I guess that was what it was like for you guys. Or was it? It seems like you managed to stop pretty much just where you wanted to. 

Reilly: We generally stopped where I wanted to. I always planned my camps ahead of time. In 1957, it didn't work out that way. From my knowledge of the Canyon, when we reached a certain point, we took what was the best, and that's what it boiled down to. Of course I realized that I wanted to stop at Harding, because I realized what the condition was there.

One thing I ought to tell you about Harding: Both Harry Aleson and Don Harris were supposed to be quite knowledgeable on the river, and I think they are. But I looked at that Quigby [phonetic spelling] grave, where they buried that kid, and I couldn't believe that they buried him where they did. All you had to do was look up in back, and right up on the wall there was an alcove there, a little low spot in the red wall, and on occasion, a hell of a hard flood would come down there. And sure enough, when I went back there in 1982, I guess, I walked up there, and where the Quigby grave was, there wasn't a sign of the grave. There was a wash about four feet deep, about twelve feet wide, and Quigby's body had [gone] bye-bye. 

Steiger: He was the Boy Scout? 

Reilly: The Mormons might have called him a Boy Scout, but he wasn't. It was just a church group outing. He was drowned at the Rincon. He went out in the water and just disappeared. And the leader was one of these good devout Mormons, but he didn't know beans about the river. I don't know what happened to the kid, whether he got a cramp or just went under and wanted to be smart and stay out of sight and finally couldn't get his breath to come up, or what happened. But that was the last time he was seen, and then they found his body down at Harding. Parents' friends found that, after old Bert Loper was drowned. 

Steiger: That same trip? Boy, that was a heck of a trip in 1949. 

Susie: Yup. 

Reilly: I remember that Dr. Bryant [phonetic spelling], who was Superintendent of the <Grand Canyon>, sent a message by a truck driver for Norm to call him before he left on his trip. We gathered at <Marble Canyon> in those days. Norm and I got in his plane and we flew down to.... 

Susie: Indian trading post. What's the name of it? 

Reilly: Some Indian trading post between <Marble Canyon> and the South Rim. 

Steiger: There's <Bitter Springs>, there's.... 

Reilly: <Bitter Springs>, someplace in there. Cedar Mountain? 

Steiger: Bear Ridge, <The Gap>, <Cedar Ridge>. 

Susie: No, no, it was between <Flagstaff>. 

Reilly: It was between <Cameron> and Flag. 

Susie: That's right. 

Steiger: <Gray Mountain>. 

Susie: <Gray Mountain>, that's it! 

Reilly: Well, <Gray Mountain>'s on the left -this was on the right. 

Susie: It was <Gray Mountain>, I think. You phoned from there. 

Reilly: We phoned from a place on the right, because I remember the little landing strip that he had there. Anyway, Norm and I flew there, and we phoned Dr. Bryant and he told us that Bert Loper had been drowned, and for us to watch out for the body, and told us to be real careful. And he acted like an old mother hen, you know. 

Susie: Oh, he was awful then. 

Reilly: And we said, "Yeah, we'll keep a sharp eye." And we kept a sharp eye, and we never found him. 

Susie: He was a wonderful man. 

Reilly: Yeah, Dr. Bryant was okay. 

Susie: Best Superintendent they ever had. 

Steiger: What are some other questions? I want to make sure we cover your bases, Karen. 

Underhill: These were just samples. Are there any questions.... 

Reilly: Do you want to know about these other people on page two? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Underhill: Some of the ones we haven't covered, yeah. 

Steiger: I'm curious to know -not to jump the order -but Kent Frost, having spent a little time with him, it'd be interesting to know your impression of him when you guys knew him. 

Reilly: At that time, Kent Frost was a good boatman. But I'd rather not say anything about him personally. 

Susie: Yeah, _________________. Better not. 

Reilly: You know about him, huh? 

Steiger: No. I mean, we just did a river trip, and I got to visit with him a couple of times. I never boned-up on him or anything. 

Susie: That's too personal. That's no good. 

Steiger: Okay. 

Underhill: We'll go on to the next one, then. (laughs) 

Reilly: __________________. 

Steiger: Well, that sounds pretty similar to modern times. (laughs) 

Susie: Yes, isn't that the truth? 

Reilly: I don't know. 

Susie: Well that's too bad, ______________ like that. 

Underhill: What about Brick? 

Reilly: Brick Martenson [phonetic spelling]? Well.... Brick's a very capable boatmen, if he -it's all a mental thing with him. He was madder than hell, when I met him, his first [measure?] at Badger. I made him run as a [packier?] with Susie and me. Oh, he was glowering about that. He didn't like it at all. I think he had some heroic ideas. He wanted to come to his first major [rapid] and run it.

