JAY FOUTZ INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.20

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. We're here at Beclahbeto Trading Post, with Jay Foutz. It's Wednesday, August 12, [1998], about 10:00 a.m. [Brad Cole and Lew Steiger are also present.] 

Underhill: Jay, we'll start with where and when you were born. 

Foutz: I was born in <Fruitland New Mexico>, November 26, 1924. 

Underhill: Who were your parents? 

Foutz: My parents were Elmer Foutz and Ethel Brimhall [phonetic spelling] Foutz. 

Underhill: Why were they in <Fruitland> at the time? 

Foutz: They were the original settlers in <Tuba City>, and when the government bought 'em out so they could give that part of the country to the Navajos and Hopis, why, they moved to <Fruitland>. My grandfather Foutz and Grandmother Foutz settled in <Kirtland>. And the Brimhalls, they moved from <Salt River Canyon> and <Snowflake> and down in that area, and they settled in <Fruitland>. So my father was raised in <Kirtland>, and my mother was raised in <Fruitland>. 

Underhill: And were they farming families? 

Foutz: Well, my mother's folks were in the sheep business and ranching business. And my father, he was in the trucking business. And my first recollection of this life is in <Ganado>--that was where we were living when I was about three years old. My father was in the trucking business and we were living at <Ganado Arizona>, at that time. 

Underhill: And what was <Ganado> like then? 

Foutz: <Ganado> was two stores and a Presbyterian mission--that was it. 

Underhill: How many Anglo families were around you then, do you remember? 

Foutz: Well, there were two Foutz families and one Lee family and one Spanish family. Four--that was it. They were just building a Presbyterian mission at that time. And my father was hauling coal from <Steamboat> to <Gallup>, and then he was back-hauling freight for the Presbyterian mission at that time. Anyway, I think they eventually named a wing of the hospital after [my father]. 

Underhill: How long were you in <Ganado>? 

Foutz: Well, we moved to <Holbrook> when I was five or six years old. 

Unidentified man: You went to school there, the first grade. 

Foutz: Yeah, I went to school--well, I was only four years old, so I went to the first grade at <Ganado>. I was four years old, because the teacher--my next sister older than me, why.... Let's see, Mrs. Holderman was the schoolteacher, and she was teaching all the Anglo people. It was from one to nine. Anyway, she needed kids, so she just asked my mother if I could come and go to school with my sister Eilene and help relieve the monotony, you know. So she spent more time with me than she did with all the other kids. (laughter) And then when we moved to <Ganado>, I was just old enough to start to school, so anyway I signed up for the second grade, because I'd already had the first grade. They wouldn't let me go to the [second] grade. It was ridiculous, but anyway.... So I had to take the first grade all over again. So then from <Ganado> we moved to <Fruitland>. And then I started school in <Kirtland>. My birthday was such that when we moved to <Fruitland>, why then I signed up for the second grade there, because they wouldn't let me go to the second grade in there. And so my father had to go straighten 'em out, and he put me in the second grade. 

Underhill: (laughs) And you did get out of school. 

Foutz: I did. I did go to the second grade, 'cause I'd had that first grade two years. And even then, I could write and read and spell and everything, better than any of 'em, because I'd had so much time spent with me when I was in--well, preschool, you might say, or kindergarten or whatever. So that was my.... And then we lived there all the rest of our life. 

Underhill: What did you want to do when you were older, do you remember? 

Foutz: Well, I really didn't give too much thought about it. When I graduated from high school, I was seventeen. I was always a year, year-and-a-half younger than everybody else in the class, so I really didn't get to participate in a lot of the activities that all the older, you know, because I was too small, you might say. But when I graduated from high school, I went to <California> and spent about three months with my uncle, Ernest Brimhall, in <California>, looking for a job, but I couldn't find a job, so I came back. And then I went to work for the BIA in <Shiprock> for about two weeks. My brother-in-law was working for the BIA irrigation, so he got me a job at the motor pool at <Shiprock>. Anyway, I worked there for maybe two weeks. And then Kenneth Washburn, he was running Teec Nos Pos at that time, so he stopped by and asked me if I'd come work at <Teec Nos Pos>--so I did. So I was working at <Teec Nos Pos> when I went into the Navy in 1943. Then when I was separated from the Navy in 1945, why, I worked there at <Fruitland> with my dad in the store there at <Fruitland>, and I got a chance to go to work in an oil field, so I worked in the oil field for a couple of years. And then I got married to my wife, Marie Marshall Foutz, and after we were married we moved to <Gallup> and worked for Tanner's Incorporated there in <Gallup>. He was running a bean warehouse there. And my brother-in-law was the bookkeeper there. His name was Skeet Woods, and my sister was Ardith Woods. So we moved over there and we lived with them about two weeks 'til we got an apartment of our own. So I worked over there for about a year-and-a-half. My father-in-law was a Consignee [phonetic spelling ?], Texaco Consignee there at <Farmington>. He talked me into coming back to <Farmington> and going to work with him, because he needed some help bad. And about that time was when the oil industry was really gettin' strong--El Paso and all of 'em had moved in, and they were really gettin' to go strong. So then.... Well, I worked in the oil, when we moved from <Gallup>, I went to work for him and worked for him for about probably three years. Then Russell, he came down to the house that evening. It was on a weekend, it was Sunday afternoon, I guess. Russell asked me if I would come out and run <Beclahbeto> for him. And I was looking for an excuse to find another job, let's say, because I'd worked for my father-in-law too long. (Underhill laughs) So he said, "Well, can you come out next week?" You know, the following Monday. He was there Sunday, but the following Monday. I said, "Well, I don't know whether I can just quit that quick or not, but I'll tell Ray that I'm going to go out and run the store, and see what he says." Of course he didn't want me to leave. But I told him I needed a change. So we moved out to <Beclahbeto>. It took about two weeks from the time he came until.... And then I ran <Beclahbeto> for about two years, probably. And then Russell was wanting to move to town, so he moved me over to <Teec Nos Pos> to work with Loyd, my brother-in-law. So he turned Teec Nos Pos over to Loyd and I, and him and Helen moved to town. And then we hired a kid by the name of George Baker to run <Beclahbeto> at that time. But it was strictly primitive at that time. I mean, there weren't any roads--just a wagon trail from <Shiprock> to <Teec Nos Pos>. Took an hour, just exactly an hour, to drive from <Shiprock> to <Teec Nos Pos>. 

Underhill: And this was about 1953 or so, when you _________? 

Foutz: About 1954 when I moved to <Teec Nos Pos>. I ran Beclahbeto two good years before that. Everything was running smooth, everything was going great. 

Underhill: You were at <Teec Nos Pos> in the early forties. How would you describe it in the early forties, before you went in the Navy? 

Foutz: This was after I’d got out the Navy. 

Underhill: Right, that you went back. But you worked there for just a couple of years? 

Foutz: I worked for a year-and-a-half for Kenneth, before I went in the Navy. Then when I got back, Russell had already traded Kenneth out of his part of <Teec Nos Pos>, because it always belonged to the family. The family had always owned half of it. So then Russell traded [Gaibo?] Canyon and some land out there for Kenneth's interest in Teec. And then when I moved to <Teec Nos Pos> after Russell moved to town, why, then that's when Loyd and I started buying half of it, working an interest in the store, you might say, in <Beclahbeto> and <Teec Nos Pos>. 

Underhill: What was the post like then, around 1954? 

Foutz: Well, it was just strictly a trading--there was no money of any kind. I mean, it was strictly trade. We got paid twice a year: in the spring was wool and mohair, and in the fall was lambs and cattle. And that was it, that's the only two times you ever handled any money. The rest of the time it was all just the barter system. They'd bring a basket in or a rug in or whatever. And if they needed something, they pawned a little something for it. You never saw any money. I mean, you might operate for a whole month and handle thirty dollars, you know--which was a lot of money in those days, for that ___________.

And then later, when they started hiring a few of the Indians to work on the railroad, why, then that's when a little money became available. That's when a little money started circulating, because they'd go off to work on the railroad in the summertime, and then they'd come back home in the wintertime. And then they'd sign railroad unemployments, which at that time was fifteen dollars every two weeks. 

Underhill: And did you handle the money? 

Foutz: Yeah. Well, we were the post office and everything there. We had to pick the mail up in <Shiprock> and haul it ourselves and everything. And I was a railroad representative that took the claims and everything and mailed 'em in and all. And really, that was the beginning of any cash flow of any kind in this part of the country, anyway. There might have been cash flow other places, but that was the only cash flow we had. And then after a while, they raised the unemployment benefits from fifteen to thirty dollars every two weeks, which was exceptionally good at that time. And then later they raised it to.... Well, the last year or so that we signed for railroad unemployment benefits, I think the checks were $120 every two weeks. But basically that was all the cash flow there was until the uranium started, you know. And then the uranium industry hired a good many of 'em, and they paid 'em every two weeks, which.... Well, that was quite nice, you might say. We were rollin' in dough, you might say. (laughter) I mean, really, because it'd been such.... 

?: [In peril?]. 

Foutz: Yeah, it'd been such a trade and barter system so long that it was good to start really handling a few checks and handling a little money. 

Underhill: And how did that improve the business for you, to have cash? 

Foutz: Well, it doubled and tripled our volume, you know. Teec Nos Pos became a pretty good store. I mean, it was doing a pretty good volume at that time. [Beclahbeto?] was doin' good. It took us five years to get our part of it paid off. And then from then on it was really good. I mean, it treated us pretty well, that's all I can say. 

Underhill: And when you were buying livestock and handling the wool, can you describe a little bit about what a typical wool season was like, and how much you brought in? 

Foutz: Wool season was.... During the livestock reduction program, why, they forced them to reduce their herd you know, and all that. So a good wool and mohair season, we'd probably buy thirty bags of mohair and probably anywhere from sixty to a hundred bags of wool. That was probably as good as anybody at that time. Maybe further out around Kaibito and out in that area, they might have bought more wool. But at that time, we were buying more wool and mohair there than any store in this part of the country--and more lambs than any store in the country. We'd rebag all [the wool] and haul it to town and store it. If we were lucky, we'd find a buyer for it--if we weren't, we'd just keep it in storage 'til somebody would come along and buy it.

But now lambs were a different story. There's a market for them every.... I mean, when you went out and bought and trailed--herded--them to <Farmington> and put 'em in that railroad stockyards to load 'em on the railroad cars, why, there were buyers there to buy 'em. 

Underhill: And how many lambs would you typically have when you were herding them? 

Foutz: I was going to say just on average, 2,500 head. And Beclahbeto on average, was about 100 maybe 150. But we kept 'em separate until we started to town. And then when we started to town, we took 'em all at once. 

Underhill: And how many folks were usually involved in your drive? 

Foutz: Oh, there were always at least three herders, and then we were checking on 'em every day, making sure they had plenty of water, plenty of food, plenty of whatever they needed--plenty of wood. 

Underhill: And how long did it take to get to.... 

Foutz: Took just a week to get from <Teec Nos Pos> to the top of the river there, on the south side of the river. Then that night, we'd move in on the river. We would let 'em water, and then we'd feed 'em good. And then late that evening we'd start across that bridge with 'em. We'd stop all the traffic and we'd herd 'em across the bridge and up the lane and into the railroad stockyards. Because after you got 'em in the stockyards, you couldn't do nothing with 'em. I mean, they had to have an overnight drink, and then we'd weigh 'em at daylight the next morning and load 'em on the cars. But that was a fun time. I mean, because everybody was involved, and everybody liked it, you know.

Now, wool season, it was work. I mean, it was hard work. Nobody really cared (laughter) too much for wool season. But lamb season was work, too, until you got 'em all put together, 'cause you had to weigh 'em one at a time. You'd put an old number two tub on the scales. I think the tub weighed three pounds, or whatever, so you knew how much the tub weighed. And then you'd turn the lamb upside down in it, and weigh it, and then you'd kick it out and brand it and turn it loose. It took forever to weigh lambs, you know, because every time you turned one upside down in that tub, why, there were always two people making sure that you got the scales just right. And that's the way we wanted it, you know. So it involved lots of work, and sometimes.... 

Underhill: How many days did it take to weigh 2,500 lambs? 

Foutz: Well, it took about thirty days. We bought lambs for about thirty days, and then we were all through. We started in right after the fair in September. We always started the first day after the fair in <Shiprock>. And then we ran from then 'til we completed. The fair was generally the latter part of September. Then we'd buy up 'til the last week in October. And then we'd trail 'em out. 

Underhill: And what made wool season so much harder? 

Foutz: Well, you had to dump every sack, and you had to resack it. And then you had to.... You know, a sack of wool is heavy. 

Underhill: How much did they weigh, usually? 

Foutz: About 270 pounds average, with the dirt and grease and everything. Mohair, it was always heavier than wool--300 pounds or so. So they quit using the big seven-foot bags on account of it. They went back to the six-foot bags. Makes it easier to handle. It was fun, we had all the time in the world--it was just.... Well, nobody likes to break a sweat (laughs), let’s put it that way! (laughter) But we enjoyed it, or we wouldn't have stayed so long. And it's treated us quite well. 

Underhill: And when did you learn to speak Navajo? 

Foutz: I was raised close to the Indians, so I had the basic individual words, you know. We used to sell a little fruit and a few watermelons and stuff in there, along on the river, you know. Basically, always had enough--the basic words to where I could get by pretty well in the store. But as far as carrying on a conversation, why then that was something else. Then it took quite a while before I could visit with them, you know. I still can't talk it--I can just barely get by. 

Underhill: Do you have a nickname in Navajo? 

Foutz: Not really. 

Underhill: None that you know of, anyway. (laughter) 

Foutz: The only nickname I ever had was this old boy down here at <Red Mesa>.... When we left <Teec Nos Pos> and come over here, I was the only trader on the reservation that would buy a goat. I'd buy every goat that I could possibly get my hands on, because as far as I was concerned, in the overall operation, there's as much money for me to make dealing in goats as there was in sheep and lambs and all, because they'd sell goats anytime, but lambs and sheep were only a certain time of the year. But I could buy goats anytime, I could buy goats all summer long or all fall long-- winter long, for that matter. I've had a corral full of goats in the dead of winter, where if they'd lay down, they'd freeze to the ground, you know. But I could always make a little money on goats--not a whole bunch, but just enough to keep me interested in it. And so this old man down there at <Red Mesa>, he come in, Hosteen Klizzy [phonetic spelling] you know. (laughs) So he called me "Hosteen Goat." (laughs) I was the only one on the reservation that I know of that'd buy a goat. But when he passed on, why then that fun part of it quit. 

Underhill: What other customers like that stand out in your mind from those days? 

Foutz: Well, all the old-timers that really were fun to trade with. They're prit' near all gone, they've all passed on. But we've still got a lot of old-timers here that we visit with. And they love to come and visit and trade with us. I mean, they wouldn't trade anywhere else. But we've always treated 'em fair, and they like the way we treat 'em, and they come back. There's not all that many old-timers left. I mean, look at us, we're way up in years. And they were old-timers when we come, so I mean, they're gradually movin' on, and basically all we're lookin' for is the younger generation. 

Underhill: What do you think it takes to be a good trader? You mentioned that you were fair with your customers. 

Foutz: You have to let 'em know that you like 'em, that you enjoy tradin' with 'em. And you gotta let 'em know that you're their friend. When they have a problem, you're the first person they come to, and you try to help 'em through that crisis. I mean, sometimes it's a burden for you maybe to help 'em, 'cause you have no idea how or when they're gonna be able to bring it back to you, you know. But basically, they come because they prit' near always know, if it's serious enough, they're gonna get it. And that is just building trust. And we feel like if we've got that type of relationship, I mean, eventually, no matter what, they're gonna step in and put their arm around you and hand you the fifty dollars you loaned 'em, or the hundred dollars you loaned 'em. It may take a lot longer than you intended, or they intended. We've had people step in here that's owed us a bill for three years, and plopped $300 down and say, "I'm sorry, but I've been up in <Salt Lake>, and here it is." So I mean, the trust was there when they left, and they want it to continue to be that way. 

Underhill: What kinds of services did you provide other than just trade goods and wool and lambs? 

Foutz: We're the only full-service store left on the reservation, that I know of. We deal in everything: livestock and rugs and jewelry, baskets, buckskins. Anything they need, they can come here and ask for it and we can probably find it for 'em. I mean, basically. That's it. It's completely different than a convenience store. It don't even compare to a convenience store. We still do credit, and we do a lot of things that we've done ever since 1949 or 1951. I mean, it hasn't changed that much as far as we're concerned. And that's basically what I'm sayin' to you, that we were a full-service trading post. We were then, and we are now. If they need advice, they come and ask us for it. If they need help, they come and ask us for it. Maybe we can't help all the time, but a lot of times, we can. That's about it. If I hadn't have liked it, I wouldn't still be here. 

Underhill: How did pawn change for you over time? You're not able to take pawn now? 

Foutz: No. When they took that out, they done the whole tribe an injustice. There's very little.... I mean, all the good pawn that we were used to handling is gone. There ain't no more, there isn't any more ever. I mean, there's a lot of good new stuff on the market, I'll grant you that, but all the old good coral beads and all the good belts and stuff that I would like to own, that I would like to have, it's gone, there's no more of it. I mean, it's all been pawned off, and those people weren't under any guidelines--30, 60, 90 days, whatever. We were bonded Indian traders, and we were obligated to do what we agreed to do, and that was it. But when they took it off, when they took the pawn away from us, that was probably the biggest injustice they ever did to the Navajo people, except when they forced 'em to reduce all their livestock below what they should have done. 

Underhill: How has that impacted the Navajo economy, to do away with pawn? 

Foutz: I don't really think it's affected their economy. The fact is, they don't own it anymore. The only pawn they've got is some new piece of jewelry that they'd purchased since they lost the old jewelry. And basically, that's all the pawn there is, is just the new stuff. I mean, right here in this area I'll bet there's probably half a dozen of these old squaws that wear red beads that they've had that are a hundred years old, you might say. But you can look at 'em and tell they're a hundred years old, you know. But that's it. Whereas the men and the women and all of 'em used to wear that good jewelry when they were going to a squaw dance or a meeting or something. The only jewelry you see anymore is the new stuff that they've just purchased in the last year or two. But as far as impacting their economy, I don't think it's hurt 'em, because the fact is, they have to run it to town and pawn it, and they can pawn it for maybe ten cents on the dollar for what they paid for it--that's it. And then they have to pick it up every 60, 30.... Where before, if we pawned a good string of beads, we didn't care if we had it for three years, as long as when wool season came along, they paid interest on it; and then when fall came, if they came by and paid the interest on it; we didn't care if we had those $400 or $500 beads in there. It didn't make a bit of difference. 

Underhill: Would you loan it out to them for ceremonies? 

Foutz: Once in a while, special ones--not all of 'em, because all of 'em wouldn't want to borrow it back. When they wanted to use it, they'd come in and take it out. And then after they'd used it, they'd bring 'em back in and pawned it to you, because they knew it was safe in your safe. They knew it was safe there, and that's the only reason they left it there year after year, because they didn't want it at home for somebody to steal it while they were out herding sheep. But as long as it was in my vault, they felt like it was plumb secure. And it probably was, to a certain extent. I mean, you know, 'cause we didn't mind keepin' it. We were glad to have it, really. 

Underhill: Were you involved in the FTC hearings? 

Foutz: Yeah, we went over to that. Just like the circus up in a circus tent. ______ total farce ____. And I don't know of anybody that was over there that won't say the same thing. I mean, it was a complete farce. I mean, they had that testimony pre-empt and nobody could say a word. It was all pre-programmed, the whole outfit _______. Just like goin' to a circus under a circus tent--that was all it amounted to, just terrible. I don't know of anybody that had anything decent to say about the whole outfit. Even our lawyer, the Traders Association lawyer, they won't let him say one.... They wouldn't let him say one word. Nobody. The only people that could say anything was the people that had been pre-programmed on that program, and that was it--no input of any kind, no questions of any kind-- nuthin'. It was just like settin' there listenin' to a tape recorder. Total farce. Disgrace to the human mind, really. 

Underhill: Did you think about quitting then? 

Foutz: No, we didn't care anything about it. I mean, we could see where it was leadin', but then we had a lot of good pawn at that time. We had quite a lot of good beads in there. We had probably fifteen or thirty strands of choice red beads. We had probably fifteen or twenty choice belts. I mean, we had lots of good jewelry and pawn. But then of course in time it was all redeemed, and now they don't own it, and it's gone. Steiger: Why don't they own it? 

Foutz: 'Cause they pawned it off the reservation, and those people are under no.... I mean, they pawn it for 30 days or 60 days or 90 days, and then if it's not redeemed, it belongs to them. So that's the reason. And if it's not redeemed in that given time when they pawn it off the reservation, now, I'm sure there's rules and stuff to regulate the pawn industry off the reservation--everything has rules and regulations--but, what I'm saying is there's no give and take. I mean, if the pawnbroker doesn't want to have any give and take on the tail end of that, why, then there isn't anything anybody can do about it. You know, I mean, it's up to him to say what.... He's complete boss of it after that pawn contract has expired. So, I mean, that's it. Where here, if they'd come in and say, "Don't do anything, we're gonna do this, we're gonna do that. Keep it for us," well, they knew we'd keep it for 'em, 'cause they were good people, they're good customers, we've traded with 'em every day. So, I mean, we weren't going to do anything to tear that relationship apart. It was just that simple. 

Underhill: What other differences are there between your trading post and a border town operation? 

Foutz: Well, I really don't know that there's that much difference. Off the reservation, it's just more or less either a pawn shop, a convenience store, or ... what. I mean, a lot of 'em don't really deal in general merchandising much. I mean, they probably deal in a few groceries and a few fast food items and stuff like that, but I don't know of a full-service place anywhere off the reservation. Now, the Tanners, over at <Gallup>--Joe Tanner and some of them over there--I don't know whether they buy livestock or not. They used to, but I don't think they do anymore. I mean, it's strictly just pawn and miscellaneous--groceries and stuff like that. And piñons is a big thing with 'em, you know. But they only hit every three to seven years, so it's a long, drawn-out payday there, too. 

Underhill: You mentioned the United Indian Traders Association. When did you become a member? 

Foutz: I've always been a member, ever since I moved out here--1951 or 1952. First year I was out there I paid Association dues. See, I knew what they were. When I was living in <Gallup>, my brother-in-law that was a bookkeeper for Tanners, Incorporated, he was an Indian Traders Association bookkeeper also, when he was living in <Gallup>. And I knew what the Indian Traders Association was, and they were the instigators of the Gallup Indian Ceremonial as you know it is today. I mean, if it hadn't have been for them, the ceremonial would have never started. But it was the Indian Traders Association, and that was strictly started to promote the Indian arts and crafts. And that's basically all the Traders Association was involved in, that's all it ever did--promoting the Indian arts and crafts. As far as I know, they're the ones that started that Indian ceremonial over there--or the basic founders of it. I'm sure the City of Gallup and all of 'em helped, because look at the revenue it brought into the city then. I mean, it wasn't near as extensive then as it is now. I mean, I don't know what's wrong with it now, it should be coining the money hand over hand. In those days, it did coin lots of money. I mean, they gave away a lot of good prizes and everything. But they always had money in the bank, too. But now, I see where they're wanting Gallup to furnish two or three million dollars to get 'em started again. So I don't know. There are big lumps of money, you know. They lost money last year, and I can't hardly see how that could.... I mean, there've got to be a lot of fingers in the pot. (laughter) A lot of people handling the piece of ice, I guess, I don't know. 

Underhill: Did you have a United Indian Traders Association number for jewelry? 

Foutz: I never did, 'cause jewelry wasn't our big thing. The old traders in <Gallup>, the Richardsons and the Tolpins [phonetic spelling] and those people around <Gallup> that jewelry was their main.... You know, their main business was jewelry. They sold the silver, the turquoise, and everything to make it with, and then they paid the silversmith for making it and bringing it back. And they would wholesale it or do whatever. I mean, it was quite lucrative for them, too, at that time. But basically that's all the Indian Traders Association was ever involved in, was just the promotion of arts and crafts--Navajo arts and Indian-- didn't have to be Navajo, just any Indian arts and crafts. 

Underhill: What were the annual meetings like that you've attended? 

Foutz: Well, the annual meetings is just.... They read the bylaws and the minutes of the last meeting. If they needed to elect new officers, they elected new officers, and sustained the ones that were left. It was just like any corporation meeting. It didn't vary from any of that. It was just basically the basic crew of 'em. Then they had a big happy hour and a big dinner that evening, and danced and everybody had a good time. 

Underhill: Have you served as an officer of the Association? 

Foutz: I've had the opportunity, but I turned 'em down, because I didn't want to take the time to get involved. I didn't have the time. I was raising a big family and working hard and everything. I really didn't want to get involved. But I had a lot to do with who was involved. And it was just a corporation meeting is all it was. Kind of dull and time-consuming (laughs)--nothing exciting. All the corporate meetings I've ever been to have been time-consuming and not too exciting. But anyway, that was it. 

Underhill: Are there any big issues that you recall from the Association that stand out in your mind? 

Foutz: Well, not that I'm really on top of. I've heard of different areas where the Traders Association went to bat for different traders and did them a service. But being as I don't know any of the particulars, I wouldn't voice any opinion on that or whatever. There's been one or two traders that's been picked on by the DNA, and the Traders Association went to bat for 'em. Anyway, the lawyer of the Association went to bat for 'em, but I'm unaware of the particulars or anything, so I wouldn't voice any opinion on it. 

Underhill: Have you had encounters with the DNA? 

Foutz: I haven’t. We've had a clean bill of health ever since we started. 

Underhill: Great. Have you had a lease over the years? 

Foutz: Well, we've had two leases, and we're negotiating for another one now. I can't foresee any problems with that. 

Underhill: How long did your leases run? 

Foutz: Twenty-five years. The last one was twenty- five with an option for five. And we've run the option out, so we've got to negotiate for one now. And we're in the process now. 

Cole: What is that process? How do you go about getting a lease? 

Foutz: You have to get the chapter approval, which is community input. And then you have to go before the tribal development, or whatever the heck--economic development--people there in <Shiprock>. They've got to review it and everything, and then they send it to <Window Rock>. The council over there either stamps "approved" or sends it back and wants more information or something. I mean, all it is, is just renewing an old lease, so they've got all _______. We've been here for that long, they shouldn't have any problem with us. 

Underhill: Do you know how much it costs these days for a lease? 

Foutz: It don’t cost anything with a new lease. It costs you $300 a year for a business license, and then you have to pay 1_ percent on your gross sales, rent to the tribe. 

Underhill: And that goes directly to the tribe? 

Foutz: That goes directly to the tribe. The business license in the office is BIA, so your $300 goes to them. And then your rent goes to the tribe itself. But it should be just a simple operation. That's all the legal work and everything, with all the legal minds and everything you gotta contend with, you never know what you.... 

Underhill: How long have you been waiting? 

Foutz: Well, we just started, so we don't know. We haven't had any problem before. If they want us here, fine. If they don't, we're gone. It doesn't make a bit of difference to us one way or the other. Like I say, we're gettin' old, they've treated us well, and whatever happens, happens--that's it. 

Underhill: And when you were out here in the early years, who were your friends? Who did you spend time with in those rare moments when you weren't working? 

Foutz: Just the kids and my family. We wandered the hills and always found something to do. This is beautiful country out here. I mean, if you've got the time to explore, there's no telling what you can find. About as beautiful a spot as you can find is Twin Falls right up there, if you want to take the time to get up there. It's not an easy job, but once you're there, you want to stay. Beautiful. Lots of beautiful places around here. And the kids used to go over here in this wash over here, where the water runs out from under these big sand rocks over here. The water runs out from under there. They used to go over there and bring a whole tubful of polliwogs and __________. Anyway, it's fun ________. But the solitude is what we liked. I mean, nothing to bother you. All your time was yours. When you got through with the day, the rest of the time was yours, you could do anything you wanted to. You didn't have to obligate yourself to go help somebody. (laughs) Oh, you know, unless somebody needed you. 

Underhill: And how many kids do you have? 

Foutz: Seven. 

Underhill: And were they born here or in town? 

Foutz: They were all born in <Farmington>. My oldest son was born in <Gallup>. When we were first married, we moved to <Gallup> for a year-and-a-half, and he was born over there. But all the rest of 'em were born here in <Farmington>. My [older] kids graduated from Shiprock High School, and the youngest ones all graduated from Farmington High School. My older kids, they went to school at <Shiprock>. 

Underhill: How were you treated by the Navajo community? 

Foutz: They loved us. I mean, we had no problems whatsoever. My kids used to wander these hills. You didn't worry about 'em. I mean, kids used to come to the store and shop in wagons. My oldest boys used to get on the tail-end of the wagon and ride it down there two or three miles and then walk back home. I mean, they weren't scared. They wouldn't do it now, probably, but in those days you didn't have much to worry about. The only thing you had to worry about was rattlesnakes, and that was it. And they always had a dog with 'em that would ______ if they run across one. They enjoyed it. They're glad they weren't raised anywhere else. 

Underhill: What are the Navajo people like, from your experience? 

Foutz: They're very friendly and they'll help you. I mean, they're just--basically, in their hearts they're just the best of people there are, really. Their attitudes and their friendliness surpass any white community you can find anywhere. You have a few drinkers and troublemakers or whatever, but you have them everywhere, it doesn't matter. But basically they're very, very friendly people. And they're willing to help. If you ask someone to help you with something, they're willing to. I mean, they're just good neighbors, really, basically. No problem. Of course they've come a long ways since the time we moved out here. They were a lot more primitive then than they are now. But they're well-dressed, well-educated and everything now, so they're completely friendly. 

Underhill: And how have things changed, in your mind, here over the fifty years almost? 

Foutz: Well, the change is indescribable, really, because it was strictly primitive when I came out here. There was no electricity, there was nothing--no highways, no roads of any kind, or anything--and now it's more or less a modern civilization, you might say. Like I said, it took a full hour to drive from <Shiprock> to <Teec Nos Pos>--maybe longer. And you never made a trip to town that you didn't break a tire on a rock or something, you know. The roads were terrible. There were no bridges, you had to cross the washes. When they were runnin', you couldn't cross 'em. Now, it's just a zip. It’s like going from the horse-and-wagon days to the space age, you might say--it's that drastic, really. But they deserve all they can get, I guess. They need the education and they need the roads and everything. They've come a long way, really. 

Underhill: When you went to town, how often did you go? 

Foutz: We went to town once a month. Went in on Saturday, and came back Sunday evening, or maybe early Monday morning. And that was basically just to get supplies that we didn't normally stock or something. We furnished our own electricity and everything. We all had diesel electric lights. You run 'em all the time, so you had to have all the lights on all the time. Everything was running all the time. But it was a good life, really was. 

Underhill: Is there anything you would change if you could? 

Foutz: (laughs) There was nothing I could change. Like I say, I was glad when the changes came--let's put it that way. I was glad when they put the highway in. I was glad when they put bridges over the washes. I was glad when I could drive to town in forty-five minutes instead of two-and-a-half hours. And I'm glad that I didn't have to buy a new tire every time I'd go to town. (laughter) 

Underhill: How did you get your supplies? You said you were just stocking some things that you wouldn't normally have. 

Foutz: We ordered 'em. The salesman came by once a week and we ordered what we needed--or every two weeks, you might say. And then they'd deliver 'em the following week. 

Underhill: And where were they coming from? 

Foutz: They were coming from Farmington Merc. Later the Farmington Merc sold to Charles Ilfield [phonetic spelling] or whatever. And then we bought supplies from there. And then Charles Ilfield sold to Kimball. Then we bought groceries from Kimball. And then when Kimball closed their outfit up, we went to Associated Grocers out of <Phoenix>. Then we got groceries from them every week, or every other week, whichever. So, let's see, Associated Grocers quit coming out in this area about three years ago, so now we're getting all of our supplies from <Albuquerque> out of A.G.

So anyway, I'm all through! (laughter) 

Underhill: Are you sure?! 

Foutz: Or whatever! 

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

Underhill: This is Karen Underhill from Northern Arizona University, and this is Part 2 of an interview with Jay Foutz at the Beclahbeto Trading Post, and it is Wednesday, August 12, [1998], about 11:00 a.m. We're going to keep you going here for a little bit. (laughter) We were talking about getting your grocery supplies. When you first started, what kinds of things did the men want to buy? And what kinds of things did women want to buy? 

Foutz: Basically, there were only three or four clothing items that the women bought, and that was the plush shirts and the broadcloth for skirts. And then sometimes we had the transparent velvet and stuff for them to make their party dresses or whatever. Basically, the clothing items were very simple, 'cause they all wore the same thing. All of 'em wore the same thing--the same blouse, the same skirts--and they still do. And the men, as far as they're concerned, they just wore the Levi's and denim shirts or whatever. And it's just been here the last few years that they've been buying the regular polo shirts and that, tee shirts and stuff like that. Before they didn't wear them, they always wore the long sleeves and the sun- protective gear is what they wore. And the women always wore their bandannas or their scarves. I've never seen one without a scarf. And the men always wore a hat. I've never seen one of 'em without a hat. But their clothing items were very simple. Their shoes were all very simple. And their hosiery was very simple. The food items were all just basic items, because they didn't eat exotic foods. All they'd eat is fruit and the basic foodstuffs. They eat lots of fruit and lots of grain and lots of corn and stuff like that. Then all the fruit they could get in season, of course. They really didn't eat much fresh fruit in the wintertime, because it was unavailable, really, basically--outside of a few oranges and a few apples, you know, that'd be about it. And I can't ever remember selling any bananas until we moved down on the highway at <Teec Nos Pos>. I mean, we never stocked bananas. But when we moved down there, we used to sell two or three boxes of bananas a week. Lots of fruit in season, lots of corn in season, lots of vegetables in season. And then in the wintertime, why, they just fell back on the basic food items--flour, sugar, potatoes, canned tomatoes and stuff like that. 

Underhill: And what was your diet like? 

Foutz: Well, we'd eat lots of meat. The Indians ate lots of mutton, too, in those days. We'd slaughter three or four mutton in the morning and hang it up, and by noon, if it was sold out, why, we'd have a lady kill a couple for the afternoon, you know. But they didn't eat any beef. The only kind of pork they'd eat was that salt pork. They didn't care anything about bacon or anything like that. They ate lots of salt pork. We ate basically what they ate. Our diet was very simple. Of course when we went to town to get supplies, why, we'd gorge ourselves for two or three days after we got back. But after that, it was just basic foods. I can't really see much change in their diet today, except they have more access to fruit and fresh vegetables. And of course they have all kinds of different things to buy to wear. I mean, they've got twenty different outlets for different things to wear. But still the old-timers wear the same principle clothing: the velvet blouses and the broadcloth skirts. I see now a lot of 'em wearing the pre-made skirts that they bought at Wal-Mart or K-Mart or wherever. But the old-timers don't--they still wear the basic clothing. 

Underhill: How involved were you in the rug trade? 

Foutz: We used to buy the world's rugs, because I guess <Teec Nos Pos> had some of the finest weavers there were in the country--and they still do, those that weave. And we used to have stacks and stacks of rugs. I mean, Penney and Maxwell out of <Farmington>. About three or four times a year we'd have wholesale people come by and keep us pretty well moved out, so that we could afford to buy more, you know. But there were really some very fine rugs woven at <Teec Nos Pos> _____. We bought lots of nice rugs here, too. But it's the same area, basically. 

Underhill: And what are the designs like at <Teec Nos Pos>? 

Foutz: (chuckles) They used lots of colors in the <Teec Nos Pos> area, and lots of design in the <Teec Nos Pos> area. And they use.... Well, once in a while you'll buy a real nice outline--you know, the zig-zag pattern. Once in a while, a nice yé’ii bicheii or something. But basically, the Teec Nos Pos weavers didn't deal in--they either wove just a Teec Nos Pos rug or outline. Once in a while a sand painting--not very often, because it was taboo to most of 'em. And a storm pattern or two. We never did buy many saddle blankets. We never did get ______ in saddle blankets, because once you start buying saddle blankets, a weaver, instead of devoting full time to a good rug, they'd break off and weave a "two-bit saddle blanket," we called 'em. 

Underhill: Not two bits any more! (laughs) 

Foutz: No, they sure are not! But I mean, they used to be five dollars or whatever, where they'd get pretty good money for their good rugs. 

Underhill: Who were the weavers that you remember? 

Foutz: Well, there were lots of 'em. I mean, Slocum Claw's [phonetic spelling] whole family wove rugs. Daisy and Irene, and the old lady. They had three daughters, Slocum Claw's daughters wove beautiful rugs. Lots of Goats' wife. And Capitaninelli's [phonetic spelling] wife. Ray Lee's wife. Goodness! Little Salt Water's wife. Oh, there were lots of 'em. I mean, there's too many to name, really. But they all could weave a beautiful rug, and they did a beautiful job, and they expected to get paid for it, and they did. 

Underhill: How much would you pay for a typical rug? 

Foutz: Well, in those days, why, some of the best rugs were probably three or four hundred dollars--but that was lots of money in those days, when they were used to living on a hundred dollars twice a year, you know, for wool and mohair, and lambs in the fall. But sometimes it'd take 'em a full year to weave it, or a year-and-a-half sometimes. They were the best. I mean, you can say what you want to, but they were the best rug weavers in the country. Now, there were a few over on the other side at Two Grey Hills, along in there, that made that all natural colored rug that sold good in certain areas. But I'd pick a <Teec Nos Pos> over them anytime, because I liked the color and I liked the design. So we did, we bought lots and lots of rugs in those days. In fact, there was very seldom a day didn't go by that we didn't buy a rug of some kind. 

Underhill: You mentioned the wholesaler coming in every once in a while. Who would you sell to besides the wholesaler? 

Foutz: The normal people. We very seldom had a tourist or individual stop by. That was when we were up in the canyon, anyway. Now, in later years, when we moved down on the highway, we put up a special building just to handle arts and crafts, where we had lots of rugs and jewelry and everything in there. Now, we sold a few rugs out of there to tourists and different people. Now, we did do that. But up until that time, we never sold a rug to an individual. I mean, basically, it was all wholesale. Penney-Maxwell used to be the heaviest buyer. They'd come out twice a year. Now he put a lot of his in museums around the country--Maxwell did. I think Penney furnished all the money, but Maxwell did all the promoting and distribution and all that type of thing. And then Russell traded a few rugs for [New Cora?] once in a while. Outside of that, it was basically wholesale. The last few years we were at Teec, we did sell quite a lot of arts and crafts out of that building, that lean- to we put up, the extension we put on the store. So we did everything we could to make a dime, let's put it that way. (laughter) We weren't there to sit twiddling our thumbs! 

Underhill: What are some of the humorous things that may come to mind that happened over the years at the trading posts? 

Foutz: I don't know. Every day was a joke (chuckles) you might say. We had lots of fun, let's put it that way. I'll tell you one that was the cutest of all, and that's all it is. There's an old lady we call "Musher" over at <Teec Nos Pos>. She's a big woman, loud woman. You could hear her when she came off the hill, really. Anyway, she wouldn't trade with anybody but Uncle Loyd. She had to get Loyd in a corner and tell him about all of her troubles and all of her problems, and what she came to the store for, and if it was all right if she bought this or that. That's fine, we had no problem with that. Then one day Loyd--it was just about an hour before noon, I guess, about eleven o'clock--his living quarters adjoined the store, so he went back in the house to use the restroom. She come bustin' in the store and wanted to know where (in Navajo), "_____________, where's Loyd?" Well, we didn't know. Then Leone said, "Well, he went back in the house." Leone was a Navajo boy, local. So she didn't say a word or anything, she swung that gate open and busted back in there. (laughs) She walked right in on Uncle Loyd when he was in the restroom. And Bernie or nobody else could stop her! Anyway.... (laughter) We all got the biggest kick out of that, except him. It upset him pretty much. We got a bang out of that.

But every once in a while, some comical thing happened and we all got a laugh out of it. All-in-all, it was pretty serious business, we worked hard at it. 

Underhill: How many employees did you have? 

Foutz: Well, there was Loyd and I and Leone all the time. That's it, I guess. Leone worked for us from the day we started 'til the day we quit. He wouldn't even quit workin' for us to go work in the uranium mine. He was plumb satisfied with what he was doing. And he was the best of help. He was as good an employee as you could ever ask for: very trustworthy, very efficient, and he could see ahead what he needed to do and he'd do it. Most Indian help, you have to tell, quite often, what to do. He was always right on top of everything. But that's the only outside help we had--just him and I and Loyd. Leone Redhouse was his name. Very, very, very efficient. 

Underhill: How did you and your family participate in the community with your neighbors? Did you go to squaw dances and things? 

Foutz: My family never did go, but I went to them. When we were kids growing up, we went to all the squaw dances when I was a snot-nosed kid. Growing up, in high school, every time there was a squaw dance somewhere, we'd [grab] our little old straw hats and go hit the trail 'til we found it. (laughter) And we enjoyed it! We'd dance with 'em, we'd join the circle. Yeah, we had a ball, we really did. Even took our dates on a few of 'em, when we were dating and going to school and everything. And I think they thoroughly enjoyed it. It'd get pretty dirty and dusty and everything. But that was part of the fun! (laughs) Every one that we could get to, we went to when we were kids. But out here, we just went to a few yé’ii bicheiis and a few of the ceremonies. I never did get in a circle in the squaw dance, but I've been to a lot of 'em. When we were kids, we'd _______. Wasn't new to us, we knew what it was about and everything. 

Underhill: How do you think Navajo society or culture has changed in the last fifty years? 

Foutz: Well, it really hasn't. I mean, the ones that really are onto it, that want to know. I mean, the culture hasn't changed a bit. But the younger generation really doesn't seem to care too much about it. You know, they are more modernized. I'm not saying that they're not involved in it in some way or another--I'm just saying that they don't care anything about it. I mean, it's no big thing with 'em, let's put it that way--where it is a big thing with some of the old-timers. But the younger generation, they don't.... Some of them can't even talk Navajo, let alone know anything about the culture. We've had grown kids in here that can't understand Navajo, and they're full-blooded Indians. Their parents are educated, and they never talk Navajo in the home or anywhere else. So they can't talk [Navajo], they don't know it. So that's what the big thing now, is with the Navajo Tribe itself, is to preserve the culture. There's not a day goes by that you don't--in the newspapers and news media and all--preserve the culture, they don't want to lose it. There's still quite a few medicine men all scattered around the reservation still, practice their.... And they use 'em a lot, too--even college graduates, they come out and have a session with the medicine man. It's no big thing. It hasn't been bred out of 'em. They still believe what they were taught when they were growin' up. 

Underhill: What do you think the future of the trading post, as it looks now, is? 

Foutz: The trading post as you and I know it, as we know it, is a thing of the past. I mean, when we go, this is it. I mean, there's not another one on this reservation--this is it. I mean, when we go, this will be converted to a convenience store and a fast-food type of operation, and that's it. There won't be anything resembling a trading post left. (pause) Whatever. We're having fun, let's put it that way. And until we leave, we're gonna keep on doin' what we want to do. But when we do leave the trading post as we know it, it's completely extinct--completely extinct, as far as trading posts are concerned. 

Underhill: Is there anything else you would like to add that we should know? 

Foutz: Not a thing that I'd go public with! (laughter) No, there's not a thing. I'm just saying that we've enjoyed it and had a lot of fun. And that's the reason we're still here. If we hadn't enjoyed it, we'd have been gone a long, long time ago. We've made lots of friends and they consider us as friends. That's it. We're proud of what we've done. That's it! 

Underhill: I'd like to thank you very much for your time and for sharing some memories with us this morning. We really appreciate it. 

Foutz: You're welcome. I'm glad I didn't have to work while I was sittin' here! (laughter)



