FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Ethel Sechrist

Interview number NAU.OH.28.37

Mrs. Ethel Sechrist, who has been in <Flagstaff> since 1928, and is the widow of Charles Sechrist, <Flagstaff> physician. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on January 7, 1976. Transcribed by Susan Deaver Olberding.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in <Kansas> 

    Husband Charles, born in <Kansas> 

    Moved to <Flagstaff> in 1928 

    Houses lived in 

    Three sons 

    Milton, Gilbert, Carl 

    Neighborhood on North Beaver

    Jones, Harnsch, mentioned 

    Shopping in downtown area 

    Safeway, Babbitt’s, Sauer’s, other stores 

    Different organizations 

    Charles was Mason, Federated Church, Shakespeare Club 

    Citizens Cemetery, Catholic Cemetery 

    Garden Club

    Cemetery projects, others 

    China Canyon 

    Women’s Club 

    Library, outside swimming pool, Mrs. Runke

Tape 1, Side 2

    Fourth of July, Pow Wow 

    Trash 

    Visited <India> in 1960 and <Flagstaff> Pow Wow was mentioned in a local paper 

    Christmas 

    City decorations (cut trees) 

    Garden Club and house decoration contests 

    Hospitals 

    Sisson house next to Arizona Lumber Mill 

    Nurse (name of nurse later given as McDermid) 

    Dr. Sherman 

    Mercy Hospital 

    Flagstaff Hospital 

    Delivering babies, different accidents 

    Flagstaff Hospital 

    Dr. Raymond 

    Exchanged his land and Forest Service land for donated land for hospital grounds 

    His office described 

    Raymond Foundation 

    Accreditation of hospital 

    Nurses home 

    Dr. Fronske 

    Specialists after World War II 

    Treated many patients for free, especially during Depression of 1930’s 

    Other accepted payments: food, jewelry from Indians, etc. 

    Help for Ethel Sechrist in her home 

    Indian and Mexican women

Tape 2, Side 1

    Help in home, continued 

    Mexicans and Negroes worked at sawmills 

    Dr. Sechrist on School Board for 18 years 

    School integration 

    Wilson Riles 

    Discrimination against blacks in <Flagstaff> and elsewhere 

    Chinese 

    Different illnesses that were common in area 

    Cancer, Pneumonia, flu, Whooping cough, Measles, Tuberculosis 

    Different medical practices 

    Office hours 

    Open on Sunday 

    Charles on School Board, 1938-56 

    Charles appointed to legislature, 1964-65 

    Worked to get college designated a university (NAU) 

    Snowstorms, 1967 

    83 inches of snow in one storm 

    Owned ranch (Buck Taylor’s) 

    Buck Taylor 

    During water shortages, people came to springs on ranch to get water 

    Telephone installation at ranch 

    Government and family cooperation 

    Sold ranch to Al Grasmoen who started Ski Bowl area 

    Grew potatoes during WW II, and sold to army 

    Murders, drunks, fights, in 1930’s 

    Coltons and Putnams, mentioned

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Mrs. Ethel Sechrist who has been a <Flagstaff> resident since 1928. It's being conducted on January 7, 1976 at 310 E. Dale Avenue, <Flagstaff>, which is her home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers representing the Flagstaff City/Coconino County Public Library. Mrs. Sechrist, when and where were you born?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I was born in <Kansas>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. And, how long did you live there?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, most of the time I lived there until I came to <Arizona>. Went to school in <Kansas>, married a Kansan. I worked in <Washington DC> four years during the First World War in the Hoover Administration. And then I taught two years in <Missouri> in Central Heart Pain College, and then I was married. My husband was in medicine and after he finished medicine, we went to <St. Louis>, where he interned, and then we came to <Flagstaff>. And I've been here ever since.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's backtrack a little bit. What was your maiden name?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Loflin, L O F L I N.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me a little bit about your husband's background.

ETHEL SECHRIST: He grew up in <Kansas>, too. He served in the First World War in the Navy and he taught school some and he worked in a bank the last two years before he went into medical school. And we both went to school at the University of Kansas at Lawrence. And, of course, the medical school's in <Kansas City>, so he had four years in Lawrence and then three years in <Kansas City>. Then he interned in <St. Louis>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now how did you meet?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I met him at the University of Kansas while I was getting my master's degree.

SUSAN ROGERS: But, apparently you didn't get married right then.

ETHEL SECHRIST: We were married in 1923.

SUSAN ROGERS: How did it come about that you decided to move to <Flagstaff>?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, we were broke when he got through medical school--it's a long old grind, you know--and there was a job here, so...

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now how did he hear about the job here?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Through the St. Louis City Hospital. They had previously sent one of their interns here and he was moving to <Phoenix>, and so they were looking for somebody to replace him.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me about the first day you arrived in <Flagstaff>? What were some of your impressions?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I can't remember the first day; I just remember the first weeks. My husband came in July and we had a four-year-old son by that time, Milton, the eldest of three boys. My husband came, as I said, in July and that was when his internship ended and he drove out from <Kansas>. Our son had just had his tonsils out, so we came out later on the train, I think about a month later.

SUSAN ROGERS: When you first arrived, where did you live?

ETHEL SECHRIST: We lived in a little apartment over on West Elm, I guess it was.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it still there?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, it's still there and it's across from the old high school that was torn down. It's across from where the old high school was. It was torn down a couple of years ago. And we just lived there a few months and then we rented a house on East Birch, and we were there for a couple of years. Then we bought a house at 603 N. Beaver and we lived there until we bought this house in 1940. So since 1940, we've been here.

SUSAN ROGERS: And you bought this house, you didn't build it.

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh no, it was 10 or 12 years old when we bought it.

SUSAN ROGERS: And who did you buy it from, do you remember?

ETHEL SECHRIST: It was built by Ray Simpsons, and he was manager of the Penney's store when he built it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you said you had three sons. Do you want to give me their names and tell me what they're doing?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, the eldest one is Milton and he's a property manager in <Phoenix>, and he lives on 1010 South Mountain. The second one is my son Gilbert, who's a pediatrician here in <Flagstaff>, and the youngest one is Carl and he teaches science in <Las Vegas Nevada>.

SUSAN ROGERS: It sounds like you lived basically in the same area when you moved to <Flagstaff>--can you describe what your neighborhood was like, how many houses were around, what some of your neighbors were.

ETHEL SECHRIST: When we were living on North Beaver, we were just a couple of blocks from the end of town then, the north end of town just ended right there where Fort Valley Road begins. There was a little grocery store on the corner there on the north and that was all that was in that area. All those houses farther on and all the other stores--most of it began to grow after the hospital was built. See, we built the hospital in- opened it in 1936, just about forty years ago now, I think it was the 6th of January! So it would be almost exactly forty years ago when we opened the hospital. And after the hospital was built, then you see that road was opened up and the water was up in that area and then the end of town began to develop.

SUSAN ROGERS: When you lived on Beaver, there weren't any houses right next door to you, or were there?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, there were houses. Just the same as it is now, as far as I can recall. Except on the East Side of Beaver, where the little drug store is now, there was a house and old Judge Jones lived there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that J.E. Jones, you mean?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I believe those were his initials.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember anything about him?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, I didn't know him very much. My husband took care of him up until he died, but I really didn't- his daughter was Zella and I knew her. But I wouldn't say I knew her intimately.

SUSAN ROGERS: And who were some of your other neighbors?

ETHEL SECHRIST: We had Dr. and Mrs. Harnisch living to the north of us and there was one vacant lot there which was later filled in by a house which Matson's built and which now has an agency, for ah-

SUSAN ROGERS: For Insurance or something?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No I think they just, sell land and houses, I believe. I really don't know too much about it, I see the sign on the house as I drive by. The next house was occupied by the Harnisch’s, at that time this lot was vacant and Dr. and Mrs. Harnisch were relatives of Dr. and Mrs. Fronske, his father-in-law and step-brother-in-law. And, they had one son who was Ed Harnisch and he had charge of the Safeway store at that time, he's dead now, and his wife is still living and she lives just a block or two over from here. She's retired from teaching. She's one of the ones who was born here and lived all her life here.

SUSAN ROGERS: What's her first name?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Helen Harnisch. And her father was postmaster here for years. Her maiden name was Runke.

SUSAN ROGERS: How do you spell that?

ETHEL SECHRIST: H A R N I S C H. The Harnisch’s were retired from practicing medicine in <St. Louis>, and they were very lovely people. We enjoyed them a great deal. Another neighbor we had after the Harnisch's were gone, was Harry Mickey, and he is no longer living, but his wife is still living out there on Hopi Drive. And she's retired from teaching Kindergarten for many years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now where did you do most of your shopping when you first moved here?

ETHEL SECHRIST: There wasn't too much choice! I guess stores were here at that time and I think I shopped all around. There was a Safeway store over there where the bank now has their drive-in and then of course, Babbitt's were where they are now, no, not where they are now, they were where they are now, but the grocery store was in where the dry goods is now. And then they built the present grocery store later on, and, Sauer's. And I shopped at all three places, probably mostly at the Safeway because it was nearest. I didn't have a car in those days and it was a little closer.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of any other changes in the downtown area from what it was like then until now?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, a great many; I don’t know that I can begin to think of all of them. Of course, the City Hall is entirely new and the bank is new and there was an old, old house in there between the bank and what's now Tissaw's Electrical Shop and the shoe store there. That's all torn out and a parking area made in one place and the new bank building. I can't remember, I think Sears were in where Tissaw's are now. Been there for quite a long time, it was quite a small store. And Penney's were on the corner where that furniture store is now. And of course the Penney's store is new, the parking area. I don't remember what year it was built but it isn't so very old. And of course, the bank buildings are all new.

SUSAN ROGERS: What big social events went on when you first arrived. Were there big dances or balls or anything like that?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, my husband nor I, neither one are much of dancing, and-

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there any special clubs or organizations?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well my husband was a very ardent Mason, so of course he attended all of those meetings all through the years that we were here. I did a lot of work at the church for many years, 25 or 30 years, at the Federated Church, helping put on dinners and things like that. In those days chiefly to make money for the church. And then, not too long after we were here I joined the Shakespeare Club, which by the way, is the oldest club that has been continuously in existence in the state of <Arizona>. It's a literary group, of twenty members, and we meet in homes. Each year we study various topics and each member makes a report on some book or some subject. And sometimes it's scientific and sometimes it's poetry, and sometimes it's art of some description--just whatever we choose for that particular year. It has quite an interesting history, and this next week, at Mrs. Brown's, we're going to have sort of a reminiscence meeting, going back as far as any of us can remember. But in the beginning, of course, there were only horses, horse-drawn carriages, and there wasn't much in the way of entertainment here in the town, and the people had to make their own entertainment. They used to have dinners and put on little plays. I guess they had quite an interesting time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's go back a little bit more on the Shakespeare Club, what are some of your memories of it. Was it already organized when you came?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh yes. See we came in '28 and it was organized in the early '90s, I think. I read a report, I can't think of the man's name who wrote that article or that book and he said in 1886, but I think it was in the early '90s. Mrs. Drain’s and Mrs. Beamer's mother was one of the original members. And that was one of the reasons I mentioned them, because they've been invited to come to our meeting and tell about the meetings that they had way back in those days that they remember their mother, when their mother was a member. I joined the Eastern Star not too long after we came here, but I never have been very active because with family to take care of and a telephone to answer I just didn't have time for night meetings.

SUSAN ROGERS: Since your husband was a doctor, can you remember if the cemeteries have been moved around or were there different cemeteries than there are now?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh no, the cemeteries are just the same as they are now. The Citizen's Cemetery has been enlarged and it's been fenced. That was one of the first projects that the Garden Club took on when they were organized in 1948. And we did some landscaping out there and we did some cleaning up and we helped to get the fence built that's around there, because in those days the horses and the cattle ran all over the cemeteries and it was all weeds, and really it was quite a disgrace. It's still not too good, but it's so much better than it was in those days. Really, it's quite attractive because it is just natural. And the Catholic cemetery has the- well, they had a priest who went in there and took down all the old markers and planted grass and a lot of the members- I'm sure Mary Sweitzer probably told you about that. She was very proturbed about it. So, if she's told you, there's no point in my repeating it. I do remember about it and the fact that they did put in grass and it did look better, but it was unfortunate some of the things that were done in doing what they did.

SUSAN ROGERS: You mentioned the Garden Club, now can you tell me a little bit about its past, were you one of the starting members of it?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, I was one of the original members. In fact I guess I'm the only one now who was an original member in '48. We had a Mrs. Dickinson who was a member for a long time but she moved to <Phoenix> and has discontinued her membership. And then there are several others who have been in quite a long time, but I'm the only one, as far as I can recall right now, who's been in since the very beginning. It was formed, chiefly; to help beautify <Flagstaff> and that's what we've worked at all these years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me some of your bigger projects?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Cemetery, as I mentioned, was our first one, and of course that was a terrific undertaking. We were a fairly small group and we didn't have really any way of making a great deal of money, but what we did make was used in buying shrubbery. And we went out and we did a great deal of the work ourselves--planting trees and shrubs and also watering and weeding and cleaning up.

We planned and supervised the planting at the Court House and the City Hall and we did the planting more recently at the new Health Building out on Fort Valley Road. We did the new City Library, and then we worked one year on the Plaza Garden, but they decided it was too much work. And right now we're hoping to take on a project of helping with the park out here at the City pond and we're just waiting to see what's going to materialize out there before we put our money in it. We received a grant of $2,000 from the Raymond Foundation to do something to make <Flagstaff> more attractive and that's where we decided to put it. But you see the Pow Wow is there every year and that just destroys everything besides leaving a great deal of debris and trash which costs us about $4,5, or $6,000 to clean up every year. And I sometimes wonder if we're justified in spending that much money because I doubt it. And I know the City doesn't get it back from taxes.

SUSAN ROGERS: When you do one of these projects, do you just go in there and get everything planted and then the City takes over?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Once we get it going, course we have that understood in the beginning. We worked one year out there on China Canyon and we did a lot of planting there and the City agreed to take care of it afterwards and they did put in a sprinkling system for us, but they didn't really do too well. Now, they do a beautiful job taking care of the little park out there on- Hopi is it? Just down from the Plaza shopping center, that area there. There's a little park and it's surrounded on one side by Hopi Drive and I can't think of what's on the other side, but they do a beautiful job taking care of that. They have a sprinkling system there and the lawn's kept well kept well and it’s all so attractive. My son lives on the street there and they all enjoy it. Course they have a nice view of the Peaks from that location, so it's really an attractive area.

SUSAN ROGERS: You mentioned China Canyon. Exactly where is that?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, you know where the new junior high is, you know the road that goes down through, right adjacent to- It goes from the elementary school on the corner there and that's the street that goes out to Clark Homes. What do they call it, what is that street? Anyway, it's one that goes down through that valley there, and it’s right west of the old <Flagstaff> High School.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know how it got that name?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No- There’s a big hill there, oh, I read how it got to be named China Canyon but I'm sorry I can't tell you. Somebody who's been closely connected with the City should remember and I'm sure I've read how it got that name, but I can't remember. It's really naturally an attractive area except for the deep fill on the high school side and even that's grown over so that it has lots of shrubs and trees and vegetation, so it doesn't really look too bad.

SUSAN ROGERS: I have down here too, that you belonged to the Woman's Club?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Not anymore, I did for several years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about that when you were a member.

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, it was way back, early; in the days when they were giving their building to the City for a library and I think I was a member right at the time they gave it to the City. But you see I had two more boys and I just didn't have time. I just couldn't do so much.

SUSAN ROGERS: When you were a member of it, what were some of the things that that Club did?

ETHEL SECHRIST: That's the only thing I remember that they did. Later on, I can think of some things that they did, after I didn't belong anymore. But that's about the only thing I can think of. And, of course, the chief reason they did what they did was, 'cuz they weren't able to pay for the building and so the City took it over and let them have a room at the back. And later on I think the City built a bigger room for them so that they would have a place to meet and then they used to rent this room out to other organizations. It was a very nice room with a little kitchen attached to it, and it was a real nice meeting place. I was really unhappy when they tore it down. I thought it was too bad they didn't put a new roof on it and use it for this project for the old people, because I just don't think that the building was that far gone.

SUSAN ROGERS: It was a historical building, too.

ETHEL SECHRIST: It was a beautiful building, it was well built. And I think all it needed was- of course, you see it wasn't built to hold books and they're pretty heavy and I can see that they probably did weaken the floor, but I do think it was something that could have been saved. And I think it's too bad it wasn't.

SUSAN ROGERS: You said that you remember some things that that Club did when you weren't a member. Can you just tell me a little bit?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I really can't tell you too much about it. One thing they did was turned out to be kind of a catastrophe. This was in connection with the Boy Scouts, somehow or other between the Boy Scouts and the Woman's Club and some other organizations, I think the Rotary was involved, I really can't recall all of them. But they built a swimming pool out there in the park and it was just not done with people who knew what they were doing. And there was no drain put in and, of course, with the winters we have, why, it ended up by having it filled up with cinders. And all that effort and all of that money went completely to waste.

Then later on, the Woman's Club, I think, bought uniforms for the high school band. And that was a very nice project, and I can't tell you all of the projects they did, but they did several things that were really very nice projects and helpful to the community. Mrs. Runke was one of their active members, I'm sure you've heard about her, and she was especially interested in preserving old things and old buildings and historical spots.

SUSAN ROGERS: What's her first name?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Laura, I believe. Laura Runke.

End of Tape 1, Side 1, Begin Tape 1, Side 2

SUSAN ROGERS: What do you remember about some of the early 4th of Julys and Pow Wows? Did your family used to go see them?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh yes, we often went to see them. We always enjoyed them and we especially enjoyed the dances in the evening. And they were pretty much the same as they are now except they weren't so big and they didn't get nearly so many Indians. All through the years we've had the same problems that we still have. I think that from the beginning, it's too bad we didn't give the Indians more responsibility, because you know they're not dumb people. And they could have learned to keep the place clean with a little help from the City in picking up the trash instead of leaving this awful mess that's left there every year. It's too bad it wasn't done and it still isn't being done. Even this last year I heard that there weren't nearly enough trash cans out there and the ones that were there weren't emptied often enough. This last year, I guess I didn't go to anything. But the year before, I went out to the dances and of course, you know the parking situation isn't very good and you have to walk a long, long ways and we walked through the area where the Indians had been, but not where they were parked. And, the amount of litter and trash was just simply awful.

One interesting thing that I might tell you about the Pow Wow, or in connection with the Pow Wow, is in 1960, my husband and I took a trip around the world and when we flew into <India>, in that area there. One day one of their papers had a half a page on the American Red Indian and about our Pow Wow. I think I still have a copy of that paper. But thought that was really quite interesting that the Pow Wow would be advertised and written up clear around on the other side of the world!

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any other special traditions or celebrations that <Flagstaff> had back in those days? Any special Christmas happenings?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No, we didn't have any Christmas decorations to speak of. The one thing that we had was trees, native trees, which the City cut and wired to posts up and down around town but they were not decorated, they were just green trees, and they cut out the ones that weren't such good trees usually, to thin out the forest. They did look nice, but that was about the only- let me see if I could remember when we began having City decorations. I remember the Garden Club was quite active in getting them going. And for quite a good many years we had contests for decorating houses and we would have a group of people judge which ones were best, which had the most attractive looking and the most attractive front door, and maybe the most attractive window or all-over decorations. For several years, we did that, then the paper took it over, and for a while they did it, and then they discontinued it. Now I guess, it's just what everybody happens to want to do. 'Course with the energy situation has interfered with a lot of decorations which we otherwise would have had.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's see were you in <Flagstaff> during the Prohibition? Do you remember any story?

ETHEL SECHRIST: When did it end?

SUSAN ROGERS: That’s what I was trying to think. Do you remember any particular stories in <Flagstaff> that you heard, or anything about it?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No, I guess not. The thing that I know most about is the hospital, you see, there wasn't any real hospital here when we came to <Flagstaff>. And there wasn't a graduate nurse in town, excepting one who was here taking care of an old aunt and uncle and she used to go up to the hospital and scrub for my husband when he did surgery.

SUSAN ROGERS: What was her name?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Her name was, as I recall, it was McMullen. It's been a long time ago. I remember the house where they lived but I don't remember the name of the aunt and uncle. They've all been gone for years and years and years.

SUSAN ROGERS: It's not the McMillan family that lived out on Fort Valley Road?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh no, this was McMullen I think. No, she had no connection with them. I think she was Canadian. I believe this aunt and uncle had originally come from <Canada>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's talk a little bit about your husband's experiences. Now when he first came, what hospitals were in operation?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, there was just an old house. It was the old Sisson house next to the Arizona Lumber Mill, and it was owned and operated by the mill because- to take care of accidents chiefly, but they did take private patients. And when we first came here, Dr. Sherman was in charge, and of course soon after we came, the Depression came you know, and then a bank failed and Dr. Sherman had a brother working in that bank and he committed suicide. And that was pretty much of a shock to Dr. Sherman and he just kind of retired to his home and stayed there. And so my husband took over operating this little hospital. As I recall, there were three bedrooms upstairs, and a big living room downstairs which was used for a ward, and maybe another private room downstairs. They could take about eight or ten patients all together.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is this house still standing?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, it's still up there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it next door to Dolan's, or across the street?

ETHEL SECHRIST: It's between Dolan's and the offices of the Lumber mill.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was that house across the street from the Dolan's ever used as a hospital?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No. There was a house there; there were two houses there. And a family by the name of Myers lived in one of them and the other one burned and I can't recall. Oh, let me see, I believe one of the young Riordans lived there for a while - Bob Riordan. I can't recall who lived there when it burned. But it was completely destroyed and there's nothing ever been rebuilt in place of it that I know of.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did they call it Mercy Hospital?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Mercy Hospital.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was this hospital still continuing at the same time when the new hospital was built?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No, because you see, my husband bought all the equipment and everything. And we moved what we could use, 'course most of it was very old and not very satisfactory any more; it had just outgrown its use. But anyway, what was usable, we moved up to the Flagstaff Hospital in 1936 and then it was- well, for awhile, my husband had an assistant and he lived there and it was just used as a residence, and I think it's all boarded up and just standing there now.

SUSAN ROGERS: So it was closed as soon as this hospital started.

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, as far as hospitals were concerned, yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now you said that they’d mostly treated sawmill accidents-

ETHEL SECHRIST: That was why Mercy Hospital was started as far as I know. It was chiefly to take care of accidents, because you see, they had loggers in the woods, and accidents happened in the mill. As far as I recall, there weren't too many. We had quite a few highway accidents, just as we have now. That's gone on all through the years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Would he treat people who didn't belong to the sawmill?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh yes, just like any hospital.

SUSAN ROGERS: How about delivering babies?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, my two younger sons were both born up there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Really? Did he used to make family calls?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, sure. The first few years we were here he delivered babies in the home. He had what they called an OB bag, in fact he had two, so that the nurses could replenish one while he used the other! And I think after the hospital was opened in 1936 he pretty much discontinued this, because by then they had plenty of room to take care of them and they had a nursery for the babies and it was so much easier for the doctors. Besides they can look after other patients and it didn't take near as much of their time and energy as it did to go out in the homes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he often have to go out to the ranches, too?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, he did go I guess, whenever there was any real emergency. I can remember sometimes in the wintertime, he would have to use snowshoes and the Sheriff's office would help him get to where he had to go and help him get out again. Oh, he used to go quite a ways, he went to the Canyon for emergencies and I can remember one particular incident when he, and I guess our oldest son were hiking down the Canyon, and this was in October and a hunter was badly shot. In fact he had an arm almost shot off, and this happened on the Kaibab. And while they were bringing him in to the hospital, they called my husband to get up out of the Canyon. So they sent him a fast mule down to get him out and he came back to take care of that man. And we used to hear from them for years and years and years, but I haven't now for a few years so I don't know what happened to them. They were real nice people.

SUSAN ROGERS: Why didn't they just build onto the Mercy Hospital instead of building a new hospital? How did it get started that you wanted a new hospital?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, of course, that building was old. I guess that building must be over 100 years old now; it was old. Well, of course, my husband wanted a standard hospital and one of the things he worked for from the time he first opened the doors was to have an accredited hospital. It wasn't until 1948 that he succeeded in getting it fully accredited by the American Hospital Association, and the- what is it they call that other organization, I guess the American Hospital Association. So ever since 1948, it has been fully accredited. And, of course, he needed nurses; he needed nurses to help to take care of these patients. And one of our first problems was that there wasn't any place for them to live. And so soon after the hospital was built, he built the nurse's home, which is where the hospital administrator lives now. In those days most of the nurses weren't married. But before he died and before he turned the hospital over to the community, practically all the nurses were married and so, of course, they lived out in town.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he have any other doctors practicing with him?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, Dr. Creighton was one of the others, and course Dr. Fronske. During the War, Dr. Fronske and my husband were about the only doctors here. Dr. Raymond was here but he just took care of a few very private patients that he'd had for years and he didn't have any office hours or anything of the sort. So, Dr. Fronske and my husband really took care of the community all through the First World War and to the Second World War. By the time the Second World War came along, we did have two others. There was a Dr. Rice who came along and- right now, I can't think of who it was.

In 1940, just before the Second World War started, the hospital had grown and we'd put an addition on it by that time and he began trying to get some specialists in the various fields because we just needed more doctors and we needed some special-ists. He either had to do things himself or send them to <Phoenix>. So he began to try to get- but it was not until the War ended before he really succeeded in getting any. And then he got an obstetrician, internist- but before that he had some people who were just assistants, they were just general practitioners. It helped him and it also helped at the hospital because they could help take care of things there. But they weren't really specialists. And one of them was, I can recall, a woman and she didn't stay very long. So many of these things I should have written down or something all through the years, because you never realize that later on maybe you may need some of those! I do think he had a pediatrician, too. But it was really 1952 by the time they really got going and then we had a Dr. Sitter (?), he's the only one that's here anymore; he was one of the ones who came in. We had a woman pediatrician, can't even remember her name anymore. She had a husband and a little boy and the husband, I think, sold real estate. She just stayed two or three years--they moved on to greener pastures.

SUSAN ROGERS: You mentioned Dr. Raymond, did you know him personally?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh yes, real well.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you describe him a little bit to me?

ETHEL SECHRIST: He was tall, slender, very interested in the community, always doing something for the community, he was very interested in beautifying the area. He was always giving people trees and shrubs and planting seed, and he was really a very community-minded person. He got the land. See, when we built the hospital up there on the hill, that was built on government land and in order to get that land, the man who was ranger there had suggested that we might be able to make a deal by trading other land for it. So, Dr. Raymond owned lots of land around the country and he supplied the land that we traded to get this exchange for the hospital. And the Forest Service was glad to do it because with that land there was always a source of annoyance for them because somebody wanted it for something! And they were happy to have it exchanged for land that was going to be used for the hospital, which they felt the community needed.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember where his office was, and what it looked like?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, it was in Dr. Raymond's building on North Leroux. I think Jean and Trox have an audio-visual office there now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right next to the old Bank Hotel, then.

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, it's farther down a little bit. There was a ski shop there for awhile. It's a stucco building, sort of grayish with brown trim, reddish-brown trim. His office was there all the time until about 1952 or somewhere along in there. Then he built an office, which is now used for doctors’ offices. Dr. Martin has his office in that building now and it's right adjacent to the hospital and belongs to the hospital. He built it with money from the hospital. So when we gave the hospital to the community, that building went along with it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you describe his office to me at all?

ETHEL SECHRIST: The first one, you mean?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, a student at school is interested in it that’s why I was wondering. What kind of furniture-

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, the chief thing I remember about it is that he had a lobby, sort of a waiting room, you know, and then he had a little office toward the back. I think he had just three rooms, or maybe there were two rooms where he took care of patients. It was about like any other doctor's office. 'Course he did emergency things there, taking care of accident patients that didn't require hospitalization. And, of course, just the regular run of office people and he had just one, Mrs. Dearing (?), who was his office helper and she was with him for years up until he retired. Well she was still working for the office after he died, because when they closed out the estate they had her there helping with some of the records and things up until almost before she died. She died a year or so after he did.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now where did he live in town?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Where did we live?

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did he live? Where was his house? Where was Dr. Raymond’s house?

ETHEL SECHRIST: He lived in the back of the office.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, he lived in the back of the office.

ETHEL SECHRIST: And he had a secretary who also had a room there. He was never married and this woman took care of his meals and his office. 'Course he wasn't practicing, but he had a lot of other business and some of the times he had another girl helping there. He was a very congenial sort of person and as I told you, he was a very community-minded person. I really don't know what's happening in the back of that building now but I presume the Trox’s have the whole building, but that's just a guess. See, this nurse, they called her a nurse, she was nurse, secretary, cook, and everything, had a stroke and she was paralyzed for the last few years of her life. And he took care of her just as if she were his own, for all those years until she died. Her name was Hazel Near, and then when he wasn't able to take care of himself anymore, he bought a home in <Phoenix> and he had a woman hire to take care of his house and do his food up until the very end. After he went to <Phoenix>, I didn't really know too much about what went on. I just know that he left this money which started the educational, or the Raymond Foundation I think it's called.

SUSAN ROGERS: When your husband was practicing here, do you remember any particular epidemics that went around town?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, I can remember of course same cases, one was where-let’s see, we had in those days instead of head of police- what did they call them? Anyway it was the same position. I can remember his being shot in a hold-up of some description in the head and doctor operating on him. And one of the interesting things about it was that while he was in the hospital, his wife brought my husband a little Christmas cactus plant, which I still have.

SUSAN ROGERS: About what year was that?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I would say probably about 1930.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, and you still have that plant.

ETHEL SECHRIST: I still have that Christmas cactus plant! It's a big plant and I won't part with it. I can remember during the Depression, you see, the mill was closed and people had a pretty hard time and I can remember he took care of oh hundreds of people just for free because they had nothing! I can remember one incident where a little Mexican walked clear up from that old mill back down to his office down here downtown, to pay him twenty-three cents, that was all he had.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did sometimes the people pay in chickens, or eggs, or-

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh yes, especially people in the country. Beef, anything they had he would use, especially after he built the hospital because then he could use lots of food. He used to take quite a few things to help people pay their bills. I even have a crocheted bedspread and a hand-quilted quilt that he took from somebody. And of course, from the Indians they would bring in their jewelry 'cuz they didn't have banks out on the Reservation, and they used their jewelry to pay bills and they also used them for pawning. And after he died there were some things in his desk that he'd had for a year or two and nobody ever came to claim them.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there many Indians living in town at that time?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Not nearly as many as there are now. In fact I can't recall too many. We used to have quite a little Indian help in our homes and I had several Indian girls. And some of them that were going to school out at <Ganado> and places like that in the school year would come into town to work through the summers. And I had several of those, and then later on, I had several work, you know, they were older and they worked for me by the year. But as far as having a lot of Indian families in town, we didn't have nearly as many. I think the War; Bellemont and the ammunitions depot out here helped to get a lot of the Indian people in town.

End of Tape 1, Side 2, Begin Tape 2, Side 1

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you're talking about the Indians- you were saying about them being cooks.

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, yes they were real good cooks and they were always real good to help with the children. And of course, these who came in from <Ganado> had been trained to do housekeeping, so they were very good at cleaning and washing windows and all of the things that- waxing, whatever needed to be done. They were really nice to have around; well most of them. Now, of course you always have a few problems, just like you have with every other race, I guess. Because I did have one that I had to watch just because she had a tendency to pick up things that didn't belong to her.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did they go home on the weekends, or did they live with you?

ETHEL SECHRIST: They stayed with us all summer. The ones who came in from <Ganado> had a matron who checked up on them and, of course, they had time off and she checked up on them through the summer to see that everything was all right and that they were doing all right. 'Course in those days we didn't have to pay very much, I'm not sure just what I paid, but I think I paid only $5.00 a week plus their room and board, and you know whatever else they needed.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you have a different one every summer?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, I had one for a long time but this one was after she'd finished school, and I can't recall that I ever had any of the others for two consecutive years. I don't believe I did. I had an awfully nice little Mexican girl who worked for me for quite a good many years, when Carl was, I think about three years old. And I did the gardening and the landscaping at the hospital, so I needed the help to keep up the housework at home. She was very good. She did all the cleaning, she'd look after the children if I wasn't there, and very dependable. She's still living and I see her every once in a while.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did she live with you?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No, she lived at home. She never- well, I believe she did marry later on. She worked for me until her mother wasn't too well and she had to stay home and take care of her, and I think she married. When she was with me, she had never been married, I mean when she was working for me. She did not live at the house. Her first name was Aurelia, and right now I can't think of what the last name is, but I noticed her picture in the paper not too long ago working with some of these older people projects, and I think she was helping with the cooking.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there quite a few Mexicans in <Flagstaff> back then?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh yes, lots of Mexicans and lots of Negroes--always have been in <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, now what did most of them do?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, there were two lumber mills, you know, in the beginning, and one of them came from down South and they brought a lot of the Negro help with them when they came, and, of course, others followed. So that mill had largely Negroes and then the other one, I think it was the Southwest, had mostly Mexicans. And, of course, they always worked in various jobs around town.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember having any particular problems with them?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Everybody got along fine?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Far as I know, and, you know, our schools here- course my husband was on the School Board for eighteen years and president for sixteen, I believe it was, and they integrated these schools without saying anything about it. They closed up the Negro school on the south side and integrated them into the other schools without mentioning anything about it and went along smoothly, no problems of any description. Really I think all through the years we've had very, very few problems; we’ve been very fortunate. I think mostly because people respected the Mexicans, especially. I think the Negro situation was a little bit harder 'cuz I can remember this Negro who's know Superintendent of the Schools, if I can think of his name--he's State Superintendent of Schools in <California>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it R I L E S, Riles?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Riles, yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that how you spell it because-

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know where his mother is? Do you know anything about her, 'cuz we're trying to get hold of her, and we can't find an address, phone number, nothing.

ETHEL SECHRIST: He was raised by an adopted parents, I think, foster parents.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, so it wouldn't be the same name, then.

ETHEL SECHRIST: No, it wouldn't be that name at all. It isn't too long since I saw something in the paper. Somewhere, somebody should know who that is. I bet Tilda Johnson knows and she's still here. You call her and see if she doesn't know who the family was. Because I remember seeing something in the paper not too many years ago, in fact, I don't think it was very many years ago, about the family who raised him. I saw him on TV the other night and he's gotten to be heavy and fat; he isn't near as nice looking as he was. But, what I started to say was, that I can remember working on some committees with him, oh years and years ago, and I can remember going down to the Commercial Hotel. I think; we were meeting in the Commercial Hotel, and he had to go round to come in the back door, he wasn't allowed to come in the front door.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, what year was this about?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, this was probably in the '40s. Of course, my son Gilbert went to school at the University of Kansas, that's where he had all his college work and his medicine and then he interned at Ohio Children's Hospital for his pediatrics. But when he was in medical school there was a Negro in the class with him and, of course, you know, he'd grown up here in <Flagstaff> where we had some, but not nearly as many problems as they had back in the Midwest, and especially in the East, <Washington>, and in the South. But anyway, I can remember he went to <Kansas City> with this boy downtown, 'course this medical school was just on the edge in <Kansas City Kansas>. But his father, this Negro's father, was working in a hotel there- no, he was working in a commercial establishment, and this boy couldn't go in the front door, so when he and Gilbert went to see his father, they had to go around and come in the back to see his father who was working there in the store. So, of course those of us who haven't lived where we had Negro problems; in western <Kansas> where I grew up, we just didn't have any, I think we don't even begin to realize what the problems have been in other communities where there was such prejudice against other races.

SUSAN ROGERS: Even though, like the Negroes here had to go in the back door, they never protested it, apparently.

ETHEL SECHRIST: As far as I know, there wasn't any protest and I presume they had problems. They weren't allowed, I suppose, to eat in restaurants. I don't know what the ones who were touring did; maybe some of them did accept them. Maybe they did like they did in the South. I just really don't know 'cuz I didn't have any occasion to come in contact with that. Most of my contact was between schools and hospitals!

SUSAN ROGERS: Now you said about his adopted parents, were his adopted parents black were they Negroes, do you know?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, I'm sure they were.

SUSAN ROGERS: they were? Okay, fine. I'm going to try to find out who that was. Okay, what about the Chinese in the area? Were there quite a few, or-?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, about the same proportion we have now. They've always been considered good citizens, hard-working individuals, and their children are always upright responsible people. They seem to have a great deal of pride, all of them.

SUSAN ROGERS: Back to these medical practices; now what were some of the really common illnesses that <Flagstaff> people suffered from?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, of course, one of the things was that for years he never got a case of appendicitis that wasn't already ruptured and we didn't have penicillin and all of those marvelous drugs that have been developed within the last few years. In those days and it was pretty rugged. He was very fortunate in saving most of them, but not all. We had lots of flu some years; we never really did have a real bad epidemic of any- We had whooping cough and measles, you know, just like all youngsters have, before they developed these toxins and anti-toxins which have practically done away with all of those illnesses.

SUSAN ROGERS: What would you say were some of the most common diseases or illnesses that people died from in this area?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, of course, we had quite a few cancers. Oh, lots of pneumonia, quite a lot of pneumonia, especially in March it seemed as if when it began to be getting springtime and the sun was warm, people would get hot out in the sun and then go sit in the shade or something of the sort. And then we had windy days and it seemed as if when the wind came, it always increased the pneumonia. There was quite a lot of pneumonia, up until we had penicillin, which almost cures it overnight. Sulpha drugs were helpful.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about tuberculosis?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, there was quite a little tuberculosis because from other areas, they sent their tubercular patients and Dr. Raymond and Dr. Fronske both came to <Arizona> with tuberculosis. Here Dr. Fronske is still hale and hearty and in his early '90s! Have you talked with him, he's one who ought to have a lot of memories?

SUSAN ROGERS: He was my very first interview and it was real good. It was excellent. Okay, can you compare any of those early medical practices to now? You said a little bit about all the new drugs now, anything else that you remember?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well of course, the doctors, at least here, worked much longer hours than they're doing now. And they took off much less time, and after the hospital was opened, you see that was his sole responsibility as far as my husband was concerned, and so we didn't get much in the way of vacations and not much days off. He even had office hours on Sunday morning, and that was started I think, because of the mill practice. You see, those people worked all week long and on Sunday they could come to the office. And Dr. Sherman had kept office hours on Sunday morning and so, when we came to work for him, Charlie was required to do that, too. And then later on, of course, it was all turned over to him and he had Sunday office hours clear up until I guess he was appointed to the legislature in 1962. He always made lots of house calls, every evening he'd make house calls, so that he made many more house calls than doctors now, who make very few house calls. They still do it if it's an emergency; my son does a few, but most of it's office practice and so I think from that standpoint it's much easier for the doctors and they have much better drugs to work with and much better facilities and better-trained personnel. And as far as <Flagstaff> itself is concerned now, we have really very fine specialists. It's much better for the community and much better for the doctors.

SUSAN ROGERS: You've made a couple mentions about your husband being on the School Board and then you said the legislature. Can you tell me a little about his extra activities like that?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well when he was on the School Board, they either built or rebuilt every school in the whole community. And of course after the town began growing, then they'd have to keep building new buildings, and so, practically, South Beaver and Emerson was rebuilt. And the high school was torn down and rebuilt, but that was after he was off the Board, when they tore the high school down. But they had built the other high school, and the gym, and the auditorium and two or three of the schools out in east <Flagstaff>. Not Coconino, that was since, and also what's now Thomas School and Christensen, those were all built since.

SUSAN ROGERS: What years was he on the School Board?

ETHEL SECHRIST: From '38 until '56. I think he was elected first time in '38. And in '56, '55 I guess it was, he gave the hospital to the community and in '56, he did not run again and that was the year we took a trip around the world, first one; we took two, one in '60, too, 1960.

SUSAN ROGERS: And then you said something about the legislature?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, he was appointed to this job. A Dr. Creighton, who was pretty well retired, ran for the position and was elected and died of heart failure on election day, so then Charlie was appointed to fill in his place. And then he was elected one year and during that time, then, he developed his illness and he died in '65 while he was still in the legislature.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did you live in <Phoenix> then?

ETHEL SECHRIST: We stayed in <Phoenix> for about six months out of the year. We just had an apartment down there. We kept our house, of course.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did any special legislature bills come out of his being there, or anything?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Well, of course, he was pretty new there; he didn't have that much influence I think; but he especially worked for getting the college designated as a university. And he worked for getting salaries improved, and he worked on the health committees, things with which he was more familiar. That was one of the concerns all the time he was on the School Board. And also for the college, was improving the salaries of teachers because they were so lowly paid, poorly paid.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any big natural disasters occurring in <Flagstaff>, maybe a big fire, or flood, or blizzard, or particular blizzard?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I remember big snowstorms, but I wouldn't say they were blizzards. 'Course the worst one that we ever had came after my husband died that was in '67. I'm sure you've heard about that one--we had 83 inches, I believe it was, 83 inches of snow in one snowstorm. But frequently, we'd have 50 inches over a weekend. That wasn't anything unusual at all.

And we used to own the Ski and Spur Ranch when my boys were young and we had horses out there for them and chickens and turkeys. My mother and dad lived out there for (?) years and we had a garden and horses, as I said, for the boys, and a milk cow. It had a spring on it. And you know <Flagstaff> has always had a shortage of water and I can remember one year when people used to come out there to get drinking water from that spring and it'd be parked for quarter of a mile long waiting to fill up their water containers.

And before we had this ranch it belonged to a little old man by the name of- can’t think of his name now. Taylor, Mr. Taylor, Buck Taylor, and this spring that fed the garden and the spring. And everything was known as the Buck Taylor Spring and the Buck Taylor Ranch. And he had for years raised vegetables. And people drove from <Flagstaff> out there to buy his vegetables because they were so nice and fresh and of course, you know, lots of things like cabbage and peas and head lettuce and things like that do well in that cool area, so he had really nice produce. He had sweet corn, and I can't remember everything he raised, but almost anything that you'd have in a garden and he never did make any effort to bring it to town, people came and bought it all and were happy to get it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now is that ranch still out there?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh no, he died in ‘36, I believe it was. He was pretty old. He's buried out here in the cemetery; I go by his grave every once in a while. He had never married, so he had no family, but he did have some nieces and nephews, and we used to see them occasionally.

SUSAN ROGERS: And did you change the name of the ranch to the Ski and Spur?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No, it was changed to that after we sold it. We sold it in '48. Al Grasmoen and his brothers took it over and they started the Ski Bowl area, and the first building they had up there was built I think by the- what was it they called that group of young men that they hired, the CCC's. I think they were the ones who built the first cabin that they had up there, which burned down in the late '40s I guess.

SUSAN ROGERS: And is that ranch still out there now?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh sure. The government finally bought it about two or three years ago. We sold it for $30,000 and the government paid $300,000 for it. We understand that came from this money they took in from the parks. What was it they called it, the Golden Eagle? Well, that's where we understand that they got their money to pay for it. It's a real nice place, it's a beautiful location, and has all this water which, of course, was valuable, and had 160 acres and there was 55 acres of farmland. And during the Second World War- we had it during that time, and so we bought some equipment and we raised potatoes. One year we sold two carloads of potatoes, one of them to the Army. That was quite an experience.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you live out there?

ETHEL SECHRIST: No. We stayed out there- I stayed out there with the boys in the summertime. But I wouldn't say my husband ever really lived out there because we didn't have the phone there in those days and he had to be where he could take care of emergencies and look after the hospital. He used to come out for dinner in the evenings. Later on we did get a phone. It was difficult because you see it was far out and it was expensive. And the way we finally got the telephone out there was with the cooperation of the government. They had the labor and they had the wire, but they didn't have any money for buying posts to put the telephone up from the main road back to the ranch and so we bought that for them. And by cooperating between the family and the government, we got the phone back to that area.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any big crimes that happened? That stick out in your mind?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Seems to me there were plenty of crimes, but I can remember some. But I can't tell you the details, it's just been too long ago. I remember some murders. I can't even recall the name it's been so long since I thought about them, and I certainly didn't anticipate that kind of question! I don't think we have much to do with the crimes excepting to take care of the people that got hurt, and it's from that standpoint only that I would remember them. But I do remember way back as far as about 1930, we had some of these wild west murders and people getting drunk and carousing and spite and all that kind of thing. The same things that I guess cause murders now. Lawsuits- I don't remember any big epidemic of any description, you know that affected the whole town. I do know we did have flu epidemics and a lot of people ill, but I don't remember tragedies like we used to have like smallpox epidemics and yellow fever and that sort of thing. Those were already pretty well under control. We've had smallpox vaccinations, you see, for years. And yellow fever was under control, still breaks out once in a while in places in <India> and <Europe>-

SUSAN ROGERS: And <South America>-

ETHEL SECHRIST: Yes, I know we had to get vaccinations when we took these tours because there were some places where we might run into it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I have just one last question. Do you remember any particular famous people who visited <Flagstaff>, maybe scientists, or else local people, that were scientists, painters, musicians, anything like that-

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh, we had lots of those all through the years, but you know, I can't tell you who they were. I know especially in connection with the museums, like Dr. Colton and that museum that he developed and in connection with astronomy. And the Putnams, I remember being here through the years, but I can't give you any- I just wasn't closely enough connected.

SUSAN ROGERS: You didn't know Dr. Colton?

ETHEL SECHRIST: Oh sure, I knew him real well. I worked with him in the Red Cross for several years. I knew her, she was a beautiful, lovely person and I knew the son, but not as well as I knew his father and mother.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of anything else you want to add? Anything you think I missed?

ETHEL SECHRIST: I can't think of anything. They've been nice years for us, we've been very happy in <Flagstaff>. My boys all are sold on <Arizona>. The youngest one lives in <Las Vegas> now, but it's so closely like <Arizona> that he doesn't mind the heat. Gilbert doesn't like the heat but Milton doesn't mind it, he's in <Phoenix> and he doesn't really mind the heat too badly.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, sounds good.


