ROY BYNUM INTERVIEW

Northern Arizona University Indian Oral History Project

NAU.OH.36.2

Mr. Roy A. Bynum is the principal at Leupp School in Northern Arizona University. Leupp School is a school which has mainly students who are Native Americans. Interviewed by David I. Schock on May 6, 1977. One tape, approximately 50 minutes.

Subjects covered in interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Mr. Bynum born on July 2, 1927 (<Muskogee OK>) 

    His background and his parents 

    Educational background (<Tahlequah OK>) 

    Interest in education 

    Various tribes he has had experience with 

    Working background (employment) 

    Description of school (including grades and students) 

    Description of new school 

    Comparison of B.I.A. schools to that of public schools 

    Comments on curriculum of the B.I.A. school (Leupp Boarding School, B.I.A.) 

    Goals of Indian Education and comments on Navajo participation 

    Comments on assimilation 

    Comments on reservation life and culture 

    Comments on the "change" in parent's attitude 

    Experience with Cherokee in Adair County OK 

    Comments about Cherokee people 

    First teaching experience (<Tahlequah OK>) 

    Comments on students at <Tahlequah OK> 

    Comments on paternalism 

    Comments on Native American goals in education 

    Comments on termination 

    Comments about the B.I.A. and termination 

    Comments about government and Indian education 

    Termination and the public school 

    Description of Leupp Public School's students 

    Description of student's homes 

    Improvements in reservation life (water and power) 

    Description of student's homes 

    After hours contact with students 

    Programs for students 

    Comments on parents and participation 

    Schools attempt to encourage participation 

    Cross-cultural programs and Leupp School 

    Success and failure of cross-cultural programs

Tape 1, Side 2

    Comments on cultural awareness 

    first college trained Native American that he has had contact with 

    Comments on Native American staff at Leupp Public School 

    Comments on Red Power and Navajo employment 

    Red Power and outside intervention 

    Red Power and the classroom and school 

    Red Power and the student 

    Comments on personal family life 

    Lasting relations with students 

    Relationship with the B.I.A. 

    Criticism of the B.I.A. (personal evaluation of that criticism) 

    Comments on national legislation and their effect 

    Transitions of Native American Education 

    End of interview

[BEGIN SIDE A]

David I. Schock: ... is being made for deposit in the Northern Arizona University Special Collections Room. It is part of a research project directed by Dr. Philip R. Rulon, associate professor of history at Northern Arizona University. The purpose of this study is twofold: first, to obtain historical information on the education of Native Americans in the Southwest; second, to obtain insight into the effectiveness of bicultural and cross-cultural programs for Indian Americans. Today, May 5, 1977, we are talking to Roy A. Bynum. Mr. Bynum is the principal of Leupp Public School in Northern <Arizona>.

Mr. Bynum, could you give me some biographical data about yourself: birth, birthplace, parents, etc.?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, I was born on July 2, 1927, in <Muskogee Oklahoma>. My parents, I was named after my father. So actually I don’t use the --Jr.,-- but I’m named after him. They are natives of the state of <Arkansas>, both retired at this time. Nationalities, I imagine my mother would be basically English, since she was a Hatfield--but she’s not of the Hatfield clan of the Hatfields and McCoys. My father is Welsh. My educational background: bachelor’s degree and master’s degree from Northeastern State College in <Tahlequah Oklahoma>.

David I. Schock: When and how did you get into educating Native Americans?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, actually, here at <Leupp>, I’ve been here for five years. I felt that this school would be a challenge. I had never been in administration. I’d spent nineteen years in the classroom, and had the experience of teaching Indian children before--not only here in <Flagstaff>, but the ten years I taught in <Oklahoma>. I had the experience of teaching Cherokee children, Seminole, Osage, probably some Wyandots, Senecas, and several other tribes, since <Oklahoma> was full of different tribes that had been ancestors of tribes that had been there since it was Indian Territory.

I knew they were quiet, especially these young Navajos that I’d had in class in <Flagstaff>. But I felt that it would be a challenge, and it would give me the insight of whether I want to be in administration.

David I. Schock: Did you have any specialized training?

Roy A. Bynum: Not particularly, outside of just teacher’s training and administrative training.

David I. Schock: What other type of work had you done through your life?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, when I first got out of college, I made a point, every summer, working at a different job. I’ve worked at Boeing Aircraft in <Wichita>. I’ve made concrete work, construction work, farm work. All these different things and so forth, I felt that it gave me a broader background--not only for conversational purposes with people, but a broader background that I could take to the classroom. And the experiences and so forth have been very beneficial.

David I. Schock: At what level do you administrate?

Roy A. Bynum: We are K through 8 here [i.e., kindergarten through eighth grade].

David I. Schock: And what tribes do you work with?

Roy A. Bynum: Most of them are, of course, Navajo. We have two or three Hopi, one--I always mess this one up--Ahmayonaise [phonetic].

David I. Schock: Could you tell me something about the school, when it was built, how many teachers?

Roy A. Bynum: This school originally started, I think it was in either ’61 or ’62. It was put here with, oh, let’s see, Public Law 815 monies, an impact area. Of course, when they built the boarding school, which is just across the road, the employees of the boarding school’s children cannot go to school over there because they are not boarding students. So they put the school here, and it consisted of five rooms, and I think at first they only had four teachers. One of them acted as head teacher. Two married couples to start with, and they lived at the boarding school where they had a couple houses that they let us use. Since then, we have grown, and three years ago we put on an addition.

Let’s go back before that. They put in two portable classrooms about seven years ago, because the population was growing a little bit from around 100 students, to begin with, to today we have about 245. But they put in two portable classrooms, and then they got crowded again, and they brought a couple trailers out here, which we used as classrooms and office space. So it kept growing, and the prospects of growth in this area is pretty good. Someday in the future, once they get together, there will be maybe a school of 350, maybe 400, students here.

David I. Schock: What would you say the average size of--how many students are in a classroom, the average classroom size, the number of pupils?

Roy A. Bynum: We’ll average about twenty-five.

David I. Schock: In your public school experience, how would you compare the BIA to the public school? In other words, pay, books, audio-visual materials, methodology?

Roy A. Bynum: The BIA, of course, has at its disposal a little bit more money than the public school does, and they do have materials and so forth, A.V. equipment and so on, that they can buy, that we slowly, over a period of years, can acquire. Actually, I feel that our educational system is better than theirs. I think we give more for the student than they do. I would like to say, though, that the BIA school that we have here as our neighbor, that we have worked rather closely with one another for the past five years. I am happy to say that I hope through my influence that they have now started being more concerned with their eighth-grade graduates. They are starting to put in the required curriculum for the state of <Arizona>, so that their students will be prepared when they go on into public high school. They’re changing from self-contained to partial departmentalization, concentrating on these subjects and so forth. Actually, we spend--with some of the personnel over there, I’ve spent many hours discussing the education of Indian children. We both agree that is our primary objective, and we’re getting closer and closer together.

David I. Schock: So would you say there is a basic difference in methodology between the BIA school, the boarding school across the street here, and your school?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, if you go back to the history, the BIA was designed to educate the Indian children and bring them up to where they would be able to go to a public school. The BIA is supposed to have phased itself out in the past hundred years. Seems you could get people to get to the point and so forth--they don’t want to lose their jobs and so on--and they keep hanging on. But I think the day will come probably in the future where the Indian people are going to demand more in education. It’s going to take a lot of improvements in roads, communications, and so forth to turn boarding schools and so forth into day schools. And the type of education and so forth will be basically the same as public [unclear].

David I. Schock: What were the goals of Indian education when you started teaching on the reservation?--actually, probably administrating on the reservation.

Roy A. Bynum: My goals?

David I. Schock: Well, no, the goals in general--the actual institution’s goals.

Roy A. Bynum: I think basically it was just to keep ‘em in school, which is a rather difficult thing to do--you take the more traditional Navajo, especially, has little concept of time. Keeping a child in school the whole school year is a very--I mean, it’s a task within itself, in a lot of cases. But I think that the demand--the parents are starting to see that the demand for education is growing more and more, and they expect their children to succeed, whatever their goals of success might be, which I’m sure will differ from yours and mine, as far as that’s concerned. But I think they’re wanting their children to do more, receive better educations. My own personal goal is to try to see that they get it.

David I. Schock: Would you say the schools are aiming towards assimilation--the assimilation of the Native American into the Anglo culture?

Roy A. Bynum: I think this is what has been in the past. I think that they’re realizing that they’ve got to accept this. But I think that the schools today are wanting to become part of the Anglo culture. But I definitely do not want to see--I want them to retain their native culture. But a reservation, whether it’s Navajo or what, you cannot take these people and keep ‘em inside of a barbed wire fence. In my opinion, they’ve got to accept that they’re going to be in contact with the Anglo world, and they need to be prepared for it.

David I. Schock: What are the strengths and drawbacks of this approach?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, I think [unclear] you find a lot of people--well, maybe some of the natives that are resisting. These are the old ones. They haven’t faced it. They haven’t realized the problems and so forth that they encounter as they go off the reservation. Their experiences with traders and so forth on the reservation, they think nothing of, whereas the younger ones coming up today, they are not going to become attracted, you might say, to the certain ways of life--although they still want to carry on their culture. But they realize that things can be--their life expectancies, different things of this sort and so on, that they can go much further with the knowledge that they can pick up in schools and outside the reservation and so forth. And I’m hoping that they get it onto the reservation so that their people [unclear].

David I. Schock: Can you give any personal illustration, examples of the effects of this type of approach?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, as far as this school is concerned, we feel in the past five years we've made a great deal of progress. When I first came here, of course I’ve had a lot of help from people that had lived out here, and have known people in the area. When a child was out of school, we had no idea why. They may be gone for a day, a week, two weeks, and we’d never know what happened to ‘em. In the past few years, they’ve come in and let us know ahead of time, --So-and-So’s gonna be gone.-- They will send us a note, they will make a phone call, that their child is sick or something. We know more today about where that child is, what they’re doing, and why they’re out--than before. And I think they appreciate that we’re concerned about the child, about their education, and their place in society.

David I. Schock: What other teaching or administrative assignments have you had that were with schools that were predominantly Indian?

Roy A. Bynum: My teaching experience in <Oklahoma>, I taught in Adair County, which was predominantly Cherokee. Most of the students in that school were Cherokee Indians--at least well over 50 percent. Their culture and so forth--of course they have mingled with the Anglo society for a greater number of years than I feel those here on the Navajo Reservation, since their reservations have been disbanded and everything, basically. Of course they have intermarried and so forth, and a lot of ‘em who claim to be Cherokee today, you couldn’t hardly tell he was an Indian at all, but they still have Indian blood and so forth in ‘em. But I had a great deal of experience teaching those particular ones. The school that I went to, college, Northeastern State at <Tahlequah>, was the capital of the Cherokee Nation. It’s very much rich in Indian history.

David I. Schock: Was that your first teaching assignment?

Roy A. Bynum: No, my first teaching assignment was at <Tahlequah>, at the training school at the college.

David I. Schock: Did you find the Adair County school that you taught in different from that first school, <Tahlequah>?

Roy A. Bynum: No, I wouldn’t say it did. I think the schools back there--I mean, since they were not reservation schools and so forth, they were public schools--wasn’t any different from when I went to public school. I’m sure the children were concerned about culture to a degree. They were more in the Anglo world. I think it’s only been in the past five, six, not over ten years, that the Indian culture push has come back. This was several years before that, that I was at [that elementary school (?)].

David I. Schock: Do you feel that you’ve had more success with one tribe than another?

Roy A. Bynum: I don’t think I was as much aware of it when I first started, as I have been in the past five years. So I can’t really say that I’ve had more success with one tribe or another. I feel that in the past five years, working with basically Navajo students, that the success that we can see here at this school I’m very proud of.

David I. Schock: What effect did paternalism have upon the education of Native Americans?

Roy A. Bynum: I feel possibly that in a way, in the past history of the education of Indians in the past hundred years, it’s had a bad effect. I think that as Americans we have been guilty a great number of years, of trying to push our way of life, our language, and everything, upon people that it was not normal to--not only just Indians, but others. I think we did not take in consideration of the way of life these people, their cultures, their beliefs. I think in the past few years we have come to realize that these things are important to them. In my position here, I have to take those things into consideration. And I know they appreciate it. Even though we are trying to put them into an Anglo world to a certain extent, and education, being able to live in it, they still want to retain some of their early traditions and so forth that they have had throughout their lifetime. And I think as soon as teachers and administrators that are educating these Indian children realize that they have a way of life, but the Indian has a way of life also, the greater success that we’re going to have.

David I. Schock: When and where did you first encounter the idea of termination? That is, the eventual withdrawal of the BIA and other agencies from the administration of Indian affairs?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, I guess I probably wasn’t really aware of it until I came out here, dealing with the people that are with the BIA. I guess you really don’t think about these things until you become confronted with it and find out, start looking into the history of such organizations and so forth, and their purpose. Once I started dealing with Indian students and so forth, and with the BIA, then you find out what their purpose was. And then you find that they’re supposed to develop a system and slowly fade out--and yet they’re getting stronger and more in numbers, it seems like. I imagine that there has been sort of a battle between the BIA and public schools and so forth, in a way, for survival on who’s going to educate, who isn’t; who’s going to administer the affairs of the various tribes and so on. And between state governments and the federal branches of governments and so forth. It’s been quite interesting to find out the problems that they do have, conflicts. Because when you do have tribal governments and federal governments and state governments and so forth trying to come up with how the tribes should be, the affairs of it should be conducted and so forth, you’ve got this nothing but mess [unclear].

David I. Schock: How has this affected your administrating of Leupp Public School?

Roy A. Bynum: I think it’s helped considerably, because you understand a little more of what the purpose was in the first place. You don’t look at just one side as a public school administrator and say, --I’m going to push all my ideas, or the district’s ideas, or the state’s ideas, upon the people.-- You get an idea of what the other agencies are doing. Actually, I try to work with especially BIA, since they are so close, and exchange ideas, make comparisons between the results of their educational process, the results of our educational process, and if they’re doin’ a better job in some areas, I’d be one of the first to admit. If we’re doin’ a better job, I’d like for them to admit it too, and see if we can work together to bring about a more suitable education process for the Indian child.

David I. Schock: How do your students feel about living on the Indian estate?--or as it’s usually said, the reservation.

Roy A. Bynum: Well, actually, most of the students we have at Leupp Public School are not what I would call a typical reservation Indian. Oh, I’d say 75-80 percent of ‘em come from homes that are more what we would call an Anglo influence, where there’s running water, lights, they’ve got television. Very few of our students are what we would call hogan Indians--the facilities of electricity and running water and sanitary conditions and so forth are not available to them. Although I’m happy to see that there is more of that happening out here: water lines have been run to two of the remote areas of this section; electrical lines. I think as far as some of the more modern-day conveniences which will make things a little bit better for them, I hope. I don’t know, sometimes I have my doubts whether they’re better or not. They’re becoming more available. It’s sort of like where you go back forty years ago, you might say, when the REA in the Midwest came about, where the farms got the electricity and so forth, and stretched out for miles across the prairie. It seems like it’s a shame that it’s just now getting here, where people that lived in the remote areas in the Midwest and the plains states and so forth, received some modern conveniences, but it???s taken a great number of years for it to get here.

David I. Schock: Have you visited any of your students’ homes?

Roy A. Bynum: Yes, I know approximately where every one of ‘em lives.

David I. Schock: What conclusions have you drawn as far as the living conditions of their homes? In general, how would you compare them to, let’s say, a <Flagstaff> home?

Roy A. Bynum: Like I said, 75-80 percent of ‘em, just as well. Others, pretty rough conditions under the standards of [unclear].

David I. Schock: Did they have electricity?

Roy A. Bynum: No. They haul water. The outhouse--the old standard farm community outhouse is there. There’s no sanitary conditions. Usually they’re a one-room traditional hogan, or where it’s a little more modern type of dwelling that they have work projects that they have out here [unclear] put up little buildings for ‘em, usually made out of concrete blocks, a little insulation that they need, potbellied stove in the middle of it. It’s still just one room. You have a number in the family. In a way, Anglo standards, would be a rather primitive, still, way of life, living condition.

David I. Schock: What contact do you have with your students during the off-duty hours?

Roy A. Bynum: Not a whole lot, really, because living in <Flagstaff> and commuting out here, it’s a little bit difficult. We do try to provide a lot of activities for our students, in the way of athletics at the sixth grade level and the junior high level, and they do make a great number of trips into <Flagstaff> to play the other schools in town. Then when we do have night programs and so forth, I’ll come in contact with ‘em some, but not as much as I’d like to, really, under certain conditions.

David I. Schock: When and how did you learn of the concept of participation?--that is, the right of Indians to help form the decisions that shape and color their lives.

Roy A. Bynum: I guess it’s just probably been in the past, well, five years since I’ve been here, that this push, you might say, has come about. Our parents, as a whole, in this area, that I have to deal with, in a way are sort of strange. If something isn’t going to suit them in school, they’ll be here. If everything is going fine, you never see ‘em. I’m happy to say I don’t have too many visitors. I think they are concerned, though. We are looking at our curriculum that we’re offering in the grades to keep the children aware of their cultures. We secure basically any of the information that we can find in educational publications dealing with Navajos. That’s the vast majority that we have here. We look in and try to get these things to keep them aware of it. And I think that most of the parents appreciate it. Now, not all of the Indian parents want their children [unclear]. Some of them will restrict them and say the only thing they want them to speak is English.

David I. Schock: In the same vein, when and how did you hear of bicultural or cross-cultural education approaches?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, basically, when the push came within <Arizona> on the bilingual education. Of course I think basically it was designed by the past senator from <Flagstaff>, Tony Gaveldon [phonetic] for the Mexican-Americans. But the Navajo, of course, or the other Indian reservations over the state had to be included in it. And we started looking to help them through a bilingual-type approach. We were encouraged to include culture and so forth in it, and in conversation with parents and other individuals in our area, and with the BIA school, which....

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Roy A. Bynum: ... draw, paint pictures of it. It’d be a great way of preserving their culture. But back to your question and so forth, when I heard of the bicultural and so forth, like I said earlier, I think it’s just been in the past few years that it has really come to the front, and the push has been there.

David I. Schock: Can you give me some examples of successes and failures of this approach?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, I think it’s only time that’s going to be able to tell us where we’ve had success or failure in it. I think if we look in past history, most of it’s been failure, in some respect. Like I stated before, we have omitted, or haven’t taken consideration or thought of the child or the parent and so forth of the various tribes.

David I. Schock: Now, you would say this even in the cross-cultural concept, that approach?

Roy A. Bynum: I think it’s got to be, but I don’t think we can push one culture over the other. It’s got to be together, or else it just won’t work today. Unfortunately, we have, in the past few years, had a vast movement over the <United States> on cultural awareness--not only Indian culture, but of the--I think they prefer to be called Black now, instead of colored--the Black culture’s been pushed, the Polish culture, the Italian culture, and all of the people that make up this country. I think a lot of it, in a way, has had a tendency to split our country. It is good to keep the cultural awareness and so forth, but in order for this country to continue to be a good, strong nation in this world, we’ve all got to work together. We’ve got to understand one another, and respect one another’s thoughts. But they’ve got to work together, not separate.

David I. Schock: Who is the first college-trained Native American teacher that you’ve had contact with?

Roy A. Bynum: That would be really difficult. I’m sure that I’ve had contact with some of ‘em that I didn’t even realize in the past that were Native Americans. I would probably refer to people that I have hired here at this school, as actually what I can recall. I know that finding Navajo teachers is a difficult situation here at <Leupp>. Most of ‘em go on to public schools, say, in <Phoenix> or <California> or further back into the reservation. Three years ago I was fortunate enough to find a girl to teach here, and was the first Navajo teacher we’ve had in this school. She has had difficulties because of their way of life. They are not strong disciplinarians--easy-going, basically, people. The parent basically does not discipline their children. It is an aunt or uncle or grandparent and so forth, that does it, so it makes it a little bit difficult teaching school, as far as this is concerned. Any school teacher needs to have discipline within a classroom to make presentation.

Also a difficulty in getting this is the fact of the influence of the BIA, the fact that they have been so aware of the governmental agencies and so forth for a number of years, that the first place they think about going to work for is BIA. And to sneak one away from ‘em is sometimes an accomplishment. But in this case, she was going to work as an aide over at the BIA, and I talked her into taking a teaching position here--tried to point out some of the benefits, and at the time, a little bit more money than she would have been making there.

Since then, I’ve been able to hire two or three other Navajo teachers and so forth. We did have a teacher of Sioux descent here, when I came to this school. But it was difficult for her because she didn’t know the language [unclear]. So actually, she was just like an Anglo teacher or anything else. She was an Indian, but it was still hard for communication, for the child, especially in the lower grades, if they need Navajo in order to interpret what is being meant in English. It does help considerably. And we’re striving to try to get more of the Navajo-speaking teachers in the school. And we think over a period of time we can definitely see results that will come about.

David I. Schock: Would you say that these people were both effective in their positions?

Roy A. Bynum: Yes, I would say they were effective. The Navajo girl has come along nicely. She has become more aware of the need to have the attention of the children in the class. I hate to keep saying discipline all the time, and so forth, but you can’t teach unless you have their attention. She has become a much stronger teacher in only a three-year period. The Sioux girl is no longer with us--she’s gone back to <South Dakota>. She’s an art teacher and did a very good job of it, quite talented in art. Did have difficulty in the classroom, due, I’m pretty sure, to the language barrier and so forth.

David I. Schock: When and how did you learn of the Red Power concept?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, I think we first came in contact with it out here about four years ago--might have even been the first year I was here. This is when they were having difficulties in the upper plains states. We have had some difficulties in the eastern part of the Navajo Reservation. I think things are fairly quiet around here. We haven’t really been affected by it too much. Most of the parents that we have here work for either the BIA or the pumping stations in the area, and they’re pretty well adapted to, you might say, an Anglo way of life, and they seem fairly satisfied with it.

I think that possibly--if I might insert this here--that this particular movement has been rather detrimental to this area. I know that several years ago the AIM [American Indian Movement] organization took over the plant in <Shiprock>, and directly had a very sound [i.e., strong or serious] financial effect on this area, because there was a manufacturer that was planning on putting a plant in here. And it was 99 percent go, but as soon as that happened at <Shiprock>, and the Navajo Tribe didn’t do too much about it, it [i.e., the new plant] was gone. And these people have suffered from that. And I think they’re starting to realize that there are ways that you can get things, other than maybe through a militant movement. And I think they’re working towards that. I know basically probably in this area they are. Now, I can’t say for the rest of the reservation.

David I. Schock: Do you think this was an idea that developed inside or outside the reservation, or a combination of both?

Roy A. Bynum: I think it’s outside the reservation. I think if you go back and check through history of bicultural people or so forth, that you’ll find that most of it was brought about not basically by the mass as a whole of that particular group, but by influence of individuals outside of it. If you look at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I think you’ll find that the head of the NAACP has never been a black person--just the executive secretary has. And surely and probably there has been some influence and so forth here as far as the Indian movement is concerned.

David I. Schock: What impact has this had on the classroom?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, like I told you a while ago, there was a financial impact on this area, which I??m sure would have had an impact upon this school. If it had gone through, there would have been more people here. We would have had a larger school. I didn’t get around to telling you anything about the enlarging of this school in our previous question earlier in the recording, that we had added thirteen rooms and a multipurpose building at this school in the past three years. We were looking for growth in this area, and we still have room for expansion there.

Some of the students are affected by it, the same as any student in any other school that would be affected by it. A student is probably the easiest person to affect by a movement, than any other person, because they are in a position of learning, and they can be influenced not only in a school room, but they’re influenced by outside activities of what??s going on. They’re in a learning state, and some are more influenced than others.

David I. Schock: In retrospect, are you happy with the career choice you made?

Roy A. Bynum: Oh, definitely.

David I. Schock: What was it like to bring your family into an area as you live here?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, actually, as far as the family is concerned, we’ve lived basically all of my wife’s and my married life, in this area. Our children have been brought up in the <Flagstaff> area in association with the various nationalities, races, that we have there. I don’t think we could make a comparison with any place else, as a family. I’m very pleased with it. I think it’s a great place to be.

David I. Schock: Have you formed lasting friendships with your students?

Roy A. Bynum: Yes, I would say so. That’s probably one of the most rewarding things that a teacher or administrator has, is for the student to come back and we’ll meet, and say, --Do you remember me?-- And surely if you’ve taught them in the lower grades, you know by the time they get to be an adult, they change a little bit, and you say, --Well, ah ...-- and you try to grope for what their name was, and they finally tell you. And oh, yeah, you remember them from such-and-such. But to see them succeed--and sometimes you regret to see that they fail--is probably, especially the success--and coming back and talking to you, thanking you for the guidance that you gave them, is probably the most rewarding thing that you can have as far as the field of education is concerned.

David I. Schock: Do Native American former students still call on you for counseling?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, it would be difficult to say yes, because my life, a great deal of time, and me being consciously aware of dealing with Native Americans. I can say I had a very pleasant surprise a couple of years ago, of a Cherokee boy that I had on the football team back there at Adair County [unclear]. A senior boy that I felt probably wouldn’t amount to a hill of beans. It seemed like he had more time with the girls, and one of the best fights I ever saw in my life was a couple of girls fighting over him. Just didn’t think there would be a whole lot of success there in the boy. But much to my surprise, I saw him in my hometown one day, and he had gone through junior college and worked on some things that I wasn’t aware of. He had become the advertising manager for a pretty good-sized wholesale grocery company there in Eastern <Oklahoma>, <Arkansas>, <Texas>, and so on. He had continued his art studies. He was preparing his second showing at the Five Civilized Tribes Museum. I was quite proud of him. I think he was proud of himself--for a boy that wouldn’t let you take him home after football practice because maybe he didn’t want you to see where he lived; that you really didn’t see a lot of hope for--did make a success out of himself.

David I. Schock: What type of relationship have you had with the Bureau of Indian Affairs?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, just in the past five years with the boarding school that was across the street, and I would say it’s been a rather successful relationship. As I said before, we try to work close together. I think our primary interest, especially with most of the people I talk with over there, is the education of children, to the best that we can help them.

David I. Schock: Do you think that the criticism of this organization today is justified?

Roy A. Bynum: In some respects, yes. I think they can do a better job than what they’re doing. I feel that with closer cooperation and so forth between agencies, public school and BIA schools, as much success as we’re having here, if it was done reservation-wide and so forth, I think it would be a terrific deal. I’m sure that probably in some areas it is more, that I’m not really that aware of. But I do know that in some areas that the people are becoming unhappy with the situation as far as the BIA is concerned. We have some students here that live a pretty good ways off from a bus stop, that want their children to go to a public school because they’re not happy with what happens at the BIA school.

David I. Schock: Are there any pieces of legislation passed by the national Congress that you think are particularly good or particularly bad?

Roy A. Bynum: Well, I think that a lot of the programs that have been designed for education, the Title I reading programs, Title IV Indian counseling, I think surely bilingual education that’s coming in more and more, are great programs--I just wish they’d give us time and so forth to administer them a little better, without so much paperwork, which gets down to a great deal.

David I. Schock: In conclusion, would you summarize for me where you think Indian education is at present?

Roy A. Bynum: I think it’s far from being at the bottom, yet it’s got a pretty good ways before it gets to its top. We’re in a transitional period. I definitely think it’s on the upswing, because more people are becoming aware of it, we’re having more people coming in that are concerned with it, and no place to go but up--but we’ll get there one of these days.

David I. Schock: Thank you.

Roy A. Bynum: You’re welcome.



