BRUCE BURNHAM INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.18

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's July 17, 1998. We're with Bruce Burnham, in <Sanders Arizona>, at the R. B. Burnham and Company Trading Post. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger running the sound and camera equipment. We're going to do an oral history with Bruce about his years as an Indian trader. This is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. 

Cole: Bruce, what we'd like to do is just kind of have you tell us about your life. We'd like to start at the very beginning. When and where were you born? 

Burnham: In 150 words or less? 

Cole: You can go up to 2,000, if you want. (both chuckle) 

Burnham: Well, I was born in 1940 in <Farmington New Mexico>. I like to tell everybody I was born on the reservation, because my parents owned the Bisti Trading Post at the time I was born, and also an interest in the Burnham Trading Post, which is over near <Two Grey Hills>. So I like to tell people that I was born and raised on the reservation. I was actually born in a hospital in <Farmington> in 1940. We lived at the Bisti Trading Post at the time, so my earliest childhood recollections are of the Bisti Trading Post. It seemed to have really influenced my life inasmuch as the exposure I had early on to people were Navajo people, and very rarely white people. So I was very inclined to be drawn to the Navajo people. The first women that I knew in my life were housekeepers and nannies, and they were Navajo and they spoke Navajo. My playmates were their children. So you might say I left <Bisti> with a five-year-old vocabulary of Navajo.

I have a sister who is three years older than me, and when it was time for her to start school--she started school one year late, she didn't start school until she was seven. So I had just turned five years old when we moved from <Bisti> to <Farmington> so that we could go to school. Therefore, I was then away from the reservation until I got out of the Army in 1960. In 1960, I went back to work on the reservation.

During the period of time from 1945 to 1960, even though I was away from the reservation, I still had kind of an interest in the Navajo people. We didn't live that far from the reservation, so I still had a little bit of association with a few Navajo people. These basically were Navajo families who had moved off the reservation into town. One of the kids I remember was one of my best friends when I was in <Farmington>, was a boy named Richard Simpson. I've lost track of him now, but in talking to a mutual friend, I found out he's done quite well in life, and he's probably as un- Navajo as I would be. He's kept some affiliation with the tribe, but he's never moved back to the reservation, so basically he's just been absorbed in the dominant society.

When I got out of the Army, I got a job delivering Coca-Cola. One of my first stops on that Coca-Cola route was the Shiprock Trading Post. And I remember, to this day, it's a fresh memory in my mind, and that was thirty-eight years ago, that when I went in that wareroom to deliver the Coca-Cola, the odors in that wareroom just overwhelmed me. It was the odor of mutton fat that had been walked on and walked-into the floor. It was kerosene where you'd fill a kerosene can and slosh a little on the floor. And it was the odor of the sacks of flour--you know, this huge pile of flour back there. And then there were some sheep pelts back there. So it was a combination of all those odors of that trading post that just brought back every childhood memory I had--and even some I didn't have, because there was just something that was so appealing to me there, because of the nostalgia of that odor, that I went in and applied for a job on the first day of my job as a Coke delivery man. I went in and applied for a job in the trading post. They didn't hire me there, but they referred me to another store which was the Red Valley Trading Post--or the Red Rock Trading Post is the name of the store--owned by Jewel McGee and Troy Kennedy. So they hired me, and this was kind of, oh, late in the fall. I went to work there, and we were in the process of shipping lambs when I went to work there. I stayed there through the winter, and I had just married a non-Navajo, and she couldn't stand living on the reservation, so we had a lot of problems stemming from that.

In that day and age, when you went to work at a trading post, you went to work for so much a month and your board and room. And then you were expected to live there twenty-four hours a day. So even your day off you had to stay and guard the store. But then periodically you could get to take a Saturday and Sunday off once a month to go to town. So that was just more than she could handle, so we moved back to <Farmington>, and then I got a job delivering milk for the dairy there. I still had to call on trading posts, and every time I'd call on a trading post, I would just feel like that was where I needed to be.

And then Elijah Blair called one day and said, "I've got a vacancy here for a manager. Would you be interested in taking a job working for me as manager of the Aneth Trading Post in <Aneth Utah>?" And I said, "Well, I'll come look at it." (chuckles) I had started at $250 a month and my board and room at Red Rock. And then I think Elijah offered me $300 a month and my board and room, which at that time was far less than what I was making as a delivery man, but I just couldn't resist it. I went back to work for the trading post, went to work for Aneth Trading Post.

So then I stayed there for about four years and a divorce. My wife just wasn't inclined to stay at the store, and I wasn't inclined to live in town. She wanted us to live next door to her parents in <Farmington>, so we just got a divorce.

Every morning I'd look out the window and watch this same old Navajo man. His name was Sagetnitso, and I'd watch that man ride his horse up out of the valley and down through this wash and come up on our side of the wash. He was always just ramrod straight. The man had dignity, and it always impressed me, because he didn't slouch down in the saddle, he was just always ramrod straight, and in perfect cadence with every hoofbeat. He'd just lay that quirk on the horse's flank just with every stride. He wasn't whippin' the horse, he was just--that was part of the cadence of him riding up out of the wash. So every morning I watched the same fellow. He's the only Navajo I've ever met in my life that was absolutely punctual. It wasn't five minutes after eight when he came to the store, he wasn't waiting there at five minutes 'til eight--he was there exactly at eight o'clock every morning, and he was just absolutely punctual. There was a ritual about that part of his daily routine. He would come in the store and he'd roll a smoke with the makings that we kept on the counter there. He'd roll a smoke and buy a Nehi grape soda. He'd walk over in the bull pen there and sit down on the bench with that smoke that he'd just rolled, and he'd have his open Nehi pop. He'd sit there on the floor and then he would light that Bull Durham cigarette and fill his mouth with smoke, and then take that Nehi grape soda and take a little swig. And that carbonated water would burn the inside of his mouth, and he'd really salivate. Then he'd go (ptooie!) and spit on the floor. (laughs) I'd go get a mop and mop it up. He only spit on the floor once a day, and that was just that opening ritual every morning. It just so intrigued me, because the guy was just a great man. There was an air of nobility about him. He was a great guy. As long as I live, I'll never forget him.

I was watching him ride up out of the wash one day and I said, "You know, here I am, twenty-four years old, and I'm watchin' the same old Indian ride the same old palomino horse up out of that draw every morning to come in here and spit on my floor, and I'm gonna hafta mop it up. You know, there must be more to life than this. The whole world's going a hundred miles an hour out there, and I'm stuck in <Aneth Utah>, watchin' that same old Indian every morning." And it just started festering on me, and finally one day I just walked in and I took my keys and I threw 'em on the counter and told Lij, "I'm gone. I can't stay here, the whole world's passing me by." And so I left and went back to <Farmington> and helped my father for a little while.

And then Lij Blair sold out to Roscoe McGee, and Roscoe McGee called me and said, "Bruce, you gotta go back out there and run the store for me for about three or four months while my daughter and son-in-law get acclimated to it and everything. Would you please do that?" I don't know whether it was because Jewel and Roscoe were my cousins, or what it was, but I felt a little bit obligated to go back out. So I did, I went back out for about three or four months and then I left.

<Aneth Utah>, was a difficult place for me. I don't know whether it was my age or what it was, but it seemed like I had a fist fight with every Navajo within twenty-five or thirty miles of there. Every time a young Navajo guy would get drunk, he'd figure, "Well, I'm gonna be the one that whips the trader." And he'd come in.... I got so paranoid, I guess, while I was working there, that it just didn't take anything to aggravate to the point of going to blows. It just was eating on me, because I thought, "One of these days, one of these guys is really gonna clobber me." And the way luck had it, I never did get whipped while I was there, but I was agitated about it enough that I had kind of ill feelings about <Aneth Utah>. To this day, I would never consider going back to <Aneth Utah>, simply because I felt like everybody just had a chip on their shoulder there. And it was probably more me than anything else. I was young and I was gonna assert my authority and be respected, so I whipped the guys that challenged me. It was kind of a tough period in my life.

So anyway, to make a long story short, I left <Aneth Utah>, and loaded everything that I owned in this world in a little Volkswagen convertible, and decided to go to <California> and make my fortune. 

Cole: What year was that? 

Burnham: That was 1964, late 1964. So I went to <San Francisco> and lived in Haight-Ashbury for a year- and-a-half. I was working for Delta Airlines there, a full-time job. And then I had a part-time job as a certified mortician's air service. And what I was doing, I was helping ship the bodies back that were coming back from <Vietnam>. We'd pick 'em up at the Oakland Army Terminal, and then because of my knowledge with air freight and air freight scheduling, that was what my job was, was to route those remains of the soldiers. It paid good and everything, but I was just a duck out of water out there in <California>, and I found out that it was goin' the same speed as anywhere-- it wasn't passin' me by.

Well, after a year-and-a-half there, I don't know whether I was tryin' to be a beatnik or what it was, but I was kind of enjoyin' a different kind of lifestyle. But my father had emphysema and was pretty sick, so I came home to visit him. And when I did, I had worked a full shift that day and got off at eleven o'clock in the evening and headed for home. Well, I drove from eleven o'clock in the evening until five the next afternoon, and I was in <Tuba City> on my way to <Farmington>. And so I thought, "Well, old Lij Blair owns the Dinnebito Trading Post down here, so I'll just go down there and visit him. I need a place to stay tonight anyway, I'm too tired to drive on the rest of the way. So I drove out to Dinnebito and got there and asked Lij if I could spend the night and he said, "Sure," and put a cot in the wareroom of the trading post. (laughs) Boy, I'll tell you what! I thought I'd sleep like a baby, but I didn't. I was awake all night. The smells of that. Every trading post has the same odor. You know, you could probably blindfold a trader and walk him through a thousand businesses and he'd tell you which ones the trading posts were, just from that same odor that you have in every trading post.

The next morning over breakfast, Lij says, "Well, when do you want to go back to work?" And I said, "Well, it's September now. Soon as deer season's over, I'll go back to work." And he said, "All right." So I went back to work for him at Dinnebito and stayed there for about five years, and then struck out on my own after that. I've had a lot of really great pleasant experiences working around the trading posts. That's where I met my wife, was while I was at Dinnebito.

It's a little ironic. One summer my younger brother was working for us, and he asked me one day, "Bruce, do you think you're ever going to get married again?" See, I was pushin' thirty then. He says, "Do you think you're ever going to get married again?" And I said, "Yeah, I'm gonna get married again." And he says, "Well, who you gonna marry? You don't ever go to town." I got in a rut where I didn't even go to town anymore. He said, "Who you gonna marry?" and I said, "Well, somebody like that girl over there, Virginia Deal [phonetic spelling]." I think she was about seventeen at the time. And he says, "Oh, yeah? When you gonna get married?" I said, "I don't know, before I turn thirty." I believe I was about twenty-eight when that conversation happened. As it was, two or three years later I called my brother and said, "Well, I'm gettin' married." He said, "Who you marryin'?" I said, "Virginia Deal." (laughter) Needless to say, she didn't know I existed 'til later on, but I was always impressed with her--not only was she a beautiful young lady, but she had a poise and something about her that just had class. I was infatuated with her years before we ever got married. I asked her one time, "Didn't you know I existed?" She said, "I didn't even know you were in this world!"

But anyway, I've had a lot of great memories with Navajos. I would say that almost all of my closest friends have been Navajos. There's a young Navajo man that worked for us at Dinnebito--his name is Robert Silas. I hate to see this book written without an interview with him, but he's dead now. He was a great, great guy. I have many, many fond memories with just things he and I did. We used to go to squaw dances together. He was always gettin' me in a jam. He was settin' me up constantly when I was tryin' to learn to speak Navajo. He'd tell me to say something, when I'd say it, it'd come out wrong and everyone would get a good laugh, you know. We were great friends.

I left Dinnebito Trading Post with the thought in mind--that was 1970--of buying The Gap Trading Post. I had made a deal with Troy Washburn to buy The Gap Trading Post. Well, we went over there and I spent, I think, only eight months there. In that eight months we more than quadrupled the business and were really goin' to town, really had a goin' business. When he saw the potential of the place, he just reneged on sellin' it to us. So I left there and came over here to Sanders and bought the Cedar Point Trading Post from C. G. Wallace, and we ran it for a year or two. I didn't like that store necessarily, because it was on an interchange on Interstate 40, and it was just very difficult to trade with the Navajos and deal with tourists at the same time. And so we sold out there and put in a silversmith's shop not too far up the road here at Corino Canyon [phonetic spelling], had forty- five silversmiths working for us full-time. We did that for about three years, and I still didn't feel right, not havin' a tradin' post. So we came down and built this building then in 1974. And so that was, I guess, when we took on this location.

We built this rug room on the back of the store about five years ago. We've been here ever since. Looking back now, I see that we've been in this community for twenty-eight years, and it's no wonder that I see so many of these customers that come in that are adults now that I've known all their lives, practically. And for some of 'em, where I had a strong influence in their lives was because of the years that I spent trading with their parents--primarily their mothers. And so the polite form of greeting here is to call a man Shicheii, which means "my grandfather." And a lot of these young Navajo people around here call me "Grandfather" in the true sense of the word. It's a reward in itself to reach that stature in the community, I think, because it affords you a lot of respect.

That kind of brings you up to speed. 

Steiger: How would you spell that, Shicheii, if you had to? 

Burnham: Oh, S-H-I-C-H-E-I-I. 

Steiger: And I've got one other question--not to interrupt. How would you describe that trading post odor? You mentioned it, but could you describe it, and how would you, if you could? 

Burnham: What do you mean? 

Steiger: What does it consist of? You said "all the trading posts have the same smell." 

Burnham: Yeah, it's the odor of your customer--my grandmother used to describe that odor as a "stale" odor. It's a combination of a Navajo's clothing that is cooking over a greasewood fire. It's that greasewood smoke, it's little bits of mutton fat that drop on the floor and then are ground into the floor. It's the floor-sweeping compound. It's the kerosene. It's the sheep pelts. We used to buy a lot of sheep pelts, and the odor of those sheep pelts. And the odor of a big pile of flour in the wareroom. Those are all odors that exist in almost every trading post. Not so much so anymore, because so many trading posts have converted over to being mini-supermarkets or convenience markets. But the old-time trading posts that dealt in general merchandise, bought lambs and bought wool.... See, that's another thing, there was always a bag of wool layin' around in a wareroom, so lots of times you kept some of the colored wool and didn't ship it, because you would sell it back to your customers to card and make the natural greys to go into rugs. So there were always those odors [that] just almost labeled a tradin' post. 

Cole: Did the odor change throughout the year much? 

Burnham: So much of that odor was just imbedded in the wood floors of the store that it never really changed a whole lot. Of course now the odor from the wool would be the odor of the lanolin plus the urine that is on the wool. So that establishes part of the odor. The other strong, dominant odor would be from the sheep pelts, the flesh side of the pelt, where there was fat or oil of the fat still there, and even getting a little rancid. You cut a sheep up and you got chunks of fat layin' around, and those just get kinda ground into the floor and into the soles of your shoes and you walk on the wooden floor, so those are all just odors that become so strong in a tradin' post. 

Cole: You mentioned kind of how you fit into this community. Maybe if you could describe for us a little bit what the trader means to the community. 

Burnham: Well, my wife and I just got back from <Houston Texas>. Yesterday, almost the entire day, we discussed that--what the trader's role is in the community, and how the trader's wife played such a different role. I would say that the role of the trader in the community was almost family-like, inasmuch as you had a responsibility to take care of your customer. You had a responsibility of making sure they ate year-round. A trader couldn't just merchandise his wares, because what would happen would be, the temptation would be just too great for the customer to just spend all their buying power in a six- week period, and then have two, three months of no ability to buy at all. And so a trader had a grave responsibility of budgeting his customer.

That changed with the cash flow. When there became a lot of welfare assistance on the reservation, the trader's cash flow really changed, because there were many days where we didn't see a dollar in the cash register in cash, and yet we did a volume of business that day. But as that cash flow increased, to where there was money on the reservation, and your customer had some money to spend, you weren't quite as prone to keep your thumb on a customer and not let 'em buy somethin'. You knew always, within ten dollars--I don't know how we did it--but a good trader always knew within ten dollars of what every customer owed. And you knew that they would have ten, twelve bags of wool, or you knew that they would have seventy-five or eighty head of lambs to sell. So you knew what their capacity was to pay their bill, so you kind of gauged 'em and only would let 'em spend so much every month, knowing that by the time wool season was here, or the time lamb season was here, they would be pretty much at their limit. It's just ironic how things seem to work out.

We knew within ten dollars of how much a customer owed. We knew within ten or fifteen dollars how much they would have in assets to pay. So it was a funny system, but that was probably the gravest responsibility that a trader had. But it wasn't something that was explained to him, it was just something that you took for granted, and your customer took it for granted, and that's just the way it was. You didn't do anything that would put a family in a position of not being able to eat. You had to be pretty hard-nosed about things sometimes.

I always enjoyed a story that Walt Scribner told me up in <Farmington>. Walter started tradin' when he was thirteen years old. He said that a trader told him.... I forget who the trader was now, but anyway, they said, "Now, look...." This was at Shonto Trading Post. He said, "All you've got to do...." It was Hugh Heflin. He said, "All you've got to do is learn how to put everything on those shelves that the Navajo wants, and then learn how to say "dooda." That means, "You can't have it." (laughter) It's kind of an amusing story, but the thing of it is, you had to learn how to say no. Some traders learned how to say no, and other traders couldn't say no, didn't know how to say no.

You had to be able to say no, without offending your customer. What a lot of traders did to manage that was they would put like the Levi's and the socks and the tee shirts and the underwear--everything that wasn't absolutely essential to have--they'd put in a box. And then old Hosteen Shorty might walk up to you and say, "I want a pair of Levi's." Well, he couldn't see 'em openly on a shelf, so you'd say, "ádin, we don't have any." And then he would understand, and that was a way of saving face for your customer. You didn't have to say, "No, you can't have 'em, 'cause you owe too much." You just said, "We don't have any." And he knew you had 'em, I knew I had 'em, but if you said, "ádin," then that meant that it wasn't embarrassing to him or humiliating.

The next guy in line to step up might be the same size as Hosteen Shorty, and he'd step up and say, "I want a pair of Levi's," and you just go over to the box and get a pair of Levi's for him. All there was, was a waist measurement that we sold. The length didn't really matter because it just meant you either had more or less of a cuff to roll up.

So anyway, that's what it meant. That was part of the gauging of a customer's credit, and slowin' 'em down, or lettin' 'em have something. It was a real balancing act or a juggling act the trader went through. And yet that was probably the determining factor for success or failure for a trader. If you went out and just sold everything that they wanted, as they wanted it, and then they couldn't.... You'd have had to then carry 'em above and beyond the amount they were able to pay, or you had to cut 'em off and starve 'em. And no trader ever was successful at starvin' his customers. So that was, I'd say, probably the essence of being a trader, was that ability to manage his customer's resources indirectly. 

Cole: What about today in your trading post? 

Burnham: Today it's changed, because we have a cash flow. Now, we merchandise. In our store we try to make it attractive and build a nice display of items we want to sell--the same way they do in town. Now we want to sell it to them. Now we don't say "Dooda." We still do to an extent, because we still run credit, we still have thirty-day credit on Social Security checks, but thirty-day credit is far different than six-month credit. So it's easier to gauge your customer, but we still do to a certain degree. 

Cole: Bruce, how would the trader be seen as a community-builder? Would he be part of that? 

Burnham: Oh, definitely! You know, if you understood that in the early days of trading, it was almost the same out here as it was in the book The Grapes of Wrath. You had a bunch of people that weren't tryin' to make a fortune, they were tryin' to feed their family. And if you looked at some of the old trading posts that were originally built, many of 'em had dirt floors and very crude buildings. I remember the Bisti Trading Post when I was little. We had a wood floor in it, but that was a pretty modern store. But the whole house was probably smaller than this room, and yet it was adequate. But everything that we had focused in running the store. We didn't eat all the cheese, because we needed it for our customers. We were very meager in what we ate out of the store, because it was really our inventory we were depleting. We didn't have refrigeration, and so there was just.... And the customer knew that when you went to town to get your supplies different times of the year, how long they had to come in and be able to expect to buy some fresh bacon, instead of salt pork; and how many days there would be cheese available; or how many days there would be bologna available. And so your customers got used to that. 

Cole: How long would that be? 

Burnham: Well, usually two days. By noon Tuesday you were usually out of cheese and out of bologna. Now, if it was in the wintertime when it was cold, then we had a little storage room that was always in the shade and stayed pretty cold, so that time would extend. But the customers always knew what day of the week you butchered, and then there'd be fresh meat that day and half of the next day. That's the longest you could keep it without it spoiling during the summertime. From early spring up until--well, from about January until probably June, was a period of time when they didn't butcher many of their own animals; one, because they were poor; two, because they were lambing. So we would butcher at the store, and so they knew that if they wanted cheese and regular bacon that they would come in sometime between Monday morning and noon Tuesday, and they might get some regular slab bacon, or some cheese or bologna. Then they knew if they came in on Wednesday, up until maybe noon on Thursday, they might be able to buy a piece of fresh mutton. And so we ate the same provisions. That was the way it was. It was really a deal where you'd hire somebody and they were more concerned about just having shelter over their head and feeding their family. That was the main criteria. It wasn't real lucrative until probably the early sixties it started becoming much more lucrative to own a trading post. And so I guess what I'm trying to say, the early traders came out, they weren't wealthy merchants, they were young people that were trying to make a living, just doing anything they could to feed their family. And I think in doing that, they came to grips with the fact that if they built the community up, that as the community went, so they did also. If they built the community up, improved the livestock or got a better price for the wool or did this or did that, the community would come up. Well, it would also bring the trader up in the process. So the good traders were builders. Just by trial and error, the proof was in the pudding. The successful traders were the traders that stayed in an area a long time. And the reason they stayed in an area a long time was because they were building the community. They were doing something to enhance their position there, and in doing that, it always brought the community up with 'em. And so it was kind of.... You knew there was so much livestock in the area when you went there. Now, to capitalize on your investment of being there, and your time spent there, you knew that you had to develop a better rug-weaving area, in order to capitalize on your being there. So you improved the rugs, you improved the livestock, you gave silver out and had 'em silversmith for you. Anything that you could do that would create extra income greatly enhanced the families that you were dealing with, and it enhanced your position there also. So it was important that a trader have the wisdom to help guide these people along, into a little bit better circumstances. If you had a family that was kind of struggling to eat, you would find a job for the man of the house, maybe. You might send him off to the railroad, or you might find him a job working on a farm, or herding sheep for someone in <Mancos Colorado>. And then he would send money home. The trader had quite a dynasty, and traders had a lot of power to enforce their decisions. Oftentimes the men didn't like that, but the Navajo women liked it because it was a matrilineal society out here, and the women were pretty much in charge. So when the trader found her husband a job, the husband didn't really have the right to say "I'll go or not go." The woman would say, "Okay, you go." And he was under pressure to leave then, and send money home. A lot of men resented havin' the trader spoil his good deal.

You know, I think we understand that as Navajo men, early on, were just like any of the tribal cultures-- they were the warrior and the raider, they were the protector of the homestead. But the women were really in charge of everything to do with the family. They had the biggest responsibility there. Well, as these tribes were put on reservations, they lost that need for having a protector or a warrior or a raider, and then it went down to a deal where these men didn't have that role any longer, going off to war or going off and raiding. But the women didn't relinquish any of their power in the family, and that's how it became such a strong matrilineal society. Well, a lot of the men thought that was all right, too, because it became his sole purpose in life to father children. And if his wife was pregnant, then he could move on to greener pastures 'til she'd had her child. Then he'd come back. So a lot of the men....

And they're not lazy. I tell you, you could hire a Navajo man and give him a shovel, and hire a guy on a backhoe and at some point in time, that Navajo's gonna shovel more dirt than that backhoe will. (chuckles) At some point in time, because of their tenacity and their patience--he'll overtake the backhoe. They're great people, but I would imagine if I was a Navajo man, I wouldn't like some white guy tellin' me when I needed to go off and go to work. (chuckles)

But people realize that within their communities-- after Basque Redondo--and this is the critical point in history for Navajo people--up until Basque Redondo and the Long Walk, they were pretty much a nomadic.... They weren't just tied to one spot. They did a lot of raiding and things like that, and they got away with it, but all these treaties that were broken caught up with 'em, and then they were sent off to Basque Redondo. In going to Basque Redondo, they lost that role in life as being the protector and the warrior. So the traders that understood that were keen on understanding that the economic development of the community just absolutely hinged on the trader--and that's what gave them such a strong, strong hold on their area.

Another thing. You will not find a trader that has something good to say about the tribe, as far as tribal government--or the BIA. But I'll guarantee you there is not one trader that you talk to that would complain about the fact that the BIA and the Navajo Tribe protected your investment, protected your interest to the point that they wouldn't let some other trader come in and compete against you. And because of the two different cultures that we come from, and the economics of these, and just the cultural lifestyle and everything, you have got one group here that says, "Well, we have to have that trader in order to get ahead here. But boy, he's crooked, and he's no good," and that's because they don't understand the profit motive. But based on that, they're saying that traders are all crooks, they're no good. "They buy something for a dollar and they sell it for two dollars, they sell it for more than they paid for it." Well, see, they don't understand overhead and profit motive. And so they say, "I guess we have to endure one of 'em, but we sure don't want two of 'em! We don't want to have two of 'em. Boy, we'd be double-bad then!" Well, you know, they just didn't understand that if they would have opened up another trading post within a half-mile of that trading post, or a quarter-mile of that trading post, that they'd have had competition, they'd have had much better prices. So this is the trader's.... You know, the trader's always cussin' the tribe and FTC. I agree with the traders that FTC just absolutely was a law written and applied to a different circumstance that what it was written for.

You know, if we understand that traders were really the heart of the economy in the community, then we understand how they had so much control and what our power really was. It's really changed with the cash flow. 

Cole: Describe a little bit, if you can, the two different economic systems--especially the Navajo system as you perceived it as a trader. 

Burnham: Well, the system that I see in place with the Navajo is that if you pay a Navajo $1,000 for four bags of wool, they will immediately convert that--not so much now as they would have in the past--they would have converted that cash to jewelry or goods, because they don't see the money as having any value until it's spent. Once it's spent, then it is something that is tangible, something they can use. You know, you've got that money in your hand, you can't eat that money, so it has no value. So I think you're going from one culture that doesn't place any priority on saving money, to a culture that in business tries to amass money. Everything's towards that end, of amassing wealth. To a Navajo, an acceptable form of amassing wealth is to buy lots of jewelry, and then you have that jewelry to use, and that's, you might say, the interest on your savings account, up until the time you decide to pawn it and convert it to something else that you need. And so the pleasure of ownership, which the Navajos have a different idea of ownership....

There are few things that the Navajos consider total ownership of--one is your horse. And even through time, now, that has even evolved into the ownership of your vehicle or your car. If you ask a Navajo, "Whose horse is that?" The Navajo would say, "It is Chee's horse, or it is So-and-So's horse." But if it was his horse, he would say, "Eii shí shi»íí." That means, "That is my personal horse." He says, "shí shi," "shí" twice, you know, "my my," so that labels it as his personal--not something owned collectively by his.... If it was collectively, he would say, "Eii nihi»íí," "it is our horse." But he doesn't say "our horse," because that horse belongs to an individual. Even if it was another individual in that family, he wouldn't say, "It's our horse," he would say, "It's my brother's horse," or "my sister's horse." So that is one thing that Navajos really believe that they own personally, is their saddle, is their horse. It doesn't extend out to "my livestock." That's not "my my" cow. That's "my" cow. But that personal, that emphasis on it being mine mine makes it different. And so a Navajo's idea of ownership is radically different than ours. Everything that I own is mine, and not in the sense of the word, "It's mine until I need to convert it to something else." This possession and ownership, to us, we feel that we own the land that we build our home on. The Navajo doesn't feel like you have the right to own Mother Earth. It's not that final acquisition of it becoming mine and no one else's. It's only mine to use while I need it, and then I can convert it to something else, in the nature of being Navajo.

So I don't know if that answers your question much. We come from two different philosophies, and our common denominator between these two philosophies is the very thing that we have such a difference on, is the ownership. You can funnel that right down into the focus of cash. Man, that's my hundred-dollar bill, period. Probably, to us, it might be more valuable to us in the stage of being cash, because it represents the power to be able to leverage. With the Navajo, it's only yours until you need something. It's serving no other purpose. Can you understand what I'm saying there? 

Cole: Yeah. 

Burnham: So that one basic difference in our philosophy really tells the whole story about the rub, or the differences between the trader and his Navajo customer, and why his Navajo customer feels like he is crooked. But that is why Navajos in general are not capable of running a trading post, is because they have that Navajo philosophy of life, that Navajo cultural identity that prevents them from absolute ownership of something. It's complex. Some traders understand that outright. Other traders have fit in, really not knowing how or why they were successful, or what the differences were in their lifestyles, in their cultures. But in order for a trader to be successful, he has to deal with that idea of just the simplicity of money not having any value until it's spent. If you understand that statement, then you understand how important it is for us to save some of that money, and how unimportant it is for a Navajo to save some of that money. In terms of being Navajo, if you wanted to save something, you would buy 200-pound sacks of corn and save it. That corn might not be available when you need it. (laughs) Then you'd just be stuck with a hundred-dollar bill. It's a difficult thing to overcome. And the Navajos, by choice, have chosen to still keep that cultural identity and just let the traders more and more kind of manage their affairs-- even the modern-day families, modern weaver families still let, and still expect the trader to fulfill their needs--on a daily basis, almost. I had a gal in here a couple of days ago that I bought a rug from for $2,500. The next day she wanted to borrow $500 against her next rug.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're at the R. B. Burnham and Company Trading Post in <Sanders Arizona>. It's July 17, 1998. We're speaking with Bruce Burnham about his years as a trader on the Navajo Reservation. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger.

Bruce, you had mentioned something about the fact that trading really became lucrative in the 1960s. Why was that, what changed? 

Burnham: Well, it was the Great Society. You know, it was the fact that the states came out and had these social programs, welfare programs and everything, that the Navajos really hadn't been--I think they were qualified to receive welfare, but never had the opportunity to apply, just because they didn't know it was there. And so there was a thrust of wiping out poverty in the sixties, and part of that thrust was to let everyone know that they were eligible for welfare benefits. And so in the mid-sixties, I know in <Arizona> they sent case workers out to the trading post. These are case workers that weren't familiar with Navajo, they didn't speak Navajo--those came later--but the early bunch came out, and they would use the trader to interpret. Well, the deal was that if an individual owned 500 head of sheep, they weren't eligible for welfare. So what they would basically tell us to tell our customer, or their future welfare recipient, was if they would transfer their grazing lease and ownership of those sheep to a daughter or somebody, then they would be qualified for welfare. If they would divest themselves of their wealth, they would be eligible for $260 a month. That's just a figure I'm pulling out of the air, but they would be eligible for this welfare assistance. So the Navajo people just thought of that as a great opportunity--and so did the trader. Because what the trader could see was, well, sure, they're going to give that livestock to a daughter, and they're still gonna have that wool to sell, collectively, as a family, plus we're going to have the bonus of Mary Rose getting $260 a month cash. Well $260 a month in cash was equivalent of a $1,500 livestock account in the store. That's a pretty good-sized livestock account, someone that had $1,500 worth of wool that came in and paid twice a year, either $1,500 worth of lambs or $1,500 worth of wool was the equivalent of what this lady was going to get just for divesting herself of this herd of sheep. And from a pure standpoint of economics, boy, that was the thing to do. I didn't know a Navajo that got rid of their livestock. They only transferred the ownership over to a relative-- usually a daughter--and so that doubled their resources, their source of income.

With that came the biggest change to ever hit the Navajo Reservation, and that was that all of a sudden there was money, everybody had money to spend. So stores started converting from behind the counter to self-service and merchandising. Boy, you know, we thought that was just great! I guess we weren't smart enough to see that we were signing our own (chuckles) death certificate as traders, because with this cash flow came pickups. Everybody could make a down payment on a pickup and then the big investment in a Navajo's life became their pickup truck. And this whole $260 went to make a truck payment. That left 'em with havin' to come up with money to buy gas and all that. So there's a short period of time in there between receiving the welfare check and finally buying a pickup truck, that the traders just really profited, because it gave us a whole new type of business, and that was a cash flow business--cash and carry business. And with that, we were selling so much more in goods, that we wanted to find where we could buy goods the cheapest, so that we could offer a little bit better prices and stuff, because we were starting to merchandise.

So Kimball [phonetic spelling] Mercantile in <Gallup>, they quit carryin' us for six months credit at the tradin' post. They started requiring that we pay our bill every thirty days, as did Malco [phonetic spelling] Gas and everybody else that used to carry us for six months. So with the knowledge of us converting to that cash system, they demanded their money up front. Well, in doing that, if they were only going to carry us for thirty days, there wasn't any incentive to stay with Kimball's any longer, so we were one of the first trading posts at Dinnebito to switch to Associated Grocers, and really greatly expand the line of groceries in the store to where it was more like a supermarket. We were treating these people like they lived in town, and we gave 'em choices that they'd never really had before. The old theory to a trader on the Navajo Reservation is you don't necessarily sell 'em what they want, you sell 'em what they need. And that changed with that influx of cash.

So that was when the trading really changed. And it's been changing ever since, because two things happened when the Navajo bought a new pickup. Their first wave, they bought old trucks, to where it wasn't that big of an investment. Second wave was they liked new trucks, too, just like you and I. So they bought a new pickup truck. So then not only had they spent the largest portion of their welfare check on a down payment on that vehicle, they also had to buy insurance. If they bought a new vehicle and financed it, they had to have insurance, too. So they ended up almost using up their entire disposable income just to have that pickup truck.

But the other thing that came with that pickup truck was their freedom of movement. And so they always had a neighbor or someone that was willing to put a tank of gas in their truck to haul 'em to <Flagstaff> or to <Farmington> or to <Gallup> or to <Page>. And so, boy, here the pickup's goin' fifty-five miles an hour (whoosh!) past the front of the trading post, heading for town. That's where things really changed. All of a sudden we had to start competing with town. We never did have to compete with the other traders, because we weren't close enough together, and our customers didn't have transportation to go any farther than they absolutely had to.

So things changed in a hurry, so all of a sudden we're at a point now to where we have to compete with traders in town and businesses in town. And so it opened up a whole new concept in trading.

As the Navajo people started going out farther and farther into town to trade, they started not paying their bill, leaving the trader holding the bag. We still had livestock accounts, and darn, all of a sudden, you saw a truck whizzin' past the front of the store at forty miles an hour with eight bags of wool piled on the back of it. And I'll just about guarantee you those were eight bags of wool that had already been spent, that needed to be paid on their account in the trading post. And so they went on by and said, "Well, we need money right now to buy new tires for this truck, so we're gonna go ahead and sell these bags of wool in town to get somethin' we need in town, 'cause we can get it a little cheaper in there." Well, the long and the short of it is that the trader got stuck for the livestock account, so the traders quit givin' long-term credit on livestock.

It worked the same way with rug weavers. It got to where you weren't sure you were gonna get the rug anymore, so you quit grubstaking the weaver. You quit lettin' her take an advance against the rug, because her primary objective was to get all she could get for her rug, and that meant that in order to do that, she at least had to shop around. Not very often does a rug come back from town to the trading post, even if the trader was willing to give as much as she got in town, or even more than she got in town, very seldom do they ever bring it back from town, because they're in town where they want to spend the money, and so it's just easier, more convenient to sell it and do their shoppin' right then. And more than likely, the rug doesn't come back to the tradin' post because there's $300-$400 owed against it. It's put the trader in a precarious position of not being able to secure any of the accounts any longer. They're all open accounts, and with no recourse for collection.

It's changed the complexion of trading, just having the pickup truck. So that's the way these economies have clashed in so many ways, because the Navajo is still--they've got the cash in their hand, but they still have the same motivations that they did before, of that money not having any value to you, spend it. So it really changed the complexion of how much the trader could trust his customer, is what it boiled down to. To this day, I still write off thousands of dollars of credit every year that I can't collect, simply because they come in and.... Rug weavers come in and work me over. They come in and maybe I've bought every rug they've made in the last three years, and if they want an advance on the rug, I always made 'em pawn. Well, I get to know 'em well enough that they come in and they want a couple hundred dollars 'cause they've got a real critical circumstance that they need the money for, so I'll loan it to 'em. And better judgement every time tells me that if that weaver is that important to me, I would be better off to give it to her as a gift than to loan it to her, because more often than not, that ends our relationship as a trader and artist, simply because she gets behind the eight ball.

Don't get me wrong, a lot of traders say that that Indian just sits up here on the side of the hill and tries to figure out how they can get to you, how they can do one up on the trader. They're not that way, they're great people and they're wonderful people. They've got good intentions. I've known very few Navajo people that intentionally swindled you. They had every intention of doin' what was right. And their philosophy on an unpaid debt is, "What are you worried about? What are you complaining about? I'm still here, I'm still alive. Here I am. So why are you worrying?" As if to say, "Sooner or later I'm going to get around to paying you." And it's such a standard statement that there must be something there that I don't fully understand in that statement, because I've heard it so many times, exactly that way. "Why are you worried? I'm still here." In other words, "Don't start worryin' about it until I'm no longer here. When I die you can start worryin' about how you're gonna get your money." (laughs) So there has to be somethin' in that statement that I fail to really comprehend. I think I've got it figured out, but there's somethin' there that I can't quite put my finger on, because it is such a logical answer for a Navajo to give you, of just saying, "What are you worried about? I'm still here." 

Cole: When you mentioned that initially you'd take a pawn for a loan, so you actually were giving the loans for longer than thirty days then? 

Burnham: Yeah, six months. And then that's what requires if you're gonna advance to a weaver. Lots of times it's six months before the rug is done. And you see, about the time the FTC hearings came about, I moved off the reservation. I could just see.... Well, I was a little paranoid, I think, that I could see so many restrictions and controls coming down on the traders, that it was no longer going to be lucrative for a trader to be in business out there. They were talking about forcing you to give 'em a copy of all of your invoices, showing how much you paid for an item, and then they were going to tell you how much your markup could be, and things like that.

I think more than anything else, this was just some bluff talk. It's totally against the free enterprise system to fix prices. In fact, the laws about price fixing go both ways--it's not just to protect the consumer, it's also to protect the business. 

Cole: In that case, when you say "they," who do you mean? 

Burnham: We were thinking government conspiracy, BIA conspiracy, FTC--the Fair Trade Commission-- conspiracy. You have to admit that we operated in a very remote area, and we weren't necessarily up on every bit of the information all of the time. A lot of it was one trader gettin' together with another trader and sayin', "Boy, have you heard what they're gonna do to us next?!" And so these tactics, these things kind of built up. And so pretty soon we're thinking that they are going to enforce these kinds of things.

The Food Stamp Program is thinking about enforcing some of those kinds of price structuring and things like that. The WIC Program does require traders to give 'em copies of their invoices and stuff like that. They're saying that you've got to keep your markup within a certain percentile of what it cost you. These are really things I think that are really against the law. First of all, you can't take money that comes from federal taxes, which is where, I would assume, the money comes from for the WIC Program, and then selectively say who can participate in a program and who can't, and how much you're allowed to charge and how much you're not and things like that. I think those are violations of ethical business practices. If you want to enforce price controls, then you'd better do it by using usury laws and not demanding a structured markup system. In other words, where they're gonna tell you how much you can make. That just doesn't fit into the free enterprise system. 

Cole: Maybe kind of walk us through how the whole FTC thing came about, and what happened at the hearings. 

Burnham: Well, right at the first, traders were very tentative about what was happening, and intimidated by it. People were very nervous. We didn't want to be the guy on the hot seat, and there wasn't a trader on the reservation that wasn't in violation of parts of the new law the Fair Trade Commission was coming down the road with. 

Cole: And when did that law come into effect, do you remember? 

Burnham: That was in the early seventies. And when they came in with this Fair Trade Commission laws.... We had a lot of warning, there was talk about it for two or three years before it ever really came to fruition. It wasn't something that just all of a sudden they passed it in Congress and then the next day came out and enforced it. They passed it on Congress into law, and that's all it was, was law. It hadn't been implemented yet. So they started waitin' for a chance to implement it. And so what happened was some traders were very opportunistic--an opportunist to the nth degree. They would take advantage of every situation that came along to make a little money. And so they found violations here and violations there, but what they needed was one individual that they could really come down on. And so the United Traders Association had a meeting and said, "Well, are we or are we not going to defend the traders in this issue?" And what it was, it was to become a class-action suit.

Now, some of the traders were members of the Association, some were not. Some were sometimes, and some were not sometimes. Some joined when they saw something bad comin' down the pike, and would drop out of the Association when the threat was gone. And that seemed to have been the criteria that they used for saying whether or not they would defend this issue. The thing of it is, they could have come out to Dinnebito Trading Post and filed charges on us. 

Cole: What change happened? Mainly around pawn? 

Burnham: Pawn was the big focus. There was some idea about what you could and couldn't do as pawn. They didn't say per se that you couldn't do pawn anymore--they just said that you couldn't even charge as much interest as the bank charges you, because it's a secured loan, for one thing. The pawn was the most affected, and every trading post took pawn. There were many other things. You couldn't intimidate your customer into paying their bill. Or you couldn't demand that your customer had to get their check in your post office box in order to have credit in your store. And you couldn't intimidate 'em into payin' the bill, simply because.... In other words, you couldn't let 'em charge up to the full limit of their check and be in compliance with the law. And so there were a lot of these issues that really were blanket issues that had to do with every trading post on the reservation.

I, for one, felt--and I don't know, maybe I was the only one that felt that the United Traders Association should get behind it wholeheartedly. It wasn't just one trader that was brought to trial, it was several different traders. Some of 'em were just about as clean as a trader could be, but even then there were gray area issues that they were guilty of. There were other traders that were guilty of some pretty tough infractions, but I am inclined to think that the violations that they were prosecuting over were set up. They were situations where the opportunity was made available to the trader to violate it, to probably a little bit bigger degree than he normally would. So I think in settin' 'em up, the biggest case to go before the FTC was what the United Traders Association attorney seemed to think was an undefendable issue. So they said, "I don't think you want to defend that."

Well, I think it was shortsighted to take that stand, because it was something that affected Indian trading totally, regardless of who was on the hot seat. It may have been that we could have represented this individual, whoever he was. If our attorneys could have defended him, maybe they could have made it a personal violation and not a class-action suit, to where his indiscriminate behavior would have been accountable only for himself, and not for traders in general. Maybe that could have happened, had we had something to do with his defense. It was certainly, in my lifetime, the biggest thing that ever affected Indian trading.

The other big thing that's affected Indian trading is the conversion to cash, and that's the Triftway Markets. I think that it's something that has evolved in time. I don't feel any malice towards Jerry Clayton [phonetic spelling]. He will go down in history as probably being the most influential person in history.... (tape turned off and on) Anyway, what I was touching on here, was that Jerry Clayton will go down in history as having affected more change on the reservation than any other trader in history. That probably includes Lorenzo Hubbell, or J. B. Moore, or any of the famous Indian traders. And it's simply because he was in a position to convert the reservation to this flashy-lookin' convenience market operation where in today's society, probably the most important purchase that Navajo makes now is the gasoline for that pickup truck. And so they converted not just to the flashy-lookin' service station, but fast food, and potato chips and pop. They don't carry stock groceries like the necessities--the flour and coffee and sugar and all the necessities. They have been replaced by islands of every kind of candy and everything from sunflower seeds to potato chips. But, he's something to be reckoned with. He's pretty much taken charge of the reservation, as far as the type of business goes. 

Cole: And who exactly is Jerry Clayton? 

Burnham: Jerry Clayton is a man with a vision. He was working in a gas refinery and had the opportunity to buy that refinery when it was kind of an old- fashioned refinery that didn't have a whole lot of production, but it was functional, and the guy that owned it was gonna close it down and sell it out for, I understand, scrap metal prices. And somehow Jerry talked him into lettin' him buy it and pay it out, out of profits that he would continue making. I think the first thing Jerry did was buy it and then scout out a few old run-down tradin' posts that were along the highways going across the reservation, so that he could retail his own product. So it just grew, and the Navajos liked it. But what it did, it took enough of the trader's business away, that it started to get to the point to where the trader was havin' a hard time makin' a livin'. But you have to understand, the trader had just come off of this period of time in Indian trading that was the most profitable of any time, and that was the sixties when everything was so profitable. Now, the shift is kind of settling back somewhere to the middle. But the trader is seeing a downsizing in business as the convenience market sees more. And so this trader's sittin' here, and he doesn't know how to scale back down again. Even a trading post today would be so much more lucrative than a trading post was in the early fifties. But it's not anything like the heyday of the seventies. So it's just not attractive to the traders any longer, because they don't want to scale back to where they're back in a barter system again, and back into really havin' to be creative to do business. It's some of the changes we've gone through. 

Cole: What other things did the FTC decisions.... Did you actually go to the hearings yourself? 

Burnham: No, I didn't. No, I was too busy runnin' my own operation by then. By the time the hearings happened, I had already moved off the reservation to Sanders and felt like I wasn't really affected by the FTC hearings.

I guess the traders could blame the Bureau of Indian Affairs more than anybody for the FTC to have this power to enforce such ridiculous laws in pawn, because someone had gotten the idea about writing a plan for what was acceptable for taking pawn on the reservation. Nobody, nobody used that law to go by, or those rules to go by, because it was practically impossible to do pawn according to the way the BIA figured you needed to do it. Everybody stayed within a pretty standard policy of charging 20 percent interest on a pawn transaction, but then holding that pawn for six months to a year before it went dead. A lot of pawn that a trader had in his pawn vault was pawn that had been there for two or three years. It was in those good old belts and good pawn--good old treasures of families that you dealt with. The idea wasn't, "Oh, let's kill it so we can sell it." The idea was, "Let's get it back into the family's hands." The family knew that you had it in your pawn vault, and they knew you weren't sellin' it, you weren't threatening to sell it, so it was safe where it was at, so let's just leave it there. So that was kinda the way it went.

The BIA said you couldn't do it that way, you could only charge 'em 2 percent to do pawn, and then you could charge 'em 1½ percent--and I'm not sure on these percentages--but 1½ percent per month thereafter. Then if you sold it then, you couldn't sell it for less than fair market value, and you had to go back and give your customer the difference between what it went dead for and what the fair market value was. It was ridiculous.

Well, a lot of these things like that happened-- that, and the fact that you couldn't require that your customer get their check in your post office box in order to have credit. That was illegal. Just a lot of other little things that you couldn't do. And it just seemed to encompass almost everything the traders did. But they wrote those laws probably thinking they were dealing with a modern type of business. Well, Indian trading has never been what you would call the normal mode of business. There's some balance in there somewhere.

You know, I was thinking [about] Norman Rockwell's pictures that they used to have on The Saturday Evening Post magazines, and it would show the guy in the supermarket with a chicken on the scale, and the lady that's buying the chicken on the other side of the scale. They're looking at each other smiling. The grocer's got his thumb on the scale on one side, and the little old lady's got her finger under the scale on the other side, and they're just smiling at each other. (chuckles) There's a balance in there somewhere.

I've known very few traders that were downright scoundrels that I would consider as being thieves. One popular thing for a dishonest trader to do was if a check came in--like in the early sixties there was a railroad retirement adjustment of benefits that went retroactive for several years. And so the men that were working on the railroad and had been signing up for railroad retirement benefits got these huge checks. I say "huge"--for the time and everything, they were big checks, like a $2,500 check. And I know an individual that would cash those checks for those people, and a $2,500 check became a $250 check. Those are the kind of guys that needed to be weeded out, but ironically enough, I don't think any of those traders were touched by FTC or anybody else. They continued to do their outright dishonest acts, even after FTC. They were blatantly illegal before and after, and they just continued on doing what they were doing.

I would almost come out in defense of--. He's caught a lot of heat over the FTC hearings. I would be inclined to defend his position inasmuch as he was a long-term trader in an area that has always been a good area--the Navajos have always done well in that area. It was a big enough area that he always had competition. So he must have been doin' somethin' right to keep that many people as loyal customers as long as he did, and keep them on the upswing as far as their economy goes. I'd say that he's not near as bad a person as a lot of other traders have almost tried to tar and feather him. I know him, and he was probably our nearest competition for Dinnebito, but I know him personally, and I know that he's not a totally unethical person. I think that they skillfully set him up and then he took the heat for the whole thing. But I also feel like he got shortchanged as far as no defense from the United Traders Association.

It was just such an issue that it had to do with all of us, and I don't see how the Association could ever take the position that it didn't affect all of us, and that even though maybe his charges and position was not defendable, that didn't lessen the fact that we were all liable to a certain degree to the same laws. So it did affect us all. 

Cole: Were you ever a member of the Indian Traders Association? 

Burnham: You know, I never was, because I didn't have a trader's license. I was working for Elijah Blair, and he's the one that held the trader's license. Usually I went to all the meetings and everything, and never was challenged on it, until there was a real close vote one time, and I was voting our vote from Dinnebito. I was asked to leave the meeting, because I was being a little outspoken about something. It wasn't the vote whether or not to defend on the FTC--it was another issue--but I was somewhat politely told that I didn't have a vote to cast. (laughs) 

Cole: What were the meetings like? 

Burnham: A very professional-level meeting where we came in and we discussed issues and business. And it wasn't just lighthearted visiting, it was meaningful dialogue on the issues that were affecting the traders. You'd have a good attorney, have professional leadership always at the helm, and it was conducted as business. After the business was taken care of, we usually had a dance and a dinner and a social event. That was a social event. But the business at hand was what was discussed at the meetings. 

Cole: Do you remember some of those issues, other than like the FTC? 

Burnham: Railroad Retirement Board and how they were gettin' so bad about not wanting to pay railroad retirement benefits to individuals that came home without being laid off, where family circumstances were that they had to come home or something. That was one of the issues. Another issue was whether or not imitation arts and crafts should be allowed to be sold anywhere on the reservation. Just all kinds of different issues like that, that affected most of the traders. And what about the issue of whether or not traders could have permission to have a private well on their trading post lease site? The tribe's stand there is that any well on the reservation that is drilled has to be pumped and made available for everybody in the community--it can't be pumped for one household or one individual. There were a few trading posts that came with wells, but if anyone made much of a stink of it, then you had to pump that well and make the water available to everybody in the community. So just different issues like that of dealing with the BIA and discussing the lease sites and the upcoming renewals. And the tribe was posturing about how they were going to increase the lease rates, increase the percentage on the leases. Just different issues like that.

Taxation on the reservation. Taxation of the state or the county levying taxes on someone that was residing on the reservation--primarily traders. Everyone realized that the state had no right to levy a tax on a Navajo, even though he lived within the state, that state didn't have the right to levy a tax against him.

State income tax. A white person working on the reservation pays state income tax. A Navajo working on the reservation does not pay state income tax. So you see that taxation problem came into focus. Well, they finally won it, that they couldn't tax a trader on property tax when he was operating on the reservation-- for your fixtures and everything in your store. The county has an assessment on the value of that equipment in your store--I have to pay it. However, I don't have to pay it anymore now, because I am recognized as being within the exterior boundaries of the reservation, so I'm not subject to that tax anymore, even though I own the property. Those issues like that is what the United Traders Association defended.

Back in the inception of the Association, there was imitation Navajo jewelry being made, and they organized to help lobby legislation that would keep that from proliferating. 

Cole: Do you know who some of those earlier members were? 

Burnham: The earlier members of the Association? 

Cole: Yeah, the ones that maybe started it out. 

Burnham: Well, Russell Foutz was one of 'em. My father was one of 'em. Jay Springer probably was one. C. G. Wallace I'm sure was one of the original guys, 'cause he was really into Zuni jewelry. See, and it wasn't.... We have a tendency to think that it was just Navajo traders. It ended up being just almost all Navajo traders in the Association over the years, because there were fewer and fewer traders on the other reservations. And so it came into focus almost as being the Navajo Indian Traders Association.

But, yeah, they had a purpose in organizing--it never was a social club. It was always there for a purpose. They had some pretty wise management. You can imagine how wise that management had to have been to take twelve or fifteen or twenty dollars dues and end up with $250,000 pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, and pay for all of the legal counseling and all of that in the meantime. So they had some pretty wise decisions, and it was probably--I'm not sure who it was who was smart enough to buy ATandT stock when they did. I think it was ATandT stock that was what made the nest egg grow. 

Cole: Did your dad have one of those numbers, do you know? 

Burnham: Yeah. 

Cole: Do you know what number that was? 

Burnham: I don't remember what it was. And I don't think he ever really used that number, because he wasn't in an area that manufactured jewelry. He was in an area that was primarily rug weaving. I do know that they had a lead seal that went on a rug. It was a wire that went through the rug and pulled back through the lead seal, and then you'd squash it with this thing with the number on it, and it would put your number on that lead seal, and that was to guarantee the authenticity of it. But there never was much of an issue about Navajo weaving, and needing to use it on rugs. The issue was on silverwork. But yeah, he had the number. 

Cole: What was your dad's name? 

Burnham: Bob Burnham, R. B. Burnham. 

Cole: And your mom? 

Burnham: Phyllis Burnham. She came from <Cache Valley Utah>, which incidentally is where.... The prophet of the Mormon Church called my great- grandfather and his brother, my great-great-uncle, to come to <Kirtland New Mexico>, to establish a branch of the Mormon Church there. And that was how we came to this country. And then we came from Cache Valley, originally. 

Cole: What year, do you know? 

Burnham: That was in the late 1800s--I can't remember exactly when it was. I had a book that covered all of that, and I lent it to somebody and they lost it, never got it back. But anyway, they built a church there in <Kirtland>, and then the prophet told my great-grandfather, "You stay there and support the missionary effort there, and open areas of commerce and trading with the Indians." That was how we came to be Indian traders. My great-great-uncle was called to be the first bishop there, and was a bishop there. They called it Burnham Ward in <Kirtland>, and he was bishop there for thirty-some years.

My great-grandfather was trading from a wagon, and he would start in <Mancos Colorado>, and trade all the way down to <Gallup>, across the reservation and back. He'd leave <Mancos> with a wagonload of lumber. Well, he might have a wagonload of sheep pelts by the time he got to <Gallup>--or rugs or whatever. He'd load up there and head back the other way, just tradin' whatever he could trade. He wasn't selling anything to anybody for cash, I don't think. He took goods, comin' both directions. So that was how he traded, and then my grandfather first built a store at a place they call <Tsaya>, which is over by <Chaco Canyon>. And then after that he built the Burnham Trading Post. And then my father was partners with him there. 

Cole: Where was that? 

Burnham: At Burnham. It's up near <Two Grey Hills>, kind of by <Sanostee>, up in that area there. Then my father had the opportunity to buy the Bisti Trading Post, which is just about eighteen or twenty miles from Burnham. And so they kind of had a little dynasty there. He and my grandfather had the Burnham Trading Post, and then the Bisti Trading Post my father had on his own. And then I had another uncle that had Coyote Canyon Trading Post. And that whole area of the reservation right there were people just like my father and grandfather who were actually from <Kirtland New Mexico>. That's where Russell came from. And see, the thing of it is, their fathers, that settled <Kirtland> and built farms there, were farmers, but there wasn't enough land there to support extended families farming, so they ended up being Indian traders as a source of income, instead of loadin' up and movin'. A lot of 'em did move over around <Blanding> and <Monticello>, where there was farmland available, and Dove Creek and all out in there. And they ended up moving out there. But those that stayed in <Kirtland New Mexico>, their extended families became Indian traders. And so almost every trading post up on that quadrant of the reservation had a trader from <Kirtland> that was a Mormon, because they came from that Mormon stock that settled <Kirtland>.

Incidentally, the name of <Kirtland> back then was Olio, and they called it Olio because of the blending of the cultures there. There was all different cultures there, and so they called the place Olio-- later changed it to <Kirtland>. 

Cole: How long did your dad own <Bisti>? 

Burnham: Well, my father owned <Bisti> probably just about five or six years. My father was determined to not be one of the traders that lived in town, where he had his family living in town and he had to commute out to the trading post, or stay at the trading post by himself. So he sold out, and by then my grandfather and uncle had established a couple of trading posts in <Farmington>, so he went in and established a wholesale supply house to supply traders, and then got in the trucking business and pretty much stayed out of it for, oh, about eight or ten years, and then ended up going back into the business and managed the Shiprock Trading Post for Russell Foutz for two or three years, and then went to The Gap Trading Post and managed that trading post for a couple of years for Troy Washburn. By then, my father had emphysema pretty bad and wasn't able to really work very hard. And so then he ended up, because of his health, moving back to <Farmington> and reopened the old trading post in <Farmington>. 

Cole: And what was the old one? 

Burnham: Well, that was the name of it, the Old Trading Post. There's a little rug out there that was woven for my father that says "The Old Tarding Post." And the deal of it is, she just misspelled the word. When he got after her about it, she said, "What are you complaining about? It's all there, it's just not in the right sequence." (laughter) 

Cole: How many brothers and sisters did you have? 

Burnham: I've got two brothers and two sisters. 

Cole: Are any of them traders? 

Burnham: No, I'm the only trader. I really regretted to see that, because we all had been pretty much raised on or around the reservation. I think every one of us had spent a period of time in our young years in a trading post. Mine was before I went to school, and my other brothers and sisters had a stint of being in the trading post after they were in school-- some of 'em in high school and what not. And to this day, probably everybody except my youngest sister, has a very strong interest and pull towards the Navajo Reservation. And it's too bad. I feel like they should have pursued trading.

I've got a brother that today as we speak he's probably in <New Zealand> or <Australia> or <China> or <Jerusalem>. That's all he does is travel, all over the world. He's a public relations man for Duke Energy, the corporation he works for. He's very successful. I've got another brother that's a publisher. He's an editor for a publishing house in <New York>. I've got another sister that lives in <Las Cruces New Mexico>. Her husband is high up in the BLM. Another sister, her husband farms 5,000 acres in <Idaho>. Everyone's pretty much gone a totally different direction--not just physically in a different direction, but different professions and everything. 

Cole: So once you were in <Farmington> at school, were you involved in any trading activities as a youth at all? Work on the posts, or work in the stores in town? 

Burnham: A little bit in my uncle's store. He called it the Chief Trading Post. No, really not as a trader or anything. Just, you know, hangin' around and sweepin' the floor--just for a place to hang out, do something to get a strawberry pop. You know, that kind of thing. No, I was away from trading until I came back in, I guess it was 1961. 

Cole: And you went out to work with Troy Kennedy and Jewel McGee? 

Burnham: Yeah. 

Cole: What were they like to work for? 

Burnham: Salt and pepper! Just totally different guys. Troy was more excited about rugs. And Jewel was kinda the old livestock guy. I think they really had opposing philosophies of trading: Jewel's really centered around livestock, and Troy's centered in developing rug weavers. And it was really Troy Kennedy that got Desbeth Tutt [phonetic spelling] to weave those "whirling log" rugs that she's so famous for. So you really have to take your hat off to Troy and Edith as really being real strong in making something happen-- whereas Jewel, as far as being an old-time trader, Jewel was probably right up with the best of 'em. He was tight as the bark on a tree, knew where every nickel was every hour of the day, and was just totally in focus all the time as far as trading goes.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's July 17, 1998. We're with Bruce Burnham at his store, the R. B. Burnham Company Trading Post, in <Sanders Arizona>. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger, who's running the camera and sound equipment, and this is the third tape. This is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project.

We were just talking a little bit about Jewel McGee and Troy Kennedy, who were the first people you worked for. You mentioned Jewel was into the livestock end of it. What kinds of things did he do to better that? 

Burnham: Primarily what he did was he encouraged the people that had cattle to use better bulls. Every year he would bring out new blood. He'd say, "A little injection of new blood never hurt a herd of sheep." He'd bring out good rams from somewhere to sell, and a better-bred--to his notion--better-bred livestock, better Hereford bulls to mix in with the livestock that was already there. So he was into improving the grade of livestock in an area. There wasn't much any trader could do about the value of the wool. The wool was just gonna sell for "X" number of cents per pound, no matter what, because of the amount of dirt in the wool. It never was deemed as being a very good-quality wool produced on the reservation, and basically that was because of the fact that the sheep didn't graze in the high mountain meadows where there was deep grass and little sand--they were in the same terrain the year round, and that was a sandy, high-mountain desert. So there wasn't much you could do to improve the price of the wool, but you could improve the lambs by bringing in a breed of sheep that would either make the lambs bigger or healthier or thicker--basically, a heavier, better-built lamb. And white wool was always worth more than colored wool in the open market. So you wanted to eliminate the breeds of sheep that generated a lot of black sheep. There were a lot of things that he did to improve the livestock.

I don't think there ever was a trader that wanted to improve the horses on the reservation, because the horses have always been a real grazing problem on the reservation. Because of the significance of it being an acceptable display of wealth, there's always been too many horses. For every horse you see on the reservation, for all those horses you see, there's probably one out of twenty-five of 'em function, as far as having a use of riding or herding sheep on. Most of 'em are just there in these huge herds of horses, just as an acceptable display of wealth for a family. So I don't think any traders came in and tried to.... There was this fellow--I think his name was George Simpson-- he did try to import a blood line of <Kentucky> thoroughbred horse to the reservation. I think he had some children--he was not Navajo himself--but there were a lot of Simpsons. I even knew a George Simpson that was Navajo, which was probably a grandson of this original George Simpson that settled in the country back in the 1860s.

That was what Jewel did, and Jewel was always trying to get a better price for the lambs, or a better price for the cattle. He was in full support of the ranch lifestyle of the Navajo people, trying to upgrade their product. So that was what Jewel did, and pretty successful at doing it, too. Jewel had a little ranch around <Farmington> where they'd buy a lot of cattle and take and put 'em on their ranch and then sell 'em when they were fat, or when the prices came up or whatever. That was basically what Jewel was known for in his trading days. I would like to watch his interview and see how he characterized himself. And through the eyes of a twenty-one-year-old young man, he may have not been anything like I remember him being. That's kind of the reputation he had among the other traders, as having been one of those cattle/livestock-type traders. 

Cole: And what about Troy, then? 

Burnham: A lot of Troy's focus was on weaving. Troy liked to visit with rug buyers, I think is how you might describe that. There was a fellow, his name was Edwin Kennedy--no relation to the Kennedys here--but he worked for Kerr-McGee when they were mining all the uranium up around Cove, which is an area near <Red Valley>. He would stop in the trading post at <Red Rock>, and Jewel or Troy would sell him old pawn and rugs. And he became intrigued with Navajo weaving, especially pictorial weaving of the whirling log rugs that were at the time, in the late fifties, early sixties, those rugs were basically taboo to weave, and he was interested in those and bought every one of them that Desbeth Tutt made. And I think that for that reason, it really got Troy charged up and interested in weaving. Desbeth Tutt wasn't the first to weave those rugs, but she was probably one of the most famous. 

Cole: Was she doing them when you were there those couple of years? 

Burnham: Yeah. Now, see, I was only there at Red Rock just a few months. (chuckles) That was a long, rough, rutted, bad road to travel, and my wife at the time absolutely hated it at the reservation. And so there was just no way in the world that we could live there and traverse that road. What would happen, her parents would come out to visit her and she'd say, "Well, I want to go home with my folks for a little while, and you come get me." So they'd come out and get her. I don't know how she contacted them, but she could. (chuckles) It seems like on demand they'd show up. Then they'd load her up and she'd go back to <Farmington>. Then when I got tired of batchin', I'd have to go to <Farmington> and bring her back out. So she disliked it enough there, that there was just no way that we could have stayed there. 

Cole: Were you a fluent Navajo speaker at that point? 

Burnham: Oh, no, no. I don't know how many traders would make the claim that they were fluent. I don't make the claim that I'm a fluent speaker. I always seem to manage to be able to speak enough to do what I want to do, or have what conversations I do. It's not necessarily always a good idea to be fluent, or show your fluency in Navajo. For one thing--and this just might be some romantic idea I've got about it--but I've come to think or believe that when you speak in Navajo, after you've been out here thirty years, and you speak in Navajo, you're also thinking in Navajo. And when you're thinking in Navajo, whether you like it or not, you're placing yourself in that same cultural identity that a Navajo has. You're somehow taking yourself out of the cultural ideals that you have, and you're a little more apt to be susceptible to that philosophy of life that they have. I think any trader would admit to you that it is much easier to deny somebody something in English than it is in Navajo--especially if you've been around long enough to be thinking in Navajo while you're speaking, because there's a real ... philosophy there of being obligated to each other. So it's hard. Then when you turn them down in Navajo, then they can say, "Ni éí doo joobaii da," "you're an unkind person." (chuckles) You say that in English, it's water off a duck's back. But you say it in Navajo, and it has a little impact on you, if you understand it in Navajo. You know, that's really telling you where you fit in.

Navajo is a language that doesn't have profanities. You can say things in Navajo that are vulgar and not proper to say in mixed company, but it's not profanity. English is such a profane language. There are so many profanities in English, and we're so accustomed to it, that we think nothing of it. The nearest thing to profanity in Navajo, are little cliches of "that's what the coyote is called," and just little cliches that aren't really profanities. And so when you take such a humble language as Navajo and you converse in that language and you understand what you're saying in that language.... There are a lot of things that I say in Navajo that I have a difficult time translating into English. And yet when I use it in Navajo, I know what I'm sayin'. But it takes a full paragraph to explain in English, just one word. And so it's not always to your best interest to be speaking in Navajo.

One time my wife, when we first met, I was talking to someone, and she was standing there, and she didn't know it was me talking. And I was talking to an old Navajo guy, and she was listening while she was stocking shelves or something, and she turned around and she says, "I thought that was two Navajos standing there talking." (laughs) She said, "I didn't realize that was you talking to him." And she was a little bit shocked, because she'd never given it any thought about whether or not I spoke Navajo.

As far as fluency, I would be a little bashful to say that I was fluent. Certain thoughts in my thought process, especially if I'm dealing with a Navajo, I just switch to Navajo without thinkin' about it. And even when I converse with non-Navajos, there are certain things that I try to say in Navajo that get said a little bit better. And I don't know if that enters into some area of fluency or not. 

Cole: I guess by fluency, I guess I meant at what point you kind of became capable of at least dealing with the language in trading. 

Burnham: Oh, I started to become, just two or three months into trading, I started picking up a lot, because the sounds of Navajo were still familiar to me, after being five years old with a five-year-old dialogue. One time I went into a place with my mother. My father was telling me about this. He says we went into a place called the Palace Market in <Farmington New Mexico>, and I walked up and told the storekeeper there--he was just an Indian trader to me, in my eyes-- I walked up and said, "Tó »ichíí »a, Shicheii," "Give me a red pop, Grandpa. I want a red pop, Grandpa." And he thought that was so cute, and so he was teasing my mother about, "Where's your little Navi?" They called Navajos "Navis" back in those days. My father thought that was pretty cute, but my mother didn't think it was cute at all--she was a little bit offended by that.

Having had that basic knowledge of sounds, the sounds of the language, it wasn't too difficult for me to start picking up the language. It didn't take me long--especially after I became a bachelor. I started associating more and more with the Navajo people, whereas before, if I had a day off, I'd automatically just go to town. Well, after I got a divorce, I didn't necessarily go to town when I had a day off. I might stay and go help some Navajo hoe corn or work in a corn field, or go to a squaw dance or do something like that. I wasn't quite as prone to goin' to town. What I did like to do, I liked to accumulate days off, and then take a week off and go up in the mountains, fishing or something like that.

After I started affiliating more and more with the Navajos on a personal level, that's when I really started pickin' up a lot of Navajo. Like I say, after I got a divorce--I guess I was about twenty-two years old, I got a divorce--from then on my friends were all Navajos, the people that I associated with were all Navajos with the exception of a few schoolteachers in the area. So I started identifying more and more with the Navajo all the time, and it always felt so natural to me, that it was a far more compatible lifestyle for me than going to town was.

If I went to town, I was like a chicken with his head off. I'd go get drunk and raise hell and do things I wasn't supposed to do. I was much more content on the reservation. I recognized that right off when I was working out there. I had a sense of belonging on the reservation. I don't know how many traders ever had that sense of belonging there, or that same identifying it with being where I wanted to be and being home. So I don't know how the other traders would answer that.

But Navajos are a very, very pleasant people, congenial and polite and courteous. You can just make a list of ethics and go down the list and they just rate so high on so many things. They're really family- oriented, and basically really honest people. It's just when we come into that clash of that dollar bill. Even when the cash flow got started, that was where a lot of the clash started happening. Up until then, there wasn't that clash, because the dollar bill wasn't the mediator--it was the pound of wool, and ten pounds of wool equaled a pound sack of coffee. That barter system. You know, Navajos are just a wonderful people that had just as difficult a time coming to grips with the cash economy as the trader did in converting his business to that cash economy.

My career--you know, the area I would probably brag about, and not necessarily feel like I'm braggin'--had been the influence I've had with rug weavers. Even at Dinnebito, that was my input to the trading, was that I had a natural interest in the rug weaving, and the rug weaver. You become so well-acquainted with the individual you're dealing with, when you're dealing with a rug weaver, and you really develop some strong relationships, and they're pleasant relationships. And that is the thing that has held my interest, my entire career, has been my interaction with the rug weaver.

And as I left one area, when I left Dinnebito and came over here, it was like stepping into a different world, because over here I didn't have Elijah Blair to answer to, or any other trader, and I was on my own. And so the proof was in the pudding, so to speak. I could do whatever I wanted to, and if it didn't produce a livelihood, then I would have been out of business. So I've pretty much dedicated my time and effort from the time I moved here until present in arts and crafts-- not necessarily always rugs, but because during the jewelry boom of the seventies, boy, it was just like crazy. It was like shootin' fish in a rain barrel. It didn't matter what you produced, there was a ready market for it. And so I got real heavy into arts and crafts, or into jewelry.

But I always had that little nagging in the back of my mind that the weaver and the rug was really where I belonged. And so we really have had an impact on the rug weavers. I've got a rug that I want to show you after a while when we kind of sum it up, and tell you a little story about that rug.

In the late seventies there was a company producing what we call roving, and it's a carded wool that the weavers can separate then, and spin into yarn and weave with, and it's very good, produces a very uniform, finely-woven rug. And so that was a big input that the Babbitts had into the rug-weaving period. I was real strong on it too, because Lij and I had conflicting views there. Lij wanted to keep the weavers just carding and spinning their own wool and using it, and I wanted to use this roving, because it allowed the weaver to do a better finished product. So we had a little conflict there. But I was the one that was at the store all day, every day (chuckles), so I kinda won. But we converted the Dinnebito Trading Post from just a saddle blanket weaving area to a recognized quality weaving area. Lij and I both worked on that. I used to wear the knees out of my jeans, just from bein' down on the floor, lookin' at rugs, and showin' weavers where we wanted them to improve and what not. Well, by the late seventies, this roving wool was being used everywhere on the reservation, and we were starting to see some rugs we didn't know where the wool was coming from, but we started buying rugs from the <Shiprock> area that were made of a pre-spun yarn. We really didn't know the difference, and there wasn't much of a way to tell a difference, because it was the same roving that was pulled down into a weight of yarn that was good for weaving, with a machine.

Then I think it was about 1984 I found where to buy that wool, and I bought it, put in a huge inventory of it here, and I started selling it to all the other trading posts on the reservation. Well, this same wool, you know, the Foutzes had been using it for years, but they just hadn't told anybody what it was or where it was coming from. And so I kind of let the cat out of the bag and started selling it to all the traders so that weavers all over the reservation had access to it. And I became the biggest customer of Brown Sheep Wool Company, up in <Nebraska>. But I never was satisfied with the weight or the texture of the rug, so I found another mill in <Pennsylvania> that does a woolen system type carpet yarn, and that's what we sell today, and it produces a rug that has much more of the feel of hand-carded and homespun yarn. And so by then I was selling $250,000 worth of wool a year, primarily coming from Brown Sheep Company, and it took a lot of guts on my part. I don't know if I'd have the guts to make that kind of a change again--but I quit selling that wool completely. I took it out of my store, and started selling the one that we developed in <Pennsylvania>. And our wool sales went from $250,000 in a year, down to about $60,000 a year. But it's just slowly worked its way back up to where we're just about up to that old level again. That's neither here nor there.

The thing is that I feel that if there has ever been one thing that has influenced the weavers in weaving and really doing a better rug as far as the integrity of the rug is concerned, it was switching to that Wild 'n Wooly carpet yarn that we sell. And so I've had somewhat of an effect on almost every weaving household on the reservation. 

Cole: Is the Wild 'n Wooly what's being sold pretty much everywhere now? 

Burnham: Yeah. We're probably selling a little bit more Wild 'n Wooly than Brown Sheep right now. But we're getting more popular all the time. So I see it as being sooner or later we're going to really take over the yarn market on the reservation. The days of carding and spinning your own wool are past. Not every household has access to wool anymore, because there's just not enough land to support that many sheep. And if you card and spin your own wool, it's gonna take you three times as long to make a rug. And the rug you make with the pre-spun wool is gonna look better, too. So you're lookin' at a six-to-one ratio. It takes you three times as long, and you get twice as much for it. So in my calculation, that's six-to-one. So we don't encourage carding and spinning anymore. So with that, that has given me access to the weavers like nothing else I ever did, is introducing this new wool. So that has enabled me to really get into their mind, into their heads, and really develop this long-lasting relationship with them. Not a whole lot of them. But the things that I do with a lot of the weavers that weave for me almost exclusively is we influence a lot of other weavers. They end up copying what we're doing. So we end up, I think, having a major impact on rugs all over the reservation, with the exception of the yéiis and pictorials. You know, this just isn't a yéii or pictorial area, so we have very little to do with those rugs. But, we've pretty much made the Burntwater into the rug it is today. We started a revival period of the transitional period rug weaving-- you know, the chiefs' blankets and the late classic period. I think we started that revival or renaissance here. We've made the Newlands outline rug what it is today, which is the latest rug to be recognized as an area style weaving.

And yet the most exciting thing I've ever done as an Indian trader is to start the Germantown rug period over again. And that is the thing that we went back to the mill in <Pennsylvania>, which is in <Germantown Pennsylvania>, that does the Wild 'n Wooly, and we had them reproduce a Germantown yarn, a true three-ply Germantown yarn, and then with that palette of yarn and colors, we come back in and get this Germantown period restarted. And part of the excitement is teaching the weavers that part of their history about Basque Redondo, which is where Germantown weaving started. Once they get into the mindset of those weavers of that period, they become so creative and excited about what they're doing, and look how brilliant the colors are. You know, the colors are brilliant, the designs are different, and it just gets 'em excited, and it's nice to be a part of that excitement.

It's also nice, the fact is not all the traders on the reservation have access to this Germantown yarn, I've been pretty stingy with it. I haven't gone out and tried to sell it to the other traders. It was so expensive to develop that I sold half of it to Jed Foutz to defray the costs. But I vowed when I sold it to him I was only gonna sell it to one other trader other than myself, and if he wanted it, he could have it. But I also made him promise to just use it in Germantown rug reproduction. But that to me has been the most fun I've had, and the most excitement of anything I've done. Even the fringe, putting the fringe on those rugs, has really kind of stopped people and made 'em look twice, because the one rug period, weaving period, in history that fringe was acceptable, it was the Germantown period.

Well, now there's a lady that's writing an article for, I think, the Philadelphia newspaper. 

Cole: The Enquirer, or something like that? 

Burnham: Yeah. It's much the equivalent of the Arizona Highways magazine. Well, she's writing an article about that, and we got talking. I said, "You know, it's really funny, because the people that refer to themselves as the people of the second Long Walk are the people that are now doing the Germantown reproductions. It was the people that were on the long walk at Basque Redondo that did the Germantown rugs. So it's a little ironic that now these people consider themselves to be on the second Long Walk, and here they are doing a Germantown reproduction. 

Cole: Why do they consider themselves to be on a second Long Walk? 

Burnham: Because of the forced relocation of the Navajo-Hopi land dispute. And you know, most people aren't aware of the fact that Basque Redondo, or the original Long Walk, that's what it was, it was a relocation. They rounded up the Navajos and incarcerated them there, held them there, not as a sentence that they were imposing on them, that they were going to keep them there so many years and then turn them loose. They picked them up and brought 'em there and were going to hold them there just long enough to round up the Apaches also, who were the other tribe that was givin' everybody a pain in the hindside. So they were gonna get 'em both there at Basque Redondo, and then they were going to march 'em over land, by foot, all the way to the Oklahoma Indian Territories, and that's where they were gonna relocate the Apaches and the Navajos. That way they could get 'em all together, all the problem Indians that they were havin' problems with. They were gonna get 'em all together, and then they could take care of their problem that way.

You know, we were in the middle of a civil war at the time, they didn't have the resources to take care of these people. They were dyin' like flies with all kinds of disease. Venereal disease was rampant at Basque Redondo. These are all things that.... It wasn't the Navajos that brought those things to the camp, it was the scalawag military guys. And so the Navajos had sunk to their very lowest point in their history. But had it not been for the Civil War, they probably would have been taken care of a least well enough to keep 'em alive, and then transported to <Oklahoma>. So we came close to havin' this conversation in <Oklahoma>, had it not been for the Civil War.

To see the Navajo people catch onto that, and get that mindset is really somethin'. But then, you see, after they were turned loose and they came back home, that left such a scar in their mind of how bad things could be, that they never raided or made war again against the United States government or the territories. So these people that were forced to relocate from the Navajo-Hopi land dispute, or the FJUA is what we call it now, the Former Joint Use Area--when they were forced to relocate from there, they started sendin' 'em to <Phoenix> and <Flagstaff> and <Durango> and <Farmington>, and all these towns all around. They were buyin' 'em homes there. It wasn't workin' out. So they got this idea of buying all this ranch land that adjoins the reservation here, and turning it over for relocation. And it's been, I would say, the most successful phase of relocation in the history of the dispute. But it was forced on them, so for that reason they do kind of feel like they've been forcibly relocated, so they identify with the Long Walk. This, in their terms, is the second Long Walk. The irony of it was just, you know, I'd never even thought of that, until that lady brought that up. She said, "Well, you know, here you are. Here you have the people on the second Long Walk doing a Germantown reproduction." And this is the first Germantown renaissance to happen since 1900. Since it died out, this is the first renaissance period we've had in that Germantown weaving.

I could sit here and talk to you all afternoon about Navajo history. It was my wife's great-great- grandfather that really caused the Long Walk to happen-- the original Long Walk. He was the chief of a band of Indians over around Mt. Taylor, and it was him that kept going out and raiding on these raiding parties in retaliation for the fact that the government wouldn't enforce the treaty to protect the Navajos--they only enforced it to protect the people from the Navajos. So the Spanish people, the Mexicans, would herd their sheep and livestock onto the Navajo Reservation. So in retaliation for that, my wife's great-great-grandfather would go and steal some of their kids and sell 'em as slaves, and stuff like that.

In doing this Germantown period, I did a lot of research: research for the type of yarn, research for the all the colors and everything, and researched the history of Germantown. In doing that, I uncovered all this history about my wife's great-great-grandfather, a man that was known to the military as Antonio Sandoval. His Navajo name is Hosteen Kishkoli [phonetic spelling]. It means "the man with the club foot." That's such a strong, revered name among the Navajos, that her family, about half of 'em, still carry that name Kishkoli. It was really gratifying to me to find this bit of history about her side of the family. Since then we've come to suspect that she's also related to Lorenzo Hubbell. So it's interesting. I was always quick to brag about being a fourth- generation Indian trader. Well, in fact, my wife is also. And another thing that intrigued me was the fact that my great-grandfather and her great-great- grandfather may have traded together, because that was the route that my great-grandfather traded on, was that route down by the west slopes of Mt. Taylor, down to <Chaco Canyon>. And that was where his people lived, was right in there. So it's highly likely that our great- grandfathers traded together. 

Cole: Were you married in a traditional ceremony? 

Burnham: Yes, we were. 

Cole: What was that like? 

Burnham: Now, there's some pictures that I would like to dub into this tape, and we've probably got 'em here. Yeah, it was great. It was the most meaningful thing that ever happened to me in my lifetime. In a Navajo wedding, the total focus is on the man, not the woman. The woman is coached and everything by her mother and aunts beforehand. The man is brought to the wedding, and then the entire focus of that wedding is on the man, understanding what he's getting himself into. Because she doesn't become part of your family. Your parents don't acquire a daughter-in-law, they only lose a son. Her family gains a son-in-law that is like a worker ant. He becomes obligated to serve that family, because his children will be part of her family, not part of his family. Your children are a part of your wife's family. And so they want to make sure that you understand what your responsibilities are. And probably for me, even more so than most, because they weren't leaving anything to chance in explaining it to me.

And it was all done in Navajo, and I thought it was beautiful. Right at the beginning of the ceremony, the medicine man asked--and he was fluent in English--he says, "Should we do this in English, or in Navajo?" And this Navajo, his name was Bruce Arthur, he was there, and he jumped up and he said, "Hey, do it in Navajo. He's just a white Navajo." (laughter) And I thought that was a compliment. So they did the entire wedding ceremony in Navajo. I think being done in Navajo gave it more meaning, because of the language. The language is so much more beautiful. The Navajo language is a very prayerful, beautiful language. And so I think that I was lucky to have had that ceremonial wedding. And Lij hired a photographer from Cortez to come down and take pictures at that wedding.

Well, anything else? 

Cole: What do you see as the future of Indian trading? 

Burnham: The future of Indian trading, I think, is going to swing more and more in line with rug weaving and arts and crafts. The traders are no longer going to be general merchandise Indian traders as we've known 'em, but they're going to become specialized traders of dealing in arts and crafts. The trading posts, as a trading post, is doomed, and we're on the last legs of it now.

Someone referred to me as a mustang the other day, and I said, "Well, what do you mean?" And he said, "Well, you're a dying breed." We truly are. And we're just one of many, many businesses in the <United States> that have made the crossover into the computer age and not survived it. It was more pronounced for us, because we went from seeing our customers riding in a wagon to data processing, in forty years. That's a tremendous change. It hasn't been that long since I've seen Navajos coming into the store in a wagon.

And just the other day my wife and I were driving across the reservation, it was about ten o'clock at night, and we were driving along and feeling a little melancholy, I guess, and we were thinking about what it was like to look out there and see a street light at a hogan, with three pickups parked there--no wagon in the yard, and a bright light inside the hogan window. When you interview my wife, you ought to ask her about, mention about what she felt like when she realized that that was an era that was gone. She became quite melancholy about it, and reminiscent of days when she would come in from herding sheep all day, and come over the hill and come into view of the hogan and see a wisp of smoke coming up through the smoke hole at the top of the hogan, and see the warm glow of a kerosene lamp in the window, and just smelling that smoke. She could also, in her mind, smell some ribs cooking over the coals inside the hogan, and the coffee boiling over, and the smell of the fry bread being made.

That's one of the real warm moments I have to remember about my wife, is that recollection of what life was like. Just that simple thing of how she felt when she saw a hogan, and how alarmed she was now to realize when we're driving across the reservation to see all these street lights and satellite dishes. (laughs) That's in a short space of time that they've gone [from] a battery-operated radio that took a battery--a big square battery like that, to operate. Not a car battery, but a regular, we call 'em waterless batteries now, and waterless radios. You had to string a big antennae for it and everything. But they went from that to a satellite dish in such a short period of time, in a thirty-year time, twenty-year time, for a lot of 'em. And to think of how that has affected their lifestyle, being caught between those two. The availability of our world, and still caught in the cultural identity of their world. So it's been quite a switch. 

Cole: What kind of an impact do you see this having on their culture? 

Burnham: I see the young Navajos today as really being between a rock and a hard spot, so to speak. They've shed their traditional ways, and they're not quite able to fit into this idealistic picture that they've been shown on TV or in school. They've seen that carrot dangling out at the end of the stick. Well, they can't quite get their hand on it. And in order to get their hand on it, they're going to have to sever ties with the reservation and the culture that they were raised in, in order to compete in that dominant society that has all those candied apples and cotton candy and all the glitz and glamour of modern technology.

So I see the reservation as being two generations away from losing the language right now. When that language is lost, the Navajo people are going to become a generic tribe of Indians. They're going to be part of the "Powwow Indian Group," of just Indians that want to maintain Indian identity. They can't get it from their cultural background anymore, so they're going to get it in the urban areas from other Indians from just wherever, but they're still going to be Indian, they're going to be a generic Indian, because when they lose their language, that's when they're going to lose their cultural identity. When they lose that--I think that when they lose that cultural identity, that's when we're going to be threatened with the fact that rug weaving is a dying art, because it's the cultural identity that keeps the weaving alive today. It's not a matter of economics. So if it dies, it's gonna die from within. From without, it's a healthy trade, and a healthy interest of people knowing what Navajo rugs are, and appreciating them for what they are. So it will become a dying art when it ceases to be a part of their cultural identity.

My wife remembers going to bed at night to the sound of that (tapping) tap of packing the wool in a loom, and waking up in the morning to that same sound of her mother getting up early and weaving a little bit before her day starts. So those are sounds that make an impact on a child. When that child grows up then, and their earliest memories are that of being strapped in the cradleboard and leaning up against the wall of the hogan and listening to the mother weave, that rhythm of that weave become so ingrained in 'em that it gives 'em an aptitude or inclination to be a weaver when they grow up. When that ceases to exist, they will cease to become weavers. So we could very well be in the last stages of Navajo weaving as we know it today. And it's not because of any other thing than that of the loss of the.... It's not the loss of sheep that's gonna bring it to an end--it'll be the loss of a way of life and a cultural identity that does us in. Well, the statement was made that as a language goes, so goes the culture. I've been on a soap box, kinda preachin' for the last couple of years, because I feel that we're not just talking about the demise of the trading post, or the trading post ceasing to exist--we're talking about a whole group of people ceasing to exist as a culture. And what we've got here is we've got 250,000 Navajos that because of the Indian Self-determination Act, they have the ability to control all the curriculum in their schools. And the reservation is a large enough land mass, and there are enough schools and enough people, that they could really have an impact on the survivability of the Navajo people as a unit of people if they would require Navajo language, history, and culture as a required subject from "K" through twelve. They could do it in one class a day from kindergarten through the twelfth grade. They could teach the language--that's reading and writing the language--plus the history and the culture of the Navajo people, all in teaching the language.

All while they're teaching the language, they could also be teaching the.... All they'd have to have is the curriculum about their history of the Navajo people, and their culture, and they could graduate students that were totally fluent in two languages, with no effort whatsoever. The only effort required would be the initial upstart of creating the curriculum. They've got Navajo teachers that speak Navajo now in every school on the reservation. Just think of the impact that could have on 250,000 Navajo people, when they're just this close--that's one generation--they're that close to losing the language now.

If they lose the language, they lose their cultural identity. They've already lost a great deal of it, but nothing like they'll lose in the next twenty years, if they don't get a handle on the problem right now. So I see that as being the end of trading, the end of Navajo people as they exist today as Navajos. Sure, they'll still be Navajo people, but they'll be just another ethnic group of people, they won't really have the strength of being a different people. And it's already happening. You see it more and more every day. When you go to <Los Angeles>, there's a huge population of Navajo people that live in <Los Angeles>, and when you see 'em, you don't see 'em talking Navajo, you don't see 'em speaking Navajo, you don't see 'em interacting as Navajos. You see 'em at powwows interacting with other Indians, just with the sole purpose of being Indian. And that's where it's headed. And we're going to end up with this huge generic tribe of Indians, and they're going to call it the Powwow Tribe.

I already have a brother-in-law that says that he wants his kids to be traditional. That's why he encourages them to go to powwows and stuff. Powwow is the most unoriginal thing to ever have, the most untraditional. It's just a modern adaptation to something that the Navajos never did believe, they never did participate in it. It just came along at a convenient time. So there are some things that play right now on the reservation that are going to play out regardless of the trader's position, and it's going to be sad to see a whole era and way of life come to an end for so many people. And for a trader that spent thirty years in an area, you develop a kinship to the people, and that's what you hate to see happen, is the end of that culture that you've been adopted into.

You know, in making a closing statement here, I would tell you that traders, in my opinion, deal by decades. The first ten years of your career you spend learning how to be a trader and learning how to turn a maximum profit on every deal you make. The second ten years you're on the reservation or in the area, you begin to lighten up a little and see the broader picture. You're not quite as motivated by profit as you used to be. You're getting to where you're a little bit more concerned with the community and the members of the community. Well, by the third [decade], you've got a lot of kids that are calling you grandpa and you're a respected member of the community. And so more and more of the liability of that falls on your shoulders. It becomes a liability at a certain point. And so you even begin to pay less attention to the bottom line, and more into just what's good for all of us.

The fourth decade--that's forty years--by then, you're locked into it, you're at home, you're right where you feel at home. Most of your customers you've helped raise, everybody refers to you as being Grandfather or Grandpa--you're the community's grandpa. By then you're starting to give back some of the treasure that you amassed, you're starting to feed it back into the community, just as a humanitarian interest you have in those people that you've become such a part of. And then there's the trader that stays five decades. In that fifth decade he gives it all back, he dies broke, but he's happy because he had a great life where he was at, enjoyed his affiliation with all those people, and had no qualms about feeding it all right back into the community again.

That might be quite a bit exaggerated, but I think you could apply that to almost every trader. And you could find the trader, like old Jim McJunkins [phonetic spelling] that spent fifty-some years on the reservation. Very successful trader, but at different levels. His success was measured differently. And when he finally left, he didn't have anything. He didn't leave, he died while he was there. I tried to buy his store one time. We got down to the bank to close the deal, and he got up, nervous, and walked around, and came back and he said, "Bruce, I can't sell it to you. I've got no place to go. There's no other place for me to go. I've been there fifty years and I've got no place to go. That's home to me. I'm sorry. If I owe you something for your discomfort or for the trouble you went to, I'll pay you, but I can't leave." And his wife had Parkinson's disease, and they had no desire to be anywhere else. So that's when I came to realize.... And he'd spent all of his career at that one place. So you can imagine what a part he was of that community.

And it's kind of a sobering thought, to think of it in those terms, but basically, that's what it is. If you see a trader that was in an area twenty years, he was pretty successful and left with a pocketful of money. One that was thirty years, he was real successful and he still had a pocketful of money. But when you start seeing the traders that stayed in an area forty and fifty years, you started seeing traders like Jim McJunkins or the Smouses out at <Borrego Pass>. They just end up staying so long that it all just finally just turned in on itself and funnelled right back to whence it came. And that's always intrigued me about traders, of how some of 'em got out there and got caught up in what they were doing, and unbeknownst to them, they just really became Navajos in every aspect of the word.

[END TAPE 2, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're in <Sanders Arizona>, at the R. B. Burnham Company Trading Post with Bruce Burnham, and we're interviewing him about his days as an Indian trader. Also in the room is Lew Steiger, who's running the camera equipment. It's July 17, 1998, and this is tape [side] number four. 

Burnham: Well, in summing up my interview, I would like to tell you a story about my grandfather. My grandfather's name was Roy B. Burnham. As you probably have figured out by now, I'm Roy B. Burnham, III. My father was also Roy B. Burnham. So what happened was, there was one instance where a lady came into the trading post at Burnham and she asked my grandfather if he would take her husband to town with him on Saturday when he went in to get his weekly supplies, and take him in to the Mission Hospital that was on the south side of the river in <Farmington>, for treatment, that he was pretty sick. So my grandfather said, "Yeah, I'll do it."

The main reason that my grandfather agreed to do it was because he understood where the lady was coming from. They had a new hogan and her husband was about to die, and if he died in that hogan, they would have to knock a hole in the back side of it and vacate the hogan and build a new hogan. So as a matter of economics for his customer, he decided he'd take the man to <Farmington>, so he could die at the Mission Hospital instead of at home. Well, the long and the short of it was that my grandfather took him to town and took him over to the Mission Hospital, whereupon they examined him and figured that he wasn't so far gone that maybe he wouldn't respond to treatment. So they sent him away to a sanitarium and cured his tuberculosis.

Two or three years later, the man came home, and soon after that, his wife came in with a rug and she told my grandfather, "Here, this rug is for you," and unrolled it on the counter, and he took a look at it and had a fit because it had a picture of the trading post and his name written across the bottom of the rug. And he said, "Are you crazy? Who do you think is ever going to want to buy a rug with my name on it like that?! You should never do something like that!" and just went on and on. Finally she told him, "I didn't do this rug to sell to you. I did it because of what you did for my family." In essence, what she wanted to do was to show her gratitude for him taking her husband to town, and then the fact that he was cured and came home. So she was just full of gratitude towards my grandfather about what he'd done for their family. So at that point my grandfather started negotiating, trying to get the rug, and she said, "No, you don't like the rug, so I'm going to take it home and I'm going to unravel it, and I'm going to reweave it into a rug that you will like, because I want to give it to you as a form of appreciation, of gratitude." Well, he went on and on and on, finally ended up buying the rug, and even gave more than the going price of rugs to get it. (laughs) So that rug has a lot of meaning in our family. Not only did he end up paying more for the rug, but he also learned a lesson in dealing with people.

Before he died, I saw a journal entry in a diary-- either his diary or ledger, or else something that my grandmother wrote about him--and he said that at that point he began to realize that the only difference between the Navajo and us--or "between them and us" is how he put it--was purely circumstance--that they had all the same feelings of gratitude and thanks and love and everything that we do, and that the only difference is just circumstances, that they are not as well educated, we don't speak the same language and everything, and yet we still have those same human feelings, no matter what culture we identify with. And so that really did have an effect on my grandfather's trading days and how he traded with the Navajo people. He had much more respect for them after that. That's why that rug means so much to our family. It's important that we understand that that's what the differences are, is only that we're from two different cultures, and not ... we're not, you know, the same, you know, made from the same mold. That's it.



