NAU.OH.95.22B

164887B

Michael Collier (Part 2)

Interviewed by Karen Underhill

May 15, 2014



Underhill:  So way back when you first began to fly-and I am curious, and you’ve described this just a bit-about the intersection of your photography and your flying, and your writing, and medicine.  But tell us about when you started flying.  Obviously you’ve had some great flights in your plane, and I believe you’ve had an engine experience yourself.

Collier:  Yeah, I had a great experience in February.  I got my sixth engine put in.  You put 1,500-1,600 hours on an engine, you have to buy a new one, or get it rebuilt.  And I just put my sixth motor in.  On the fourth motor, I thought I’d heard something.  I took my mechanic-he didn’t hear it-and I said, "Jay, there’s something wrong with it."  It was only 1,200 hours into the time between overhauls.  I said, "Tear it down."  And he found a frozen crankshaft counterweight, which was the problem-kind of at the heart of the motor.  But my first engine was an O-470-J.  This is a 1955 airplane and a 1955 motor.  It was a lousy, rotten motor.  The "J" had a configuration of cylinders that was just not good, it overheated.  And one of the exhaust valves needed to be replaced.  And the mechanic out at Mack near Grand Junction, put it on, and I was going to <Denver>, I was going over to a meeting at University of Colorado, Denver Medical School.  There had been some radio chatter as I went up the west side of the Rockies about a plane down.  And I kind of picked out where it was, and it was maybe thirty, forty miles south of my route, but I had time, so I bent down that way.  And just as I was cresting the Rockies, just over the top of 'em, I heard this kind of metallic rapping sound, "bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam."  I thought, "What’s that?!"  I pulled the power back a little bit, and the noise went away, down to like 15 percent power.  And I’m starting to glide, but it’s a slow glide.  "What was that?!"  And then not two minutes later, the sound came back.  Imagine taking a screwdriver to a metal can, "bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang," really loud sound.  It was back.  And I pulled the power back to about 5 percent.  It kind of went away, and all of a sudden the cockpit filled up with smoke, and I thought about stepping out for a walk.  The smoke cleared, and I realized....  I learned more in those....  It took about five minutes for all this to transpire, because I was up at 13,000 feet.  Maybe longer, maybe eight minutes.  But I’d burned up about three or four of those minutes thinking, "I can see <Denver>.  I’m sure I can make it." Chris and I had flown all over the West in his plane, and we had always practiced....  There’d be this really snarfy grin on the other guy’s face as he pulled the power back and said, "You just lost your motor."  And so we were practicing all the time what do to.  So that was a good thing.  So it took me three or four minutes to actually bite into the idea that this was it, I was goin’ down, I couldn’t just wish my way out of this one.  It’s right up there with Wesley telling me, "Pray to the river."  It was this realization that, "You’ve got to do this, and you have exactly zero alternatives," I thought.  There was a piece of road.  The elevation of the road was 8,500 feet, and I’m guessing the road was 900 feet.  There were trees on both sides, it’s in the forest.  But I thought, "I think my wingtips will fit inside there.  And I set up to land on it.  And there’s a little dogleg in it, but I could handle that.  And I had set up kind of a dogleggy final so I could go out if I needed to, or tuck in if I had to run for it, if I misjudged my elevation.  And at 500 feet, a person pulled into the middle of the road, out of the forest.  There was a maybe 600-foot meadow immediately beneath me.  Without thinking-not really thinking-I put the plane into a 135-degree right-hand turn.  That’s 45 degrees beyond vertical.  There was a hill here, and there were limber pines kind of raking across the windshield, no power, and I’m just diving, pulling, trying to get underneath myself.  And right here, this thought came up.  Instead of thirty frames a second, now we’re operating at one frame a second.  I thought, "You could get hurt doing this."

Underhill:  (laughs)  That’s the voice.

Collier:  I thought, "That’s a really, really dangerous thought.  I’m gonna put that thought back on the shelf, and I’ll get back to that."  And so I came around, and I tucked under, and I landed in this field.  I got out of the plane, and I didn’t know what had happened, I had no idea.  What had happened was the exhaust valve guide that had been replaced had been a Ford motor part that had been slipped into the aeronautics stream, and it was worthless, and it blew up.  The valve went sideways, it tore the head off a cylinder, the cylinder tore the wall apart.  All the smoke was when all the engine oil went up against the mufflers.  It wasn’t good.  The engine was destroyed.   But the only damage to the air frame happened the next day when the cows came up and rubbed up against it. And so I was supposed to be at this meeting at four o’clock.  I forgot to mention, back up at 12,000 feet, I called Denver approach, and I said, "Denver approach, this is 4696 Bravo.  This is May Day!  I am goin’ in, I don’t got a motor."  And Denver approach-I can’t believe this-said, "96 Bravo"-and they gave me another frequency.  They said, "We'’re busy."  Busy frequency, all these bigger planes than I was, going into Denver International, or whatever it was.  I guess it was Denver International by then.  But I was so proud that I kept my thoughts to myself.  I knew where I was, I gave them how many nautical miles I was off the Denver 210 radio, and I just (snaps fingers) broadcast them to 'em and said, "I’m goin’ down.  See ya’ later."  And I just turned the radio off.  I don’t need these guys.  But another plane had gone down, and there was a news helicopter out looking for that other plane.  And minutes after I landed, the most beautiful woman in the world stepped out of this news helicopter.  She was the Voice of KOA or something, and started interviewing me.  And I just thought, "This is a strange day."  I asked the pilot for a ride, but we were too high, he didn’t have the lift to take me out of the field.  So I hitchhiked and I just made it into the meeting at four o’clock.  My boss said, "Hi.  I thought you’d have been here earlier."  He had come over from Grand Junction.

Underhill:  Oh my gosh.  Now, with your photography, you started with people in Mexico, and then obviously kind of discovered landscapes, which you knew something about.  How do you capture your images, and tell us a little about your process.  Peter mentioned to me at lunch the other day that your images, many of them, the ones you chose to keep, look like paintings.  So I know there’s something about the light, that you hit the magical moment, but maybe you could talk a little about when you’re up there flying, what you’re looking for, how you do it.

Collier:  Karen, if you haven’t figured it out by now, it’s all about stories.  For all of the geology pictures that I’ve taken, I still really love photographing people.  Finding the right light, giving people room enough to be themselves, is to me what it’s all about.  I spent many, many, many, many, many weeks in <Mexico>.  I’d take a train, take a bus, down to some town-<Tepic Mexico> <Guadalajara>, <Oaxaca>, <Mexico City>, Tehuantepec, <Hermosillo>-and I would just wander around for a day, or usually three, four, five days, two weeks, and just photograph people, and just trying to give people room enough....  I was six-foot-two-I’m six-foot-one now-with a body like this you have to be aware of your presence.  In medicine, I loved having medical students, and I didn’t have anything to teach them, really.  They had all these specialists in <Tucson>, but we’d always have third-year students up, and what I taught 'em was, "How are you with people?  How do you interact with people?  How do you touch people?"  You know, these silly students would take their stethoscope and hold it up against the back.  "Don’t do that!  Put your hand here, and use this opportunity to transmit care.  Always, if you’re six-foot-two, sit down.  Don’t ever stand over anybody.  Listen."  I had learned that in the seventies in <Mexico>.  I learned it in 1980, doing a series on people who had changed landscape.  I brought it into medicine and it served me well:  the interaction of wanting an image of somebody, but giving them something in return.  John had taught me that.  You don’t take a picture, you give a picture. You asked me what cameras I use.  I love my cameras.  I have an Arca Swiss, which is like the Ferrari of cameras.  I had three Pentax 645s, I loved those cameras.  I don’t know how many Nikons I’ve owned.  I shoot Nikons now.  Those tools are wonderful.  And if you think the cameras are bad, try the airplane!  It’'s a 1955 Cessna 180.  I love tools.  But it’s really the stories, and the people contact that they give you.  Sitting with Jene Vredevoogd for a month, side-by-side, photographing glaciers of <Alaska> in this too-small cockpit.  All of the time spent photographing people....  And the cameras are important, but it’s the stories that they tell. I remember I was in <Antarctica>, and I had, for weight reasons, just brought 35 millimeter Nikons.  And I just thought, "How in the world am I going to capture <Antarctica>?  It’s this huge, incredibly white place."  And I was in love with <Antarctica>.  I really, really loved what I was seeing there.  And I thought, "My God, I’ve got a piece of celluloid this big, and how am I ever gonna capture <Antarctica> on that piece of celluloid?"  And I had this ah-ha moment and I realized, "You don’t capture anything.  You’re making a lens through which people see the world, and they’re going to project their own light through that image.  You’re shaping what they’re seeing, but they’re bringing their own sense of what is being seen, their own history of what they’ve seen, to the image."  The tools are nice, but it’s the people’s stories and people’s inclinations, people’s own history, that you’re trying to capture.

Underhill:  I had to ask earlier-and I’m just backing up for a second-does Rosie fly with you?

Collier:  Well, ever since the dandruff of mortality landed on her shoulders, she really tries not to.

Underhill:  And so in terms of your projects, both with Rosie and on your own, what has been your favorite project to date?

Collier:  We did a book on the mountains of Arizona, took two years to do it, 180 days out camping, a little bit of aerial photography, a lot of ground photography.  That’s why I got the Arca Swiss view camera.  The idea is, from the vantage point of these ten mountains around the state, what can you see?  And so Rosie wrote it and I photographed it.  We just wandered.  It was wonderful.  It is always so good to work with Rosie because she tells me what pictures to take, and I say, "Well, go get your own damned camera."  (laughter)  And I tell her what to write, and you can imagine the response.  But I’m humbled.  She and I just did a really amazing trip on the Mississippi.  We went to <Paducah> and we took a barge, a towboat, down from <Paducah> to <Helena Arkansas>.  It was for one of these Pearson fieldtrips.  I was doing a piece about the Mississippi, and I thought, "Well, I’ve seen it from the air.  I want to see it from the river, and I’m damned well not gonna go on some silly cruise."  So we talked the Ingram Barge Company into taking us.  But Rosie was great.  I was up in the wheelhouse constantly pestering the captain, the pilot, what he was doing, how he was reading the river.  We were listening to the deckhands, photographing them.  But Rosie had the most wonderful questions, wonderful observations.  One of the captains-they changed crews midway on our stay-I think he had a crush on Rosie.

Underhill:  You didn’t throw him overboard, though.

Collier:  It would have been the wrong thing to do.  He let Rosie drive the boat, this 9,000-horsepower towboat.  It was fun.  But it’s using photography as a way to get into situations that you wouldn’t otherwise have access to.  It’s been a great key to getting places. I can’t tell you, Karen, what my favorite project was.  I don’t know.  I’ve published seventeen ... fifteen? ... I don’t know ... books.  I’ve lost track.  There was the Grand Canyon one.  Geology of Capitol Reef was my favorite because it got me out of medical school.  I did it during those first two years, and I just disappeared for four days-go up and hike another canyon.  Or was this series that I did on Over the Mountains, Over the Rivers my favorite?  I don’t know.  It’s an ongoing stream of good projects.

Underhill:  You’ve said-I think it was an NPR interview-that you and Rosie are "people of books and words, and not so much technology."  But you have created an i Pad application, so where do you see technology headed with your work?

Collier:  I can’t say I’ve embraced technology.  And by technology these days I mean the domineering electron.  I was doing a book on climate change in <Alaska>, and I was madly scurrying to get film for it.  This was three, four years ago.  I called <New York>, <New York>, <New York>, I called <Atlanta>, I called <Chicago>, <Chicago>, <Chicago>.  I called <Dallas>, I called <Phoenix>, I called <Los Angeles>, <Los Angeles>, <San Francisco>.  All these other places just said, "No, we don’t have any of that film that you need."  It was Fuji Velvia 50 ASA, 2¼ -220 film.  It’s the only film there is.  It was incredibly beautiful film.  In <San Francisco> when I called, they said, "What is film?"  And I finally found some rolls of it in <Seattle>, and so I used it for a project I was doing.  Mostly that climate change in <Alaska> book-I forget the title to it-maybe it was Climate Change in <Alaska>, I don’t know.  Oh!  The Melting Edge-I’ve been cursed with bad titles all my life-was digital.  I just shoot digital now, and I’ve learned to love it.  I have these Nikons, a D 700, a D-3S, a D-800-a ridiculous array of cameras-and I just love them.  I shoot with the D-800 and it has a sound and a feel when it goes off.  I know that every one of those 36 million pixels are just going to be perfect.  You use cameras. I was in <Trujillo Peru>, and I was doing a book on-it was with Bob Webb, and University of  Arizona published it.  It was called Floods, Droughts, and Climate Change.  I’d gone to the Mampuesto Cemetery, because the year before, the El Niño of  ’97-’98 had wiped out <Trujillo>.  The Andes just explode during El Niño years.  And it’d eroded out the cemetery, and it was in a really poor part of town.  I’d hired this lovely woman named Clara Bravo to be my guide, a tiny woman.  And she just barely spoke English.  She was game to go anywhere.  She had a little Volkswagen we drove around in.  We went to the Manpuesto Cemetery because it had eroded out during the El Niño year and had coffins bobbing down through town.  It was just such a compelling image, so I thought, "I’ve gotta go see it."  And it was in a really poor part of <Trujillo>.  I photographed for a while, and suddenly Clara was kind of pulling my sleeve, "Man, Miguel, we gotta go."  And she was looking around.  I’m dripping Nikons, and there are some really poor, really tough people starting to move in on us.  I kind of shook Clara off, looked around, and found these three guys, the meanest, nastiest of 'em, and I went up there on this dike-the dike had broken, that’s how the flooding had really started-and I walked up to them and I thought, "These are the ones who are gonna take my cameras," and I started photographing them.  And initially they were just growling, and then they started to kind of pose.  It’s that body language stuff, and it was just so cool to use the camera as a tool.  They’re good tools.  I still have most of those.  Those are film Nikons.  I still have most of those.

Underhill:  So let’s chat for a minute about the Colorado Plateau.  Oh! and you had a story.

Collier:  I was just going to make a self-observation that I apologize because I’m incapable of answering questions directly.  They’re stories.  I don’t have answers, I’ve got stories.

Underhill:  Stories are the best.  So why <Flagstaff>?  Why did you come back, why do you stay, and then what in general do you love about the Colorado Plateau?  Why is it home?

Collier:  Brophy was a wonderful high school.  Most of the students were better off than average, and most of them aspired to fancy colleges, and I said, "Well, hell, I’m just gonna go to a state college."  And my parents were able to pay for state tuition.  That was wonderful that they could.  And so I came here.  I always say that <Flagstaff> is like a big slippery bowl:  you try to climb up, you make it up, and then you slip back in.  I went away for the Air Force, and I went away for a total of about a year in <Santa Fe>, and I went away for graduate school, and away for medical school, and away for residency.  I call it my time off for good behavior.  But I’ve always come back.  It’s friends.  Karen, you’ve been here a long time-how long does it take you to walk across downtown?  Two hours?

Underhill:  (chuckles)  It depends on the time of day.

Collier:  Yeah.  If it’s three in the morning, you might be able to just walk.  But if it’s one in the afternoon, it’s gonna take you two hours to walk across.  There’s so many good people here.  There are people from all the walks, from the USGS, and from geology, and from the library here, from NAU.  There are people from the photography community.  You run into Scott Thybony at the library, and shoot, there goes another hour!  <Flagstaff> is people.  Rosie’s coming back right now, this afternoon, from a month in the Smokies.  We drove out together and did that Mazippi River trip, and then she continued for another couple of weeks in the Smokies, and she’s just getting back.  And she’s bringing her brother from <Memphis>, and her sister-in-law, and we will take them on a picnic, and we will go out to <Wupatki>, and they’ll say, "What national forest?!"  You know, it’s an acquired taste, it’s the openness. I did a book on the geology of Denali.  Oh! that was heaven!  After residency I treated myself to a book on Denali, and I talked them into wanting to do it.  It’s still their geology book.  I did it in ’88, geology for lay people.  And they were really stupid, they gave me the key to their gas tank.  I’d flown my plane up there, and I lived under the wing.  I always camp under the wing, rarely succumb to hotels.  I’d gone feral, I was living under the wing.  I was up there for two and a half months.  Rosie bought our home here in <Flagstaff> while I was up there.  I didn’t really understand why I was relating so well to Denali.  I really loved it.  And I realized, oh, it’s open, that tundra was just wide open.  I came back, I started doing that locum tenens work, but I’d simultaneously started doing a book on the geology of Death Valley.  And the geology there is amazing.  If you ever want to see geology, it is Death Valley.  It took me months to acclimate.  I couldn’t relate to that moonscape.  I realized I’d related instantly to Denali because it reminded me of the [Colorado] Plateau.  And so I’m telling you about the plateau by telling you about other places.  The plateau is rivers-there’s no rivers here.  The plateau is flying-there’s no big airports here.  The plateau is people-there’s so few people on the plateau.  It’s home.  Rosie and I play this silly game of trying to think, "Don’t you think it’s time to move?"  Well, where would you move to?  I mean, it’s <Flagstaff>, it’s home.  I can’t tell you how happy Rosie is to be getting back home today.  I wasn’t half happy myself to get back from <Hawaii> last night.

Underhill:  So tell us a bit about-because I saw you volunteering the other day-tell us a bit about the organizations that you’ve been involved with, that you’re passionate about-in your spare time!

Collier:  We’re trying to do some volunteer work at Full Circle.  Bill Packard and his wife are doing an amazing job of running Full Circle, just living a life dedicated to compassion.  And I really respect that.  So we work there, we try to do it once every month.  It’s not very much.  I run the cash register, and it’s mostly just an opportunity on Sunday afternoons to talk with people. I really, really loved working for the Flying Samaritans.  It’s a nonreligious group of aviators, started in <California>.  There were two groups in <Arizona>, one in <Phoenix>, one in <Tucson>.  I got involved with the <Tucson> one.  Mike Clifton, out of the <Flagstaff Airport>, talked me into it.  And we would fly down to <Tucson>, pick up two or three passengers.  They’d be nurses or interpreters or doctors, people doing construction work.  And we checked in through <Guaymas>, went across the water, 83 nautical miles.  When you took off, you couldn’t see Baja.  Landed at Muleje.  And Saturday morning we’d go over to Laguna San Ignacio, and we’d built a clinic there.  And it’s a little fishing village, an ejido, 300 people, and I just fell in love with these people.  They were just so good.  They would come in out of these canyons that we would fly, out of the Sierra Gigante-Sierra de la Gigante-on a mule, to come to the clinic.  We’d only go every couple of months, but we’d bring them that next two months’ supply of whatever.  Being a family doc in that setting is a little awkward, because a dentist can do a procedure; a surgeon can take off a skin cancer; an optometrist, you can bring a fist full of glasses and fit people.  But it was really fun doing family medicine, trying to just sort of lick your finger and stick it up in the wind, and that’s how you treated their diabetes.  I loved it.  It was really fun. One day we had too many doctors, and so I said, "Great!  I’m outta here!"  So I brought my Nikon D-300.  We’d built this white plastic overhang over the porch, and it cast the most beautiful light.  So I photographed all of our patients, I made these portraits.  It was so much fun, the next time down, to bring them prints of themselves. Rosie’s working at the Poore Clinic. I suppose I ought to go work at the Poore Clinic. Henry Poore wasn’t quite able to explain malpractice to me, and so I veered away, I got involved with the Whale Foundation instead, and I’m on the board of directors of the Whale Foundation.  But I still keep thinking, "I ought to go work at the Poore Clinic," but I haven’t yet.  And with changes in the whole healthcare landscape, I don’t know what their role in the world is going to be in a few months.

Underhill:  So how’s your Spanish?

Collier:  Wanting.

Underhill:  Have you travelled to other continents?

Collier:  Oh, <South America>.  <Iceland> in August.

Underhill:  <Antarctica>, right?

Collier:  Well, <Antarctica>’s another continent.  I was a doc on a boat.  It was the Explorer.  You may have read about it in the newspaper a couple of years ago, a 210-foot boat built in 1963.

Underhill:  Got stuck?

Collier:  No, it sank.  It had hit an iceberg and it sank.  It was really fun to be on it.  We went twice.  And on the fourth crossing, returning from the second trip across Drake’s Passage, it was a storm, and there were 35-foot seas, and the boat’s 210 foot long, didn’t have stabilizing fins.  It was rockin’ and rollin’.  I was standing out on the bridge with these amazing blasts of wind and water going by, and I just thought, "This is just so much fun!"  It was good.  It was a little unnerving to be out of my element.  On the first trip across, we went up to the Falklands, and then down to <Antarctica>.  It was still getting dark at nighttime.  We weren’t so far south that it was full daylight twenty-four hours.  But I remember thinking, "God, where am I?!"  And I felt really, really lonely.  I felt really separated from Rosie.  I was a lot of miles away from her, and I did not like that.  I can’t name all the stars, but I sure do recognize them.  If I’m looking around, and I’m just trying to orient, I’ll pick out the stars, and the world will snap into focus.  It was crazy down there.  It was still dark-on that part of the trip, still getting dark at night-and I remember feeling that loneliness and disorientation, and I went up on the very top deck-I was the only person up there-and I leaned backwards, over this rail, backwards, and I thought, "Don’t fall over!"  And by doing that, I could make Orion look like Orion’s supposed to look.  And then I figured, "Okay, now I know where I am."  And that was a good way to be oriented.

Underhill:  When you were young, did you have an adventurous spirit, growing up in <Phoenix>?

Collier:  No.

Underhill:  Besides spending all your money on books.

Collier:  Yeah.

Underhill:  So what’s your favorite book that you didn’t write?

Collier:  Boy....  Cutting for Stone, Old Man and the Sea.  I remember I was reading Farewell to Arms.  My father read Old Man and the Sea to my sister and I, and it is my favorite book.  But I was reading Farewell to Arms, I’d flown to <Washington DC>, and I was taking the train to <New York> for whatever reason.  On the train I was reading Farewell to Arms.  It was one of those copies that I’d bought in sophomore year of high school, and it was literally moldy.  But I was re-reading it, and it was so good to read.  What a wonderful book.  Sitting next to me was this twenty-two-year-old kid.  Nice kid, he had an i-Pad.  We got to talking and he said, "I don’t buy books, I don’t read books anymore.  And I said, "Well, I write books."  I said, "Here, look up this book.  Pull up Over the Mountains."  He pulled it up and said, "Wow, that’s cool."  And he hit a button and he said, "I just bought it."  I just thought, "What is this?!"

Underhill:  And you said, "How am I supposed to sign it?"

Collier:  "What is this?!"  And I thought it was so cool, I was reading this Farewell to Arms-in the moth-[eaten], moldy edition-and he was teaching me about i-Pads.  I reread For Whom the Bell Tolls the other day, and I was amazed at how much of myself was in there.  I just thought, "I can’t believe this!  This is why I was a conscientious objector."  And I just thought, "Wow, this is where I came from."  Grapes of Wrath.  I’m in the middle of a book by Nadine Gordimer, and it’s called The Pickup.  I’m reading it electronically.  A woman wheel-chair-bound artist in Edmonton said, "Michael, you have to read this."  So I’ve downloaded it.  It’s a beautiful book.  It’s a novel.  I love reading novels.  The Meadow, James Galvin.  Amazing.  Karen, you’ve got to read The Meadow.  It’s a hard read.  Jayber Crow by Wendell Berry.

Underhill:  Yes, that’s Rosie’s favorite, if you didn’t know that.  (chuckles)

Collier:  I did a book on the Rivers of America, and I landed right alongside the Ohio at this wonderful little grass field called Lee Bottom.  Oh! Heaven! Just Heaven!  This couple ran it, and I was going to camp there on my way up the <Ohio> to pass <Pittsburgh> and up that way, the Allegheny.  And I said, "I’m gonna walk down to the river."  I don’t know how that eastern mind works, so I wanted to get permission to walk on peoples’ land.  So they said, "Go meet...."  And they gave me the name of this old couple.  I walked down and asked them if I could go down to the river, and they said, "Oh, of course."  Their very simple little house looked out on the Ohio River, and I said, "Do you ever see shanty boats?" because I was reading a book called Shanty Boat, which is not a novel, but it was an account of this fellow’s trip down from <Cincinnati> to <New Orleans>, seven years.  He and his wife had built this 20-foot by 10-foot shanty boat and lived on it, and they would harvest-go up into fields that had already been harvested, and get second harvest-cuttings of corn or whatever they could find-just living a good life.  A good life.  And all seven years that it took 'em to get down there, their most favorite place in the world was Payne Hollow.  And this old couple said, "Oh, shanty boats.  Yeah, shanty boats.  Harlan Hubbard, he and his wife"-Carol?  Oh, I forget her name.  Susan?  "Their favorite place was Payne Hollow.  It’s right over there across the river."  And I went over, a friend of theirs took me over on a boat, and went to the house that Harlan Hubbard had built with his own hands.  Anna!  Harlan and Anna had built this home out of cobbles out of the river, out of driftwood.  It was so beautiful.  There was a man from <Madison>, from a college up in <Madison Indiana>, caretaking it.  He said, "Hey, come back here."  So we went into the barn, and there was a frame of a kayak that Harlan had made, and there was a piece of driftwood that had fishing line [strung] across it, and I strummed it, and I realized Harlan made this, it’s a lyre, L-Y-R-E.  And I was so taken.  Harlan did an amazing job writing this book called Shanty Boat.  He was a painter and he did all the covers on Wendell Berry’s books.

Underhill:  So what adventures do you have in store, or what else would you like to accomplish?  And I have to say, because I’m thinking about you, Richard Quartaroli says, "If you think you have dementia, you don’t."

Collier:  I forget a lot.  This Pearson series is amazing.  I’m learning phenomenal amounts of technology.  I’m narrating these videos that are mostly compilations of still photography.  The basic idea is, "Okay, kid, you’re reading your geology textbook.  I know you’re bored out of your gourd reading about metamorphic rocks.  You’re gonna die if you read another page of this, so pssst! let’s go to the Adirondacks and I’ll show you metamorphic rocks."  And so I do a field trip.  And so I have to learn about metamorphic rocks, and I have to write about 'em, and I have to figure out how to record it, because it’s been fun to learn a broadcast or a voice.  Rosie and I have done a few things for KNAU, and that’s been fun.  But these things require a voice, and a comfort level of just being there for students.  But they also require a lot of pictures, and I’m doing film work for 'em too.  The reason I had to make this emergency trip to <Hawaii> for these last three days was because I said, "Gosh, I just don’t have any video.  I’ve got a lot of still photography, but I guess I have to run over there and do this video.

Underhill:  Darn!

Collier:  And so they said, "Okay."  So I went over and did that.  So it’s been fun to do this.  I am working on this year’s crop of these videos, and that’ll take me through the calendar year.  I don’t have any specific plans after that, but I know, Karen, that I still need to photograph people.  And so that’s that looms.  I don’t know what the framework will be to do it.  When I go to <Iceland>, I’m travelling with this guy from <Ohio> who’s taking eight students, and I’m going to do it through the eyes of one of his students.  And so it’ll be fun to do geology pictures through people’s eyes.  But people photography has to be in there somehow in the future.

Underhill:  Other hobbies?  We know one.  What other things do you like to do?

Collier:  Eating!  Eating is great fun.  You know one?

Underhill:  We do.  It involves water.  Swimming?  Is swimming a hobby?

Collier:  Oh, that’s right.  I swim.  I like to say that I’ve never exercised a day in my life, because I just get in, and I just love to swim.  Peter flies by me.  Woodworking.  I built all the furniture in our house, so that’s been fun.

Underhill:  Now, you mentioned way earlier, that there is no plan, that at nineteen or twenty you can’t really have a roadmap.  But is there any advice that you would go back and give your twenty-year-old self?

Collier:  Read more books, because the urgency all came from books.  The urgency of the beauty of it all, all came from books.  I just read a book called A Reed Shaken by the Wind.  Ah!  So fine.  1954 book about-I won’t remember his name-this fellow who went to the swamplands between the Tigris and Euphrates River in the early fifties.  It’s a book about the Iraqi people living back in the reeds.  And he just did such a beautiful job of talking about his adventures, but more important, about the people there.  And it was so cool to be reminded, just go see.  The world’s a huge place.  It’s like a duck trying to take off.  You watch the feet running like crazy, and you’re not gonna get to take off until you’ve had a lot of those little webbed-foot paddles, a lot of books, pushing you to gain speed.  And then you can start seeing things on your own, but it all started with books.

Underhill:  Very good.  Anything you look back on that you would want to change?

Collier:  No.  It would be stupid for me to want to change anything.  (pause)  I’d like to be kinder.  There’s times when I can be sort of agenda driven, and I would like to be kinder.

Underhill:  And shifting gears just slightly again:  your legacy, in terms of photographs, your writings, your files.  You’ve selected the Cline Library at Northern Arizona University, and to quote an NPR reporter, "You have images from <Connecticut> to <California>," but why NAU, why Cline Library?

Collier:  Rosie and I have learned that there’s no immortality in publishing.  To the unpublished it seems like, "Oh, if I could write a book I’d be immortal."  It ain’t true.  A book is only good for the time during which you’re working on it, and then you move on to other things.  For all the pictures that I’ve taken that are in my files, there’s no sense that it leads anywhere.  There’s no sense that this proves that I existed.  It’s an interesting position to be in, not to have kids.  The cancer sort of chose that for me; we sort of chose it for ourselves.  If I had kids, I would think about the world totally differently, I’m sure.  I can write books about climate change and do it from not a cynical, but an irreparably sad point of view.  If I had kids, I’d have to be hopeful.  Having the Cline Library as a place to deposit pictures when I’m done gives me this little flicker of a sense that they’ll still be around.  I’m glad they’ll be here, but I think I’m fooling myself.  It’s as good as it is when you’re doin’ it.  I chose it because NAU’s been a big part of who I am forever, and I can’t imagine them being anywhere else.  It would break my heart to see them just sort of off to the dump.

Underhill:  Ours too.  So I will turn to Peter and Susan, because I always ask what questions I’ve missed, or things you were thinking about.

McGlothlin:  My question is on the climate change agenda.  Do you feel like with all the education worldwide about climate change that we’re trying to get out there, do you feel hopeful that people will start taking it seriously?

Collier:  No.  I think we’re so far down the parts-per-million curve that to be able to turn things around is gonna be not impossible, but it just isn’t gonna happen.  It is possible, but there are forces that aren’t gonna let it happen.  There’s a technology that’s coming online, but the forces that are going to prevent that, I’m afraid are too strong.  Because as people are gradually-in the ebb and flow of people’s acceptance of climate change is real, we’re up against a clock that is probably going to go off at 450 parts per million, certainly at 500 parts per million.  And it’s like medicine.  I left medicine because I couldn’t stand to see it self-destruct.  It can still do beautiful things, but it is, in my book, self-destructing.  I think the way that medicine is delivered in the <United States> is impossibly evil.  To say to somebody, "No, you can’t have care because you can’t afford it," is so backwards.  Every other developed nation in the world has come to grips with medicine as a right.  And so I always thought-I practiced for twenty-five years-I always thought, "Five years from now.  In five years this whole system’s going to collapse.  And then we’ll have to reinvent it, the phoenix out of the flames."  And five years go by, and [another] five years go by, and [yet another] five years go by, and then I realized, "Oh, I get it, it’s already collapsed."  And I think climate change is sort of the same story.  We’ve let it go to 400 parts per million-carbon.  We’re gonna let it go to 450.  You know, what was my carbon footprint for running over to <Hawaii> for three days?  Ridiculous!  I rented an airplane over there and flew myself out over <Kilauea>.  What was my carbon footprint?  I just don’t see any of us being willing to take the necessary steps.  Are we going to cut our carbon emissions by 80 percent or whatever it’s gonna take to stop and reverse the trend before we hit the skids?  I wish I could be more optimistic.  I did that book on climate change in Alaska, The Melting Edge, and my one goal in doing the book was not to commit suicide.  And I did.  I did it through the eyes of a lot of different people-scientists, native Alaskans, hunters, people all around <Alaska>.  It was wonderful to do it, but to me it was the embodiment of pessimism.

Underhill:  Which species, if any, do you think will inherit the earth once we’re wiped out?

Collier:  It ain’t gonna be the polar bears.  Who knows?  The cockroaches.

Underhill:  That was always my theory.  But Scott Thybony thinks it will be elephants.

Collier:  Really?

Underhill:  That they’ve adapted more over time [unclear] contemporary, if we’re not killing them for ivory.

Underhill: Peter, do you have....

Runge:  I don’t have any questions.  I was just enjoying the story that you were telling and wasn’t even thinking of questions, actually.

Underhill:  Well, what else would you like to share?

Collier:  It’s been a good ride.  My engines in the airplane have time between overhauls, the TBOs, and they’re 1,500 to 1,600 hours, and I’ve always thought my personal TBO was sixty, and I’m sixty-three now.  An engine, you can fly it past TBO, but if you make it to TBO, you’ve made it, and it’s gravy after that.  I feel like I’m getting to fly after TBO.  It’s been wonderful to have all of these different interests.  They’ve all been interwoven.  Obviously the photography and the geology and the flying and the river running all fit together.  The odd one out was medicine.  But it was always about stories, and always about people.  And that’s what medicine is.  It’s been good.

Underhill:  Great.  Well Michael, thank you so much for taking time to tell your story today.

Collier:  Thank you for listening.

Underhill:  Yeah.  And we’ll enjoy seeing it online.  (laughs)  Thank you./full

