ELIJAH BLAIR INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.11

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern <Arizona> University. We're here with Elijah Blair, owner and operator of the Dinnebito Trading Company. We're in <Page Arizona>, it is Monday, February 9, 1998, at 11:15 a.m. Also present are Lew Steiger, who is operating the recording equipment, and Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. 

Underhill: Well, Elijah, we have lots of questions for you, so we'll just start. Where and when were you born? 

Blair: I was born in <McRoberts Kentucky>, November 28, 1927. That's in the Appalachian Mountains, in a small mining town in Eastern <Kentucky>. 

Underhill: And what did your dad do for a living? 

Blair: When he was in McRoberts he actually was a blacksmith, I think, for the coal companies, and I don't know which one. But actually, we lived about twelve miles from there on a small hillside farm. That's where we moved back there, right after I was born. 

Underhill: And when you were growing up, what were some of your options for life? What did you think you'd end up doing? 

Blair: Well, the big push was to ... people back there ended up going to school and became a schoolteacher, or you worked in the coal mines. If you went to school, most of the thing was, the big push was, to come back and teach the hill people. And the other thing was, if you worked, you would work in some of the mines. There was a lot of big mine--coal-- companies there, and so the options was going to school... basically the push was to be a schoolteacher, or come back and work with the people. Hillside farming was not all that good. What my mother pushed me into... I had a mother that was a leader and a director and an ambitious mother that said, "You kids have to be somebody." So bein' a hillside farmer wasn't "bein' somebody," so that was about all the options we had, really, is the mines or goin' to school and bein' a teacher--most people ended up bein' teachers, which isn't all that bad, but that's what they did. 

Underhill: What brought you to the Southwest? 

Blair: Well, as I may have said before, my oldest brother, Raymond, was in the Marine Corps in the <Philippines> in the early thirties, and he became a pen pal of Marilene Bloomfield, in one of these pen pal magazines. Later he was discharged from the Marine Corps and came to Gallup. Marilene and her family picked him up, and they later on got married at <Toadlena>, where her family owned the trading post.

Then later on, my other brother, Brad, he was in the Marine Corps also, and he was discharged sometime like in '45, directly at the end of the war, after the end of the war, and he came out to visit the other brother. So when I was in the service in the forties, and I was discharged actually the end of '47--I think I came out January 2, '48, and I was goin' back to school. Actually, I went in at the end of the war, but they were still drafting, and so I went in and actually went into the Army for about eighteen months, two years, and I was goin' back, usin' the GI Bill to go to school, 'cause I didn't have any way to go to school, and I had actually applied to go to school at Ohio State. Just before I was discharged, my brother sent me a one-way ticket to <Cortez Colorado>. I was discharged in <Denver>, at Fitzsimmons Hospital where I was stationed. Raymond owned a store at <Mancos Creek>, just south of <Cortez>, and I came in January, I think, of '48. And then I stayed there about two weeks, and I always teased my sister-in-law that she got tired of feedin' me, so she got me a job at Toadlena Tradin' Post, which was actually her sister and brother-in-law’s. Here I am. 

Underhill: You mentioned your first trading post job. What were conditions like there: your living conditions, working conditions? 

Blair: Well, as I said, my first job was at Toadlena. They got me a job, actually, at Toadlena, which was the old-style, behind-the-counter trading post. And I was really just a laborer or a flunky or whatever you had. My first job was actually to be the janitor, stock boy, and they had two cows that I was supposed to milk. I milked those cows, so that was my first job. But they just had two cows. I worked my way through high school milking five cows day and night, so I thought, "Hey, this is a piece of cake!" (laughs) So I worked, that's really where I started. I was paid like $100 a month. That would have been 1948, and it was a small little separate apartment at that time there, that I stayed in while I was there. See, I was by myself, then. That was in January. 

Underhill: And who were the owners? These were your brother's sister and brother-in-law then? 

Blair: My brother's sister-in-law and brother-in- law. See Charles Herring and Raymond Blair married sisters--Bloomfield girls--and they owned the store there at that time. And this was the original store-- not original--but this was one of the old stores that George and Lucy Bloomfield owned and ran, which was the father and mother of these girls, which was the father- in-law and mother-in-law of my brother and Charles Herring. This is a lot of these, guys. (laughs) 

Underhill: Did they mentor you in the sense of they were trying to teach you about the trade business at the time? Or were you fairly limited in the work you performed? 

Blair: No, you had the opportunity, I think.... I think they knew that I was ambitious enough. Most young kids, you know, they wanted someone to come and work and really learn the business, because it wasn't that easy to find someone to work in these trading posts, because of the isolation and change of lifestyle, different culture, and a lack of being able to communicate in Navajo or English. No, they really pushed you into becoming knowledgeable by what you was doin'. So if they found an apt student, they worked on you, they did. 

Underhill: What were the living conditions like at the time for customers? And I imagine they were Navajo customers coming in? 

Blair: Yes, this was on the <Navajo Reservation>. There was a school there, and quite a few people worked in the school, and they had regular Bureau of Indian Affairs type housing. But the majority of the Navajos who lived around there lived in hogans--they all had hogans. And this is where they lived. Now, I'm sure there was exception to this, and I remember one or two smaller frame houses that were around there, but the majority of the people in '48 lived in hogans around <Toadlena>. 

Underhill: And what was their primary occupation? 

Blair: Um ... other than workin' for the school there, that would be the only work there, the one that had, but that was a small school, it was BIA. Basically they was involved in livestock. Weaving. <Toadlena> was probably one of the biggest weavin' areas there was, which is [where] the Two Grey Hills rug comes from. And by the way, George Bloomfield was actually the person who introduced--he sometimes doesn't get credit for it--but he was really, I think, the one who really introduced or promoted the Two Grey Hills rug, was George Bloomfield and another guy named Davis. But George Bloomfield was probably the biggest one. And that's what, they wove rugs, they had the sheep, they had farms. They would have farms up on top of the <Lukachukai Mountains>, way up on the top of the mountains up behind us. And they would bring the produce in to us, potatoes, etc. See, the tradin' post bought whatever they had, so we bought it, whether it was rugs, piñon nuts, potatoes, corn, or whatever--and we bought that. Employment wasn't really such. 

Underhill: How long did it take you to learn to speak Navajo? 

Blair: (chuckles) About fifty years, I figure! (laughter) I don't know, three or four years. After the first couple of years, you learn to speak fairly what we call "Indian tradin' Navajo." You learned the words and stuff like this. But to really learn to speak a language, I think two or three things happen. You first--if you can't communicate with people, you learn to speak body language, and that's the first thing you learned. You learned by watchin' 'em, what the feel was, and then you learned to speak orally. And after you learned to be able to communicate in that way, then you had to learn what I always refer to as "speakin' the culture." Until you can really speak the culture--or "understand" is probably the better word, I always use this. After that, then you can speak the language. But you did have the advantage, because you can read people's feelings, and you learn to do this because you couldn't communicate with 'em. If you ride a horse, you can speak the horse's language by the way-- and I rode horses all my life--you always know--and this is 'cause you couldn't communicate. Same thing with when you can't communicate until you learn culture- - four or five years, probably. By the time I left <Mexican Water>, which is actually four years after I started, I was pretty good. I was not fluent as I am today, but I could speak good Navajo. But I was twenty years old when I started, so that makes a difference. 

Underhill: At what point did you feel you were accepted by Navajo customers and by the community? 

Blair: (pause, followed by sigh) It's hard to say at what point. I think after you had been there for, oh, the first year or two, you know, depending on yourself, you know, the person himself. With me, you know, I was so curious and so gung ho to learn about Navajo Culture. It was fascinating to me, I wanted to learn, and I was obviously interested, and you talked, so I would say particularly at <Mexican Water>, the second year there, I think I was pretty well accepted. We were doing a lot of things for each other. I was reading letters from them, I could speak enough Navajo to where I was writing and reading letters and doing all these little things--just, you know, services in the community. I think in a year or two--two, particularly--you were pretty well accepted. There again, it depends on attitude. 

Underhill: When did you get your nickname, and tell us about that. 

Blair: Well, (chuckles) when I went from <Toadlena>, before I'd left <Toadlena> to <Mexican Water>, I went back to <Kentucky> and married Claudia, who was my high school sweetheart--we graduated from high school together. And then we brought her out to <Toadlena>. And after we'd been there for, oh, let's see, I think I got married in June, so I came out with her in November. Then Charles Herring's brother-in-law--another brother- in-law of my brother Raymond--they hired me--Jewel McGee and Roscoe McGee hired me to go and manage the store at <Mexican Water>. And Claudia and I, that was when they said, "Well, you know, we're going to pay you $200 a month, but we really expect your wife to work too." (laughter) So we went to [<Mexican Water>]. Let's see, that was eleven months from when I started working in June. They had just bought <Mexican Water>, and I was hired to go out and manage it with Claudia. From <Shiprock>, it was eighty miles west, on a dirt road. It isn't the present-day <Mexican Water>--that's a new store--the old <Mexican Water> is three miles north of there, which has really been torn down now. When we got there, the next morning I get up and there's a new wagon sittin' out front. I go to the door and I figure, "Well, that's the store's wagon." But there was an old fellah there, a Navajo fellah that kept coming up and talking to me, and he kept pointin' at that wagon like he had his horse, he wanted to haul it off. And I kept sayin', "Where's the money?" So [I] talked to him, "Where's the money?" So this went on all day long. At noon he'd come back in, wantin' to haul off the wagon. Well, I wouldn't let him have it, 'cause he wouldn't pay me for it. So my brother was at Red Mesa. This went on for about three days, every day, the same thing. And my brother, Brad, was at Red Mesa--he and Carolyn. And Brad and Carolyn came down one night, and this old guy.... See, we always had a guest hogan at the tradin' post, for your customers when they came and they stayed in there. We even furnished coffee and the staples for them to stay in there. So he just camped there. He had his horses, and we put 'em in our corral. So he came down, and Brad had been there about two years longer than I had. He had come, I think, in '45, and so when he saw Brad, boy, he was really happy, 'cause he knew that Brad could speak Navajo. So he got up and he started talkin' to Brad. Well, come to find out, he had bought the wagon from the previous owner, and he had already paid for the wagon. (laughs) So I wouldn't let him have it. Then he found that he was just.... You know, a Navajo is the most tolerant person in the world, accepting person in the world, and he finally said, "Your ears are just round and nothing goes in!" (laughter) And that's when they first started calling me Jaa’ or Jaa’ Yázhí. And from then on, later on, they really started calling me either Jaa’ or Jaa’ Yázhí--little ears. A lot of the people called me Jaa’, and mostly Jaa’ Yázhí. That's where I got my name, and it's been there fifty years later. 

Underhill: And your reputation preceded you, so the name followed you wherever you went. 

Blair: I guess, 'cause they always call me that. Most of the time, they will give you a name that is a descriptive name, something about you, something like that, some way you looked or some way you acted or whatever. This was basically the way the Navajo named the trader, or themselves--they named themselves that [way]. It's always a descriptive name. 

Underhill: Now you're at <Mexican Water> and you are operating a post for the McGee family. How would you describe the Navajo-Anglo trade relationship to someone who may know very little about it? How does it work? 

Blair: At that time, at that period? This is complicated, or more complex than to actually do it. I guess I always thought "Think of the trading post as the same thing that you would think of the anchor tenant in a large shopping center, except the trading post was the anchor tenant for the community." So the trading post is what actually held the community together. So there is where everybody came, not only to trade or sell their product--whatever they had--but they also came there to socialize. So everything that happened in this community, say, of a radius of twenty miles or so, this was the hub, and it all came into the trading post, and everybody met there, things were done.... And you dealt, whether or not she had a rug to sell or to barter with, or they had an account already established with the trader previous to you. They would bring in their rugs to pay the account. Or they would sell a cow. You would be in there, and someone would say, "Well, Sam Begay has got a cow out here." So you go out to the corral and you would weigh or buy or look at--different methods of doing it--the cow, and then you would go in and he would take out pawn pay on his account, etc. This happened over and over about lots of things, depending on what season you was in. If it was in wool season when they were shearing the sheep, then they would bring the wool in. Or lamb season, they would bring lambs in. Or if they ran out of food, they would bring lamb in, so the trader would always trade the lamb for merchandise.-- they would need flour and things that they didn't have, like flour, lard, baking powder, sugar, salt, stuff like this. Those were big staple items for the Navajo, so they brought it in. And the biggest thing that I used to tell, when I hired lots of people like myself at <Toadlena>, over the past fifty years, and wannabe managers, and I always told 'em, I said, "You know, you can get a job anywhere, but this is not just a place to make a living. This is a way of life. If you don't see that this is really a way of life, then don't try to come out here, just to make a living. You can go make a living anywhere, but unless you see the potential, like I think I really did when I went out there, the potential was obvious. And that was the biggest thing that we did, and we took care of every need that that Navajo, particularly, and I think other Native Americans, but Navajo is basically what we did. Whatever they needed, whatever type of merchandise, we stocked it. If we didn't have it, we got it for them. And any products that they produced, whether it was farm products, livestock they raised, piñon nuts that they [gathered] if there was a piñon crop that year, rugs, saddle blankets, anything that they had that they needed, we furnished a market for it. It didn't matter.

Another big thing that really impressed the Navajo was the fact we bought goat and sheep hides, and he'd bring those in and he would bring it up and stack it on the counter. We would weigh it back in the wool room and then we would pay them or sometimes you would trade them, depending on their choice. That didn't come to a lot of money, lots of time you would just pay 'em if you had the money to do it. Or he would just trade it out. It depended on their choice. He always had the option, "Did you want to trade it out, or did you want us to pay you?" Many stores may have not had money, but I usually had enough money that we gave them the option. Lots of times they had no place to spend money other than there at the trading post, so lots of time they'd just say, "Well, give me a sack of flour," or whatever it came to.

You have to think of the trading post as actually everything that happened in Navajo life, or what they were gonna do, they met friends there, they made arrangements to have ceremonies or stuff like that. They would lots of time find the medicine man there. So they would hire him. This was the hub. The social hub, actually, was the trading post. And this was basically what we did, and we was there to take care of anything that they wanted, or if we didn't have it, we could get it. 

Underhill: How did the pawn system work at that time in your earlier years? 

Blair: Well, it basically works exactly the same as it does now. The pawn actually.... First you gotta realize that the Navajo does not accumulate money. His security and his wealth was all put into his jewelry, or livestock, etc. And his status symbol actually was either in the livestock he owned--the cattle, the sheep--or then into the jewelry that he had. When he had money or trade items, then he put it into jewelry. This was really how he accounted for money, where he stored his savings account, as I call it. He put it in there, and that's where it was. So as long as he had jewelry, he could take it to any trading post, where he'd ever seen a trader in his life, wherever the trading post was, and then he could pawn for anything that he could want--if he didn't have a lamb to sell or a cow to sell, it was out of wool season or lamb season, then he could bring it in and he could pawn for a saddle or groceries or whatever. And there was a big difference between trade pawn and cash pawn--I think a lot of people thought it was all cash pawn. See, we had, probably the majority of our pawn on the reservation was actually trade pawn, which there was no interest charges on trade pawn. All of our mark up was already marked up in the merchandise that you sold, the saddles all marked up that they pawn. If they did pawn for cash, which occasionally they did, you got more cash pawn at different times, because there was a bigger need for cash for different things that they had. And like I say, if you had a ceremony or something around Mexican Water Trading Post, for instance, and you had some guy came out from <Rock Point> or <Chinle> or somewhere like that--he was there doin' the dance or Squaw Dance, somethin' like that, and he saw that you had a wagon out front, or a saddle that he wanted. So then the other trader may not have this. With the pawn, see, it's just like money. He could pawn that to that trader and he could buy anything that he wanted. This was the way it worked. Now, this was trade pawn. Okay, a lot of your locals, you already had an established credit system with them, because you knew how many lambs they were gonna sell, or how much wool he's gonna sell--you had a running open account with them. But the pawn system, actually was about someone you didn’t know pawning for additional stuff that they may want, or merchandise that they needed or somethin', or it was someone who really didn't have the livestock or whatever to sell, so he didn't have a charge account, or someone that you didn't know, so he pawned. Then you go into that, that's the trade pawn, which we normally kept it for a year or longer. And we would take it in there, and we would keep it for practically a year, always, just about always a year. One of the big misconceptions of the trader and the pawn, they thought, well, you're gonna go out there and get it so we can rush and sell it. See, it was a disadvantage to us to sell the pawn, because then if you did, then they didn't have the pawn to rotate and buy another saddle or another wagon or whatever. This was a trade pawn, so it was really a good thing for us, and we would keep it forever. If they came along when this fellah had pawned his beads or somethin' like that, he would have a ceremony. See, with the ceremonies, they definitely like to have all of the jewelry and stuff on it, on the person, particularly the patient that was havin' it. They wanted all of her jewelry on her. And so many times the trader would loan back to the person his pawn, for, say, a five-day ceremony. As soon as the ceremony was over, then they would bring it back and put it back.

And another thing that the pawn system worked as, is it was safe keeping for them. And back before the days of truth in lending and stuff like this, see, he would come in and he would say he would pawn a bracelet that's worth $500. Well, he may only buy ten dollars' worth of stuff on his pawn, but see, we had his bracelet. it's just like an open-end account. He came in a month later, said, "Well, I want some more flour." So then you would just keep adding it to that bracelet as he came in. And many times he would say, "Well, I don't really want to take it out, because you have this vault, and it is safe here. If I have it at home, my kids or relatives or whoever will try to get me to take it to offer as, pawn it for something else. But as long as it's here, then I don't have it, and I don't have to say 'no.'" And that's basically what it was. It was safe, and then they didn't have to turn down their relatives. Besides being something as collateral for things that they needed, we kept it safe for them, and they wanted it that way. They really wanted it safe there for them.

In cases of deaths, or something like that, if people had pawn in there, we always somehow made arrangement, because they always, you know, buried all the jewelry with the deceased, and we always somehow made arrangement to get it back to them. May have to switch things around, but we definitely did it, this is another system that worked. Now, that's one thing.

I think the pawn needs to be addressed about cash pawn. This was another big misconception about the cash pawn. In every store that [I] ever owned or worked in, the way it worked is a guy came in and he wants ten dollars, and we had a 20 percent charge, 20 percent interest rate. Now, I'm not talking about annual percentage rate that the fancy people came up with later. But simple interest. If he pawned for ten dollars, you charged him twelve, ten dollar price plus two dollar interest. So you put that on his piece of pawn and you stored it. Okay, you kept this for a year, and it was twelve dollars. That's what [I was telling you about]. If he came back the next day and took it out, it still was twelve dollars, because there was no pro-rated charge or set-up checking. In today's world, you have a set-up charge, and you have this and that. Now you go to the bank and you find out how many hidden charges there is, but none of these set-up charges is computed into an annual percentage rate. We didn't ever hear about annual percentage rate. Everything was simple interest at that time. And I think the majority of traders did it basically this way--I did. And so it didn't matter. This is what we did, we charged about 20 percent, kept the pawn for a year, and they paid it out, whenever they took it back out, they paid the two dollars. And this was basic to the way it always was, in every store I have ever owned, this is what we charged for cash pawn. 

Underhill: With the stores that you did own, how did you obtain a lease from the Navajo Nation? Can you tell us about leasing? 

Blair: (sigh) 

Underhill: We don't believe in asking small questions. (laughter) 

Blair: The stores, I guess we need to tell you about leasing before the ones that I did own. See, I came in '48, okay, so I really didn't end up owning a store until like '53, or part of a store, until '53. So I was just workin' 'til '53, then I became a partner in a store that actually already had a lease. But the other stores I bought into. See, in 1955, the United Indian Traders Association, along with the tribe and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, they negotiated a blanket lease of twenty-five years for all trading posts, all, probably maybe some exceptions. All trading posts ended up with a twenty-five-year lease in 1955. So this went on, and in this period of that twenty-five-year lease, and with that lease, see, you could transfer--well, you could transfer that lease if you had ten years or twenty years left on that lease. But you could get them transferred within that twenty-five-year lease. Now, that ended, see, in 1980. So when you got to 1980, you had a completely different system. To me, one of the best things that ever happened to the trader and Navajo people, and really the tribe, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. What they did was this twenty-five- year lease, which was actually pushed and negotiated by the United Indian Traders Association. And at that time Charles Tansey was the attorney for the tribe, which later became the attorney for the United Indian Traders Association. He definitely knew both sides of the coin. So it was a good thing. Now, that tells you how. So when [I?] moved in and became a partner of a store, if this lease was in place, then you ended up adding your name to the lease. So that's about the way it was. It was after this period when leasing became so cumbersome and complicated that it never really happened again--that was the only time it happened. And this ended in 1980--most of those leases did.

What all do you want to know about leasin'? After that, you had to go to the chapter house, you had to get approval from a chapter, and then you had to go to <Window Rock>, and you had to go to Economic Development and then you had to go from Economic Development eventually through all the bureaucracies that there was, and I don't know how many it was, but they was a bunch. And eventually you would end up with the tribal government deciding. It's the tribal president of the government. And then you had the same group here that worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs. To me, this was duplication, because you had the same thing happening. This was later on. Even with people who was puttin' in new stores during this twenty-five-year period--see, this was basically the same process that they had to go [through]. They had to go through the chapter, to the tribe and get it signed off, and then they went to the BIA. And then the Bureau of Indian Affairs had to agree to the same thing.

Now, it was so cumbersome that it would sit on people's desks, and you had all those bureaucrats and all those offices that anybody could hold it up. If he didn't sign off, step-by-step, then, you know, it could be there forever. Dinnebito I think is probably a perfect example. See, Dinnebito's lease ended in 1980. I had been there twenty years, and every time we went to the chapter, everything was approved, everything was wonderful, and everybody was wonderful. But see, everybody was in the same boat at that time. So we were all there tryin' to get leases. Well, after bein' there for twenty years, I never had any objections whatsoever from the local people, all unanimously approved, but you get to <Window Rock>, then, boy, you had a different ball of wax, because the bureaucrats in these different offices--young, supposedly educated. They always said, "Well, a trader always said he never had any problem on the reservation until he got to <Window Rock>," which was absolutely true. He was actually like, you know, grass roots people don't know, or, like, you know, he was saying the all-knowin'. Well, he had it in reverse. The all-knowin' was the grass roots people where the trading came from. They knew what we had done, they understand what we're doin'. But this held up the leases, and it got to where you never got a lease. I don't know, you never really had leases. By that time, see, is when all the traders had pretty much left. So there wasn't very many leases issued except like with Thriftway. All the traders left, and Thriftway came in and bought out all those leases. I think they had thirty-nine.

Now, I had been there twenty years. I ended up gettin' a five-year lease barely after twenty years at Dinnebito, and there was never any question about what I did at the local level, see. And at the end of that-- in '85, see, the lease was up again. I stayed there 'til '92 and never got it renewed again.

Well, I absolutely refused to pay bribes--although you had opportunities many times--people would make implications that there was other ways that you could get preferential treatment, which I never fell for. I don't think it was the thing to do, and I never did do it. It became very cumbersome, and you had two entities. You had to satisfy both of them. I know of one person in <Chinle>, it was the Bureau of Indian Affairs guy. I know that my lease set on his desk for two years, that he never touched it; and every time I fussed at him, he would come out and he would re- survey. At that time I was flyin' my own plane, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs had built an airstrip out in front of the store on the flats out there, when they built the school there at Rocky Ridge. And they kept saying, well, I was illegal by having this airstrip. You know, there was something wrong with me having the airstrip. Well, I didn't build the airstrip. I did use it, and I did maintain it, but it was just an excuse. It was just an excuse to keep it to where that they didn't have to do anything. But I think they were still waiting for something. And it was this way with everything. And the lease is the same with the Native American. He had no more preferential treatment than the Anglo did. It's the same. If a Navajo right now says, "I want a home site lease, or a lease to do a business," it's just as bad. It's just as bad for them. And it's always been this way, except in 1955 when the Traders Association negotiated a lease that was a good lease. And even now, I get away from the leasing, but I still think that you have to blame the leasing mechanics of both the tribal and federal government, you know, of why there is 40 percent unemployment on the reservation.

There's 40 percent unemployment on the reservation because of tribal government and the federal government. They will not let the private sector get on there and give them leases that is transferable and is renewable. Even in <Mexico> you can get a ninety-nine- year lease that you can transfer or renew. And I, at many meetings with the tribe and other people, I have always said--they talk about unemployment on the reservation and this and that. If you would go in the Gallup Independent and put in an ad, say, "We will give anyone a ninety-nine-year lease that wants it, as long as they meet...." They would have to set up a criteria of requirements that you would have to meet, and what you was gonna do and all this stuff. Then you would have no unemployment. The Navajo people are hard working, intelligent people, and they want a job, they want to work. But the leasing practices, economic development, on the reservation is what curtails all development out there. And this, until they change that, this will always be that way. You have to get away from preferential treatment or whatever to different people for whatever reasons. It's always funny to me that one guy can get thirty-nine permits, and a guy who's been there forever gets nuthin', and has no record of ever bein' anything other than a good guy businessman that was well accepted by the community. It's just hard to understand (bribes). Brad 

Cole: If a trader wanted to physically expand his building, make an addition or whatever, how would the investment on that work, and how would it fit into the leasing? 

Blair: Thank you, sir, for bringing that up. (laughter) See, the trader was treated different from shopping centers. Any capital investment or any lease hold improvement, is what they called it, was at the trader's expense, and when he left, everything was left there. They didn't pay you for nuthin', contrary to like these other shopping centers and stuff like that. See, these were built by other entities--either tribal or grant from federal government, I don't know who. I did serve on a DCI [Dine Cooperative Inc.] board at <Chinle> one time, and I know all the money came from grants. And they leased tenants like Basha's and whoever was there. And any investment or addition you made on the [tradin' post], first you had to show what you were gonna do, how much money you was gonna spend, stuff like that. That was really never a problem, to get this done. Well, later on it became a little bit of a problem, the more the federal bureaucracy got involved in it, like EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] and all of these different people. But any additional capital investment that you did, the trader paid for it. There was never anything. And the lease itself says that whenever you left, then everything that you built became the property of the Navajo Tribe. So it was there. And that is completely contrary to the way they treated shopping centers. This is one of the reasons that you saw many traders who didn't do a lot of improvement, because they knew with all of the bureaucracies of the tribe, the federal government, of gettin' the leases approved, and you know, whatever, personalities, whatever cause there was, that they was a little afraid to do a lot of improvement.

Now, I was a little bit funny, I did a lot of improvement, ended up walking off and leaving a lot of it, but I'm still glad I did it, because I was trying to service the people as they wanted to be--really, as a progressive trader, you had to change to put in more than inventory behind the counter. So we just said, "Okay, well, we hope that we can recoup our investment by being there long enough," which actually we did, you know. But at the end of the period, you left, and if you couldn't transfer it or sell it, you lost it--a lot of 'em were sold, but not for really what they should have been sold for. But it wasn’t a very marketable product that you had. You lost it. All of a sudden your lease is run out, and you've got this building sittin' there, and then you've got no buyer. He said, "Well, what have you got to sell? You have nothing but a building, and I don't have a lease. Until I get a lease, I won’t buy" And it really made it hard. Yet we had been there forever. Everybody else came and got a different deal, different deck of cards or paid the price. (laughs) 

Underhill: In hearing you speak about this topic, one of the critical elements, I think, to trading, is the difference between the Navajo perspective on economics and the Anglo perspective on economics. Can you talk a little bit about the Navajo collectivist viewpoint versus the profit motive, perhaps? 

Blair: Well (chuckles), you sure ask questions that have to be covered in depth. Here again, you have to know the culture. Like I said, if you speak Navajo, you can't do it unless you know the culture. And in the Navajo language, there is two words that defines their philosophy of economics or business or life forever. And one of them is a word which actually means "stingy" or "tight" or something like this. See, the Navajo, if you interpret this in their philosophy, see, they are collectivists, or socialistic. The Navajos have what we call their own Navajo "social security" system. It's a matrilineal society where all the kinship is related to the mother's clan. So then if you belong to the mother's clan, then you are forever responsible for each other. So if you marry the girl, then you become responsible for her, her mother, and every member of her clan. This is one of the reasons that if you try to rise above the other members of the clan, then you become "stingy," because it is a leveling philosophy. Ayn Rand called it a leveling philosophy. What it was, you know, Karl Marx came up with socialism and stuff like this. He thought he was original when he sold it to Lenin and all these other people, but the aboriginal people had been practicing it for thousands of years. They've always been a socialistic, collectivist society in a tribal existence. And most Native Americans are still that way today.

And the other word is.... Okay, first you are "tight stingy" because you try to have more sheep than the other guy. You actually should share. And you know, Karl Marx says, "From each according to his ability, to each according to his need." Well, it's exactly what they were saying, except Karl Marx thought he was an original in it. But see, as a man tried to become prosperous and get more money, more sheep, more jewelry, whatever. They'd say, "Well, he's ‘tight- stingy’" And I can name you a dozen good people that the Navajo says, "Well, he's stingy, because he rose above his peers. He had more than he needed when someone had less and then he should share."

So the other word means you are crooked or a cheater. Now, this is the closest that you can define that. I still think you can't define every Navajo word into English. Unless you know the cultural background, it's hard to do it. But it really means that you basically are crooked or you cheat or something like that. And it comes back to a socialistic interpretation of business economics, or philosophy of economics, okay? Because they will come in to me, and I remember the first time I went to <Mexican Water>, actually, although they did say that at Dinnebito. (chuckles) But this guy came up, and he didn't speak any English, and he picks up this can of beans, and he was talking about, "You are a cheater, because you charged me more for this can of beans than you paid for it." See, that shows that he belonged to a society that just by charging him more, see, made me crooked. This is one of the things that they never understood when they had those hearings with the Navajo in the '72 hearings at FTC [Federal Trade Commission]. See, when they say this trader is crooked, see, you and I know, in a capitalistic world or a free enterprise world, I have the right to make a profit on this, and I'm not crooked. But to them, in a socialistic collective society, you're actually taking something from them that don't belong to you. You should sell the beans for the same price. And this happened all the time. So this is their interpretation of bein' crooked. See, the capitalist, which the trader actually was a free enterprise entrepreneur, he was capitalistic, see, they could not understand. Well, this is not bad, this is good. This is the way the free enterprise system works, this is what made this country the greatest country in the world, is because we came here because of a capitalistic system. Although, our elected official, sometimes, like particularly in the sixties and seventies, they kind of strayed away from this and got a little bit more liberal and bleeding heart, and actually was saying, "Hey, you know, capitalism wasn't all that good." But that's basically--the good guys are the [capitalists]. They're the ones who made this country the greatest country in the world.

And so it's a misinterpretation of what is crooked, or what is stingy. Who has the right to do this? I had, just recently down here, bought a rug from this girl downstairs. This is 1992. The first guy told me this in 1948. The girl downstairs, I bought a rug from her, she says, "I know you're going to sell that rug for more than you paid me for it." Now, this kid was educated in our educational system, and in our universities, and this is why we gave the scholarship to Northern Arizona University. "Hey, teach them something about capitalism." This is what we said. This is what we do. And I think one of the books they should say that they should put in the business department down there is Ayn Rand's Virtue of Selfishness, and the other one is Capitalism, the Unknown Ideal. See, they've got to know this. This is an acceptable way of life. You're not crooked because you do this.

But that question came up last week, and I got to relate this story to you about just this same thing. There was a guy in here, not real super educated, but a guy who was in his fifties, something like that, an educated Navajo. He was in here, and real friendly, real nice guy, he's talking about him being a silversmith, and I realized I didn't know him. We were talkin' in Navajo and English, too, back and forth, and I said, "Where you from?" He said, "I'm from out at Inscription House." I said, "Oh, you knew Bah Jo Phah [phonetic spelling]," which was the name they called Stokes Carson [phonetic spelling]. Stokes Carson was in this country forever. When I said, "You knew Bah Jo Phah." He said, "He cheated!" First thing he said! "He cheated!" And then he switched to Navajo and he said, "stingy-tight-crooked-cheater." And he first said bi»hatsoh, and then "he cheated." Then I said--I didn't offend him--see, I knew Stokes, I knew the whole family, and I said, "Well, what do you mean he cheated?" He said, "Well, he stayed out there all of those years, and he never gave nothin' back. And he finally died. There's no way he could get all that stuff into that box with him." So that made him crooked, because he took more than he needed, so he became the capitalist. To me that was the best story about capitalism versus socialism. The only difference in collectivism and socialism is where the control is vested: socialism in the state, and collectivism in the culture itself, which is much more demanding. And this happened last week. This guy said, "He cheated." I know the Carson family, they were good. And Stokes, he was a trader, he made money. But you don't make money-- the Navajo interprets this as "you make money off of us. You actually got more from us than you needed, because when you left, you couldn't take it with you, you couldn't get it in that box. So this makes you crooked." This is the key to what I am trying to explain.

I even read this from my friends in Northern Arizona Economic Development. What's her name? Joan.... 

Underhill: Tomichi? [phonetic spelling] 

Blair: Tomichi. Nothing in this pamphlet mentions the difference in socialism or capitalism. There's nothing there. My friend Al Henderson, he has another program with what's his name, Terry Jan.... 

Underhill: Janis? 

Blair: Janis. He's there too. See, they don't interpret the difference in the economic philosophy of the Anglo and the difference in the economic philosophy of the Navajo. And what makes you crooked in their eyes, what makes 'em crooked in your eyes is two different things. And see, they don't do it. Somebody should tell 'em that. (laughs) 

Underhill: I think you just did! 

Blair: Yeah, 'cause it isn't mentioned. And no one understands it. Can't you see how the trader ended up actually with a bad name? because you had two different philosophies, 180o opposed to each other, and the interpretation of what is good, what is bad, what is honest or dishonest was two different things. 

Underhill: And how did that play into the 1972 Federal Trade Commission hearings, and maybe a little background about that? 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Underhill: ... at the Dinnebito Trading Company in <Page Arizona>, Monday, February 9, [1998], 12:15 p.m. Brad Cole is present, as is Lew Steiger. During our quick break, and we wanted to capture for tape, Brad had asked the question about taxation, and what kind of taxes you did pay as a trader. 

Blair: Back at this original 1955 negotiated lease for twenty-five years--I think it was '55, probably ended in '80--I think basically all the people who was included in this period paid a 1½ percent of gross sales, taxes or lease payment in rent, to the Navajo Tribe. And that was basically the taxes, all the rent, actually--actually, it was rent--1½ percent of gross sales. And that's what we paid to the tribe. 

Cole: What about trade pawn and pawn? How did that fit into that? Or would it? 

Blair: The United Indian Traders Association fought this tooth and nail before my time, and we finally came to the conclusion that there was not a sale until there was an actual sale. Some of the accounts and whatever tried to say that every transaction was a sale, but I think we basically won out and said it wasn't a sale. We was on a cash basis, not an accrual basis, and so we paid at the actual sale, which was the gross sales. 

Underhill: Speaking of United Indian Traders Association, of course that's a big part of the story we're trying to capture. The 1972 Federal Trade Commission hearings, if you could tell us a little about the hearings, and then maybe the role of the United Indian Traders Association in that. 

Blair: Well, that was probably one of the biggest fights that we probably had, which actually was with DNA actually. You know, they was the ones, and FTC came in and had the hearings, you know. But who promoted this was DNA and these legal aid attorneys, most of 'em from back East. And they came in and it was promoted actually at that time by Peterson Zah, because he was the director of DNA, and I think sold the idea that the trader was an exploiter, that he was really exploiting these people. They said everything in the world about us, that we had a captive audience, that we did credit saturation and all of these different things that the trader did, and they had the hearings, and we participated. I think--I was president during this time, of the Traders Association, and LaVoy McGee either was vice-president or whatever, but LaVoy and I went to <Washington DC>, which Peterson Zah was there, and we met with FTC. And you know, trying to explain what I have been explaining to you in this setting, you should try in the asphalt jungle in <Washington DC> Now, this was.... It was just hard to look at those Anglos and Belaganas around this room who was gonna decide not necessarily so much my fate, as the Native Americans', the Navajos' fate, because to me, who was really being done in on this whole thing was the Navajo people. The trader really wasn't the guy that was gonna really be hurt from this, but we tried. But you just couldn't relate it to them. But anyway, they had the hearings, and the big thing was that the trader’s interest. You know, the annual percentage rate--take cash pawn, for example. Well, I told you we charged 20 percent. Well, if you charge 20 percent on a ten-dollar pawn, and the guy comes in the next day and takes it out and you don't prorate the percentage, or you don't adjust the amount you charge him, then this computes into 240 percent annual percentage rate. And boy, I mean, the papers blew this up like, "Oh, that's awful! Two hundred and forty percent?! This is the awfulest thing in the world!" Well, to give you a comparison, if off reservation at the same identical period, even today in <Arizona>--and <New Mexico> was even more so, and <Colorado>--all the border towns, you have a set-up fee, which is like $5.00 in <Arizona>. So you would charge him $5.00, and then you give him an annual percentage rate of 36 percent, but you didn't have to compute the annual percentage rate, which if you did, you would have over 1000 percent, which was legal at that time. I don't know, I shouldn't say 1000 percent, but there was a percentage, if you took it out the next day. In <New Mexico> at this time, the annual percentage rate was 54 percent, without the set-up extra. This was just something they never did. See, they wouldn't allow the traders to.... When we went to <Washington>, when LaVoy and I did, one of the big arguments we was sayin', "Well, we don't mind the 2 percent <Arizona> or the 3 percent per month or 36 percent, actually, a year, as long as you had a set-up charge." But they would not agree to have a set-up charge like everybody else does. And that's what we have now. You have $5.00, a rifle is $10.00. But that isn't computed in the annual percentage rate. And this was the big argument. But on the rez, they didn't want that. They wanted to wipe out the trader and no argument was gonna make any difference about anything. 

Underhill: And why do you think they wanted to wipe out the traders? 

Blair: I (chuckles) think it was just the times-- very liberal times that they had. They didn't understand what I have explained about the difference in economics between the trader and the Navajo. They thought that we was out there to rip them off. At this time, you know, truth in lending come in, and boy, the big, bad word was "open-end credit," like we had used, and stuff like that, and you credited them from wool season to wool season. A guy just trades. See, yet by today we have open-end credit on your credit cards. See, all you have to do is pay a minimum, and you have open-end credit. They didn't want that. I think it was just a liberal time in the world, and these people were idealistic, social reformers, and they had this ax to grind, and I think Mr. Zah probably had a very bad experience somewhere with a trader that wasn't probably the best trader in the world. And he could have had a bad experience. So he was really ok, but.... And I know him. I saw him later, and he's an okay guy, but he really wanted to reform unknowingly. They even put out a book, said, the traders are destroyin' the tradin' post system. They thought it was really a system, like we were all out there together, and we was doin' all these things to the Navajos. They didn't know. Why they did it, 'cause they didn't understand. They still don't understand. If you're sittin' out there in the middle of the reservation, and an old lady at Navajo Mountain, like today, and she needs a sack of flour. All she's got to do is take one lamb to that trading post, that he will buy, and she can get a sack of flour. Today, if she wants a sack of flour, to sell that one lamb, which there's no lambs left--she can't sell it, so why should she? There aren’t very many of 'em left. She has to go to <Cortez Colorado>, to a sale barn, or St. Joe's, <Arizona>, to a sale barn. By the time you haul that lamb to <Cortez Colorado>, to a sale barn, you kind of defeated the purpose.

Now, there is other individual dealers in livestock here and there that do do a little of this. But basically, the trader was gone. And they couldn't see how this would make that much difference. They completely destroyed the market for the Navajo products in this. Now, you tell me why. I don't know why. I would have thought, as we call them, "economic illiterates," they were economic illiterates. And I think as I told you before, I was quoted in The Arizona Republic and half a dozen different publications that I said that FTC and DNA "came with rope in hand to hang the traders, but they hung the Navajos." And I don't know that they ever understood it. They say, well, all we were doin', we didn't want to put in shoppin' centers. I was on the board, helped to put in the original shoppin' center that DCI [Dine Cooperative Inc.] put in in <Chinle Arizona>. The shoppin' center was past due, it was time. The Navajo people, the Navajo consumer had a more diverse merchandise to buy from, but that you can't put one in <Chinle Arizona>, and solve a problem of a Navajo living on Navajo Mountain on top of <Black Mesa>, that is 50-75 miles away with no roads, all the mud, all the snow. If they wanted to do that, then they would have had to have gone to Navajo Mountain, to Dinnebito, <Piñon>, etc., and then put in small satellite shoppin' centers and trade like the traders did, which the shoppin' center operators wouldn't have done it, because it wouldn't have been economically feasible to do it. The trader, if they had have left it alone, it would eventually evolve to where there would be no reason for the trading post. But they just come in and whacked it off, and the Navajo was sittin' there, holdin' the bag, really--that's who got hurt. The trader--you know, we were business people. When it became to where it didn't work feasibly for us, we changed, we moved, or we did something different. But the Navajo, see, he was stuck, he could not go anywhere. He was settin' there, and then had to adjust his lifestyle. But you know, the Navajo has been so, mistreated by the federal government, that this was just another blow. He just humps up and takes it. And really, I don't think the grass roots people really understood what was happening, or they may have made a little bit more to do about it, 'cause they interviewed a lot of Navajos. I know when we interviewed Mr. Link down there, he said, "Yeah, but there was a lot of Navajos that was interviewed in this thing." They were, the same Navajo that says Stokes Carson can't get it in that box. The same mentality. Well, see, they was doin' that. You were a cheater because you made more than you could put in that box. Same thing. They didn't understand it. Yet, these legal aid people--attorneys fresh out of Harvard or wherever these law schools that they came from--had absolutely no idea in the world about capitalism or free enterprise system. See, lawyers are taught--they're paid mouths. That's what they are. They know nothin' to do with economics. They don't.... Well, my accountant one time said to me, about how we run a business, he said, "Elijah, I am the accountant. I know how to balance the figures. You're the one who knows how to run a business." And that's right. An attorney does not know how to run a business. An accountant doesn't know how to run a business. He can tell you if the books balance. The attorney can get you sometimes out of jail if you do something wrong, but he doesn't know anything about economics. Yet these are the people, as I said, they were idealistic social reformers, these guys came, with a gun. See, the gun was FTC. This is where they got the gun. It's very scary when you give an idealist a gun, and that's what they did. And you see, and I can go on forever about the effect this will have on the Navajo consumer.

See, when the trading post left, when you had this anchor for the community left out here, then about this time this welfare system came in. So then all these people, there's no reason now to sit out there and have this big herd of sheep where they could take to the trader and buy and sell to him, or whatever. They have to go off the reservation, or to a shopping center on the reservation. So then consequently, the Navajo actually moved to these communities, like <Tuba City>, <Kayenta>, the big communities and towns, and then you see the ghettos beginning to appear. And this is gonna be the next big push. These people are livin' in ghetto conditions, because they can't live out there, because they removed the source of the market for their product. The trader serviced that. And there's no way for them to do that now. There's no reason to be out there. They thought about--any more, you say somethin' to the Navajo about the sheep herd, they say, "There's no sheepherders. Only the sheepherder is the dogs." And the dogs are the [sheepherders]. You just have five or six little bunches of sheep. There's nothing to do with the sheep. They eat 'em, or they trade 'em back and forth with each other. But it doesn't supplement the economy like it did for part of the family group working somewhere else. This livestock supplemented the income and stabilized this existence they had out in the remote areas. 

Underhill: Let's maybe look at some of those historical changes. You mentioned the livestock and the role early on. How did the stock reduction impact trading? And that was probably a little before your time, but do you have any sense about that in the 1930s and the fallout from that? 

Blair: All I really know about it is it was really before my time. It happened in the thirties. But I know, there's one Navajo cuss word that a Navajo knows, and that's John Collier [phonetic spelling]. That is the worst thing in the world that you can call anybody, is John Collier. (laughs) That's the way you cuss in Navajo. John Collier was the guy, he was the Bureau of Indian Affairs superintendent of the stock reduction. That was really a bad word. And I think, here again, it's typical of everything that our federal government has ever done. Whatever they touch with the Native American, there is 999 different ways that it could have been done better if they would just come out and ask the people who it was gonna affect, the Navajos themselves or the traders. See, the trader usually knew just about everything that was happening in the community, 'cause everything happened in the community, a better way to do it. But the decisions are made back there in that asphalt jungle ______ they was tryin' to make the decision about the FTC, it is not the place to relate to what they were doin'. You know, it was the method they used. As I said, the livestock was probably the biggest status symbol the Navajo had. So the more he had, the better, the more social standing he was thought about, as bein', you know--that, and his jewelry. This was his status symbol. And when they start roundin’ these things up, and they shoot 'em and bury 'em and push 'em in ditches and kill 'em, that was an awful thing to do. They are so close to the livestock. The method that they used was awful. Granted, there was a reason to do it--the grazin', the grass was definitely overgrazed, and somethin' had to be done. I will give them that. But the method that they used, typical of every federal project they've ever done on the reservation, to the Navajo or any Native American, they should go hire a different bunch. But that's about all.... And I really don't know. I just know how vividly they dislike John Collier. 

Underhill: I've heard you mention the Railroad Retirement Board. How does that fit into the trading story? 

Blair: When I came to the tradin' post in '48--and I'm not quite sure exactly when.... And I'm not too sure but what the United Indian Traders Association may have been involved in this, I'm not sure. But someone finally figured out that, see, you had seasonal railroad work that worked on the Union Pacific and DNRG and Santa Fe and all these places--there was seasonal work that these Navajos went and worked on there. They were laid off, and then they came back. Well, actually, they were actually qualified for unemployment. So somewhere back in there, someone must have said they should be able to sign up for unemployment. So then they made, all traders became a special claims agent for the Railroad Retirement Board. And we were special claims agents. And every Tuesday, I think, at <Mexican Water>, when I went there, you had all these people who had ever worked on the railroad, they came in and they signed up for unemployment. And then the next week they came in again, and you asked them all these questions, "Are you able to work?, willing to work?, and all these things to qualify." You say, "Yeah." And then every two weeks they would get a check. 

Underhill: Through the trader? 

Blair: No, they got a check from the Railroad Retirement Board. It was a government check, and this is a government office, the Railroad Retirement Board, and they actually got a government check from the Railroad Retirement Board. Some way was funded through the federal government. And this is--all traders did this, the Railroad Retirement Board. So then we signed up, we was unemployment agents. Actually, we were agents of the unemployment service. So then when the railroads opened up in the spring and the jobs opened up, then they would call--the headquarters was like in Gallup--then they would start to saying, "Well, <Mexican Water> has fifty claimants, so then they need forty workers in <Idaho>," or something like that. And then they would call and say, "Okay, from Dinnebito we want five workers or ten workers," and stuff like this. And then we delivered them on such and such a date to <Farmington New Mexico>, where they would be put on a bus and shipped to wherever in trucks. We have pictures. And we haul them in a pickup. Sometimes you'd have as many as twenty people. So we would have a truck that you all stand up in the back. And I have pictures where these guys are standing in the back, and we hauled them from <Mexican Water> to <Farmington New Mexico>, which was 130 miles, 80 miles of dirt road, and we delivered them there. And this went on. I think I was a Railroad Retirement claims agent until in the late sixties--seventies I was still shipping. Even in the seventies, I think I was a federal retirement claims agent. 

Underhill: Elijah, it's almost like what didn't you do? But the trader performed a variety of functions. You've mentioned interpreter between Navajo and English, being a Railroad Retirement agent. What other kinds of community services did the trader perform? 

Blair: Well (chuckles), see, the trader was the Bilagáanaa, the white man. To the Navajo, this Anglo is supposed to be all-knowing, because they were certainly makin' all the rules for 'em, governing their whole life. And the trader actually did, to them, we could do anything. So anything they wanted to do, or problems they had, they would come to us. And I think of bein'--marital disputes between husband and wives. Gosh, I've gone over to Paul and Glenda Jone's hogan-- they lived right next to the store--and not separated 'em, but talked to each of 'em individually. I'll tell you one story about old Louis Mitchel. He weighed about 350 pounds--no, 250, 275 pounds, somethin' like that. Had this real small lady, Ason Shorty. Her name was Rose Mitchel. She's still living. But real small lady, and Louis would get a little bit too much to drink, so they'd always come. And so they came down to the store one day and they says, "Louis is gonna kill Rose. You gotta come or Louis is gonna kill Rose!" Well, they lived back up on the mesa behind there, so he's got an ax and he's chasin' Rose. So I get in the pickup and I run up there, and here, sure enough, old Louis is runnin' on poor little old Rose. She wasn't that big. Short with this ax. Boy, he's gonna grind her up. So I went up there and I talked Louis out of the ax. (laughs) That was only one story, but I can tell you a million stories about old Louis and Rose.

One time they were comin' down from <Towaoc Colorado> and Rose was very vocal. Louis was a great big guy, never said very much. They came down from <Towaoc> down through there, and Rose was obviously onto Louis because he had had too much to drink, and he was giving [her a] hard time. They would always ride in the back of the pickup, and it was wet and snowing and stuff like that, so he just reached out, picked up old Rose, just pitched her out. (laughter) And they go way down there before they realized, "Hey!" you know, she's back there in the mud, so they have to turn around and go back and get her. (laughter)

But, you know, we did everything--whatever. The kids always wrote letters. They sent the kids off to school, so we read the letters, and then we wrote the letters back to the kids. The kids always wanted somethin', they wanted pants and we'd get 'em pants. So we'd end up chargin' to the accounts. Anything, any legal matters.... At <Aneth> many years ago, there was-- oh, there was allotments over there, when oil was discovered at <Aneth Utah>, there. There was one guy, he was actually the son of Old Man Jelly, but his mother was a Paiute. So the rest of the family did not want Cyrus to participate in Old Man Jelly's allotment, which had the oil royalties on it. So Cyrus comes to me and says, "Hey, that's my daddy!" Let's see.... Yeah, and I went to court and hired this Dan Malinski [phonetic spelling] and we went to court with the family in Gallup--it was federal court--to prove that Cyrus was the son of Old Man Jelly. And I ended up being the interpreter, 'cause as I said, "These guys had interpreters too, but interpreters tend to interpret what they want to interpret. So I was in there, and I would set by Dan, and I'd say, "Hey, that ain't what he said!" So anyway, this went on for about two weeks. Let's see, Cyrus ended up, we proved that he was the child of Old Man Jelly, and he became, I don't know how many hundred thousand dollars he got out of the oil royalty. He's right now in a nursing home in <Blanding Utah>. And the family, I'm sure, is still gettin' that oil royalty from him. But this is just part of the things that we did. Whatever. Whatever came up, whatever. At <Aneth> the river came right down by the store. So in order to get the people from the other side of the river back across, we had this little wooden boat that we built and furnished for them to go back and forth to the store. One of the things I'll show you guys tomorrow as we go by, back in those days, see, you didn't have these case aides, as they call 'em, welfare people, tried to get people on welfare, stuff like that. So the trader knew that--see, it was actually to our benefit to get these people that would qualify for disability, aid to dependent children and stuff like that, so the case work was like over in <Blanding Utah>, or somewhere like that. Well, they didn't come to the reservation. So we would load--I remember Brad and I one time, got a pickup and put whoever we thought would qualify--we pretty well knew who would qualify--so we went from <Mexican Water> to <Red Mesa>, down across country to Bluff City. Well, you get to Bluff City, then there was no bridge at Bluff City at that time, but the case worker was over at Cow Canyon Trading Post--we were supposed to meet him there. So then we'd already prearranged to where they would meet us with horses, and we rode everybody across the river, two-by-two, or whatever horses, and we took 'em over to get to the case aide. And all these people--you know, this is things that we did.

Gosh, there was just.... And it was so normal to do it, because you thought, "Hey, we're here to serve." You know, our primary objective was service--versus the discount stores, where they say, "You got price, you put it up on a shelf and you buy it if you want to, 'cause it's good." The traders serviced the customer, and he worked with that customer. This was.... (exasperated sigh) There's probably a hundred other things that we did that I don't know--anything that they wanted. But those two or three samples of what we did. 

Underhill: You mentioned the welfare, Social Security. How was that a benefit to traders? 

Blair: Well, see, the more money.... To get back to the philosophy of the Navajo, back to his collectivism. See, money had no value to this Navajo-- only when it was spent. He would buy jewelry, livestock, or merchandise. But you and I put it in a savings account, or we invest it somewhere, stuff like that. The Navajo bought stuff, and money had no value at all. So now you're sittin' out here in the middle of the reservation, nowhere. Every customer that you could get, that would qualify for welfare--see, they would get a check, and they would end up there in your store with this check, and there was no bank, so then we cashed all the checks for them. So we either extended credit towards those checks, or when they cashed a check, they would turn around and buy whatever they wanted. And you know, the greatest thing in the world to a retailer is having someone settin' in your store, tryin' to throw money at you, and that's exactly what they were doin'. And see, this is another reason they never understood why it was such a lucrative business for the traders. To me it was a lucrative business. All you had to figure out is what did they want, and be sure that you had it, and some way arrange payment schedules and whatever would fit for you and them, so that they could buy. Now, the more progressive traders did this. They made the stores larger, they got more merchandise, and they tried to pay and get higher prices for rugs. If you upgraded the Navajo economy itself, through higher prices for their rugs or livestock.... See, we bought registered bulls, traded in the old bull for the new bull. We bought registered bucks and bought and traded it in. See, any time that the trader could improve the plight, economically, financially, or from a more--it was more marketable to have better livestock, better calves, and better wool. See, we brought better wool in because you got a higher price for a better, than the old Churro sheep that the Mexicans brought in. So we did all this. And you did it. We didn't have altruistic reasons for doin' this, we did it because when we raised their standards of living, or their economic base, it raised ours, because we knew we was gonna sell 'em something. So we did all of these things. You always was doin' things like this. 

Underhill: What do you think separates a good trader from a bad one? You've used the word "progressive" a couple of times, and described some of the things that the traders did. Anything that stands out that might distinguish someone who's a good trader from a bad trader? 

Blair: Well, I really think I'd rather talk about who the good trader was. The good trader. (chuckles) Them who didn't fit into this category was probably the one who weren’t. The good trader was one who went out there and he accepted the Navajo people, their lifestyle, their culture, their religion, their philosophy of life. He tried to understand it, and he tried to work with it, or fit it so that they could live together and understand each other, yet they was 180o opposed to each other in economic philosophy. Now, I think the good trader figured this out. See, he came out there, and he had no preconceived ideals. He wasn't the missionary type. Or he wasn't a social reformer, or whatever. He came, and he thought.... There were some of the missionary-type trader there, and I think even those realized that, "Hey, you know, we've gotta live with these people. We can't set here and talk about 'em being good, bad, or whatever." We just learned to work with 'em and live with it. And then you had, as I said, the more progressive trader as the economy chanaged, particularly after World War II, which actually when I came in there. As the Navajo were more exposed through the war--a lot of them went into the service, you know, during the war. And a lot of them went to the railroad and worked outside of the reservation, and they saw different things. They saw different things that they needed. So then the more progressive of trader tried to have all of these things for them. And whatever they wanted, they tried to get for them. They made the stores larger, they keep growin' with the changes of time. And they treated them just like they would any other person--Anglo or whatever. They didn't treat them different--the same rules applied to a Native American that did to your fellow trader or fellow Anglo. Now, this was the good trader. They didn't make a difference because he was Anglo--or he was a Native American, you was an Anglo.

You had different types of traders. You had four or five. You had traders that came out, a lot of the missionary-type trader. You know, he wanted to save the people. But actually, he didn't do too well, because he didn't do too well because it was controversial with the Native American. Then you had other traders who come out who wanted to become a Native American. He wanted to really go and be them. He, to me.... Actually, the trader that came with no preconceived ideas, no.... Well, he didn't have any reason to try to convert. He was actually a free thinker. He didn't exactly accept.... You know, he accepted what they were, for what they were, and didn't try to say, "You're wrong," or whatever, something like that, 'cause this really alienated a lot of the customers because you was that. You know, to say, "Hey, you know, your lifestyle is wrong," or "your religion is wrong," and stuff like that. You can't do that and still be a trader, and be a successful trader. And this is what the Navajo _______. You, know, it's one thing to say that they were different, but many people, I think a lot of the traders said, "Hey, you know, they're wrong. Boy, you gotta convert you into bein' something other." I always took the premise that, you know, it isn't a matter of right and wrong, it's the right to be right or wrong. So, you know, leave 'em alone, let 'em do whatever they wanted to do, in their own way, and try to live and adjust to them, 'cause you actually was out there in the middle of nowhere with no one else around, except them. They was what you had to work with. But you had two definite types of traders. You had a trader that came and actually just sold everything. He tried to, you know, just do it as cheaply as he could, and get everything out of the community that he could, whether or not he was.... He bought all the livestock, everything. You think of him as a taker or a giver. The guy that took, he just took everything, this trader did, _________. Then you had the giver, which I've always thought of as a guy who comes out and he worked with the weaver, trying to bring the weaver up, or the livestock up to a level. And here again, we weren't doing it for any altruistic reasons. This trader knew that if he could raise their standard of living, the financial conditions they were in--and he was there for the long haul. See, the other guys, some other traders came and, "Hey, I'm gonna be here ten years and leave," or "I'm gonna be here so long." But the trader who came and stayed, he really was trying to bring them and him up to where there was more money, more everything to come along. To me, this was the good trader, that guy. 

Underhill: You mentioned weavers and folks with livestock too. How did you identify potential artisans? Obviously people came in the store, but.... 

Blair: Well, see, Karen, every day you had a weaver or a potter or a basketmaker--depending on the area that you was in--they came in. And they wanted to sell you something. It didn't take you very long to realize that this lady really could weave. She did a real quality piece of work, although.... I think a perfect example was at Dinnebito. This is where the real weavers were. I mean, the weavers that had such a potential that had never had a trader to help them develop what would be a commercial, marketable item. 'Cause when I first went to Dinnebito, I had an office as big as this office, and you would sit there and you would fill it up, stacked up this high, all around the wall here--maybe not quite full--of saddle blankets. They made double saddle blankets. There's a single saddle blanket over there on the wall. And, you know, you was payin' like--this is in the sixties--you was payin' like $10 or $12 or $6 or $8 for a saddle blanket, you know. And then you saw people like Rose Dan that brought in the finest saddle blanket you ever saw. You'd been around a while, and you realized, "Hey, this lady can make a rug! She doesn't need to make a $10 saddle blanket, she's gonna get more for it." So then I went to places--I remember there was a Don Watson had a store, actually a gallery just like this, at <Cortez>--and we took all his rugs, all over the country, and I took hundreds of pictures of rugs. So then I went back to people like Rose Dan. They was hundreds of 'em. And I said, "Hey, make this--make this rug." And I picked out the good ones. I said, "Well, make this rug." And so then I moved 'em from saddle blankets to a rug, a floor rug, this size, three by five rug or somethin' like that. And then they went from a $10 saddle blanket to a $100 rug, just (snaps fingers) like this. They already knew how to do it. In every area that you will ever find on the reservation, wherever there is good weavers, good quality rugs comin' out of there, somewhere back in the back there's a trader who got down and said, "Do this." You know, "Do it like this," or "change it like this. This is what the public wants." See, we continuously tried. When we bought it, we knew we had to market it. So then we knew and found out where the market was, what the market wanted. So then all traders worked with these people like this. This went on--see, I was at Dinnebito thirty-five years, so we had some of the finest rugs come out of there, and still do. Relocation--they all moved from there. That's why we moved, because of relocation. Now they're scattered everywhere, but they still come to us now, because they know that we appreciate this type rug. That's one of the ways that you found artisans. You saw their product they did, and if you'd been around a while, you could easily identify who was the weaver, who was the potter, the basketmaker, whoever. 

Underhill: Did you supply the yarn, raw materials for rugs, at all? Or did the weaver.... 

Blair: Originally, see, back in the days when they were doing their own shearing, carding, and spinning-- those rugs, see, then they used their own sheep. You're skippin' fifty years in here. They used their own sheep. Now, one thing we would do, when you had the wool clipped--like, at the trading post, see--we would buy like 300 bags of wool at Dinnebito. Well, when we had the wool sacked by our sackers, see, we would have him pull out the blacks, the grays, the white, good long staple. The Navajo ladies liked that. And we would put it in a separate pile. Then we would sell it back to 'em, 'cause a lot of 'em didn't have sheep--and they would come and buy it that way. But this was raw wool. Then later on as you probably are aware of, you know, they started where they did have the prewashed and carded wool. First it came in a great big skein like this. Then you just unwrap it, and you would weigh it and sell it to 'em. But, as you saw hanging here in the back room, this is the prespun, predyed, one-ply wool, just like the Navajo lady did herself when she was doin' all her own washin', cardin', spinnin', and dyin' that's here now. So we do sell that, and have sold it probably for the last ten or twenty, fifteen years or so. And they have been predyed. Comes from different places, and we sell most of that is done now by a commercial yarn. Now, here in this area, you do get some of the handspun, like those on the floor. That's a handspun rug. And there is some around this area. In the more traditional area, out in this Navajo Mountain, <Shonto>, and the west reservation area is quite a bit. They call it sheep wool. They say, "This is real wool. That other...." (chuckles) And it is. But you know, the real yarns that they did themselves. And there's still some of it comes up. Some people like it, but not too many of 'em do it anymore. 

Underhill: And at your trading post... perhaps it changed over time. What were the popular items that you carried for the women, for the men? 

Blair: Well, one of the most popular items probably is Pendleton shawls. See, this was actually--and this was from day one, where it was 1948 or today, the most popular item probably was Pendleton shawls and robes. The other popular item, as I mentioned downstairs a while ago, is the buckskins and the baskets. Now, this was for women and men, this was for the whole picture. See, you had to have this. In all the ceremonies and everywhere they had a ceremony or wherever, the trader and all of these 200 and some trading posts that was on the <Navajo Reservation>.... See, we always had buckskins and the ceremonial basket, or a lot of people refer to as the wedding basket. Actually, it's a ceremonial basket, 'cause everything, in any ceremony the Navajo uses, this is the basket that he used. And here again, you have to go back to what happened to the Navajo people when there's no longer a place to buy a buckskin or a Navajo basket. There's no trading post out there now, so the man on Navajo Mountain or <Black Mesa> or wherever he is, if he wants to buy a buckskin, he has got to go off reservation to this place. See, I know, I'm a trader. As I say, I know what they want, what the Navajo people want, so then we see to it that we have buckskins and wedding baskets and __________. And we also sell it to other traders--other traders off reservation--stores and businesses, because we know what they want. But if you think back, then this is one of the--as I said, who got hung was the Navajo. See, he can't find that out there anymore. There aren't any traders out there that stock this type of merchandise, so they have to go off reservation. Thriftway certainly isn't gonna carry it. There's one or two stores. There's one, Hank's, for instance. He has a store over at <Lukachukai>, which is more a convenience type store. He will carry a few, but very few--there are very few places on the reservation any more that has that. The Traders off reservation, in Gallup, they will have these baskets and buckskins.

The other popular item I would say is for the ladies, the plush shirts, the material a lot that we had. And this always, for the traditional Navajo, even at Dinnebito, five, six, eight years ago, five years, see, in the eighties, see, you still was sellin' that plush shirt for the traditional. And the materials, all the materials, sing cloth, was actually here again, was back to a ceremonial thing--you always stocked singing cloth to use in the ceremonies. And the ladies, you had scarves, material, shirts, blouses. And as you get into the more modern stores, you had really--like in Dinnebito we had a complete western wear section for both ladies and men. We had boots and hats and anything of apparel for men and women both. In the traditional store, we always sold hats, because the trader was the westerner, and he wore hats--so the Navajos wore hats, and they identified--the trader actually was, he took on the western look because he was a westerner--they all was. And then the Navajo came along and so he wore the same type--for many years now, but not too long ago, the Navajo is not wearing as much western clothes, but then a lot of the traders kinda got away from it too. I always said that the trader who really didn't want to be identified with the Navajo didn't wear the cowboy hats and stuff. And I still think that had a lot to do with it. They didn't want to be identified with the rural country, like back in the hills of <Kentucky> you didn't wear your bib overalls in town, 'cause they knew you was a clodhopper from back in the hills, so you tried to dress a little different. To me, the West, I like to be western because this is what made this country. Everybody in the world wants to come to the West, because the cowboy, the Indian, the trader, the trading post… the West has a great heritage, and this is part of it. 

Underhill: Who did most of the buying?, Navajo men or women? 

Blair: A lot of the buying was bought by the men. Well (chuckles) yeah, I would say a lot of the buying was bought by men. They, in the olden days, particularly, women were shyer a lot. It probably was pretty much mutual, but the Navajo man lots of times came in the wagon or on the horse and he knew what he was supposed to take back. The women, lots of times, forty or fifty years ago, didn't always come. The men would come, and then they would come with the men, but the man talked more, and he probably dealt a little bit more with the trader. But then the woman knew what she wanted, and she would buy the cloth and whatever she wanted. It probably was pretty much mutual, depending on what they needed for the family, I think, involved. 

Underhill: If someone were to recall some of the funny incidents, maybe at Dinnebito, what stories stand out in your mind? You've mentioned a couple, but are there any that are your favorites? 

Blair: I mentioned, I think, in one of the stories of Rose Dan, I've talked about her a lot, because she was quite a weaver, and she still comes here, and she sells her rugs to Jahi, and it doesn't matter what happens. I mean, she comes to sell her rugs to me. And I mean, this has been going on thirty-five years. One time she came in the store and she says, "Boy, Jahi, you are no good"--saying all this in Navajo--"you sell me that hay up there. That hay is no good! It killed my horse three times!" (laughter) That's one of 'em.

I [can] tell one on old Bruce. Bruce worked for me quite a bit. He was at Dinnebito and we always had gates around, before we had the self service gondolas. We had a gate, and Bruce will tell it himself if you interview him, so I'll beat him to it. But we were in there, and we always had someone that had a little bit too much Twister or Tokay, and boy, they loved to come and pick on the customers. So sometimes we had to kind of bodily get 'em out of there, or push 'em out or run 'em out. One time old John Bizardy [phonetic spelling] was in the store, and he had harassed me forever, and I had just got tired of it, so I went over that gate after old John--I was gonna get him out of that store. And old Bruce, back there, he says, "Here comes Jahi on John Bizardy out of chute number two!" (laughter) By that time I got so tickled (laughter) that I couldn't! Finally got old John out, but.... (laughs)

Well, there was a million. There was so many. 

Underhill: Someone once told me--and I don't believe this--that the Navajo people don't have a strong sense of humor. In your experience, what would you say to that? 

Blair: They have. Really, they are the funniest people in the world in their own language, their own way. It's the hardest thing in the world.... I could sit here and tell you dozens of the funniest jokes in the world that doesn't mean anything in English, when you translate their joke into English. It gets back to the culture and what they're talking about. They absolutely have the best sense of humor in the world.

We had this one guy that worked for me for twenty- five, thirty years, Robert Silas. He had a real dry sense of humor, and he could just keep us in stitches all the time. But it all happens in Navajo. See, the reason [people] think they have no sense of humor, 'cause they're not communicating with them. If you speak Navajo, these are the funniest people in the world, and absolutely can pull jokes on each other and do it all the time, and they are happy, funny, humorous people. If someone said they knew the Navajo and told you that, he certainly didn't know 'em very well. (laughs) 

Underhill: Well, let's talk a little about United Indian Traders Association. When and why did you join? 

Blair: Well, actually, as I said, I came in '48, so I'm sure that <Toadlena> and <Mexican Water> were already-- okay, they were already.... See, the trading post was the member, and whoever owned the trading post represented the trading post as the member. So when I came to <Toadlena>, Charles Herring was a member of the Association, which actually he was one of the charter members of the Association. And then I went to <Mexican Water> for Roscoe McGee. <Mexican Water> was a member of the Association--Roscoe and Jewel is members. And then when I went to <Aneth>, which is actually 1953, I bought an interest in Aneth Trading Post. Now, they weren't a member. A guy named Ralph Tanner owned the store, and I became a partner of his. And then '53 is when I, as an owner, probably joined the Traders Association at <Aneth>. I hope that comes out right. I went there in '53, so I would say I'd had experience with the Association before that, so I'm sure it's '53 or '54 I probably became a member. 

Underhill: And I know the membership has fluctuated a bit, but approximately how many posts were members? 

Blair: I don't know, I hope you guys figure this out somewhere. I think the average member of like 120, somewhere around this, could have been 110-130, depending. As someone said, if someone got into trouble or he needed the Association to fight his battle, then he would join. Then when everything calmed down, people would drop off. But I think there was over 120. At one time, I think there was about 200 posts on the <Navajo Reservation>, so there was 120 or so, probably, that was members. 

Underhill: Did you have a [END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] number? 

Blair: No. That really, the numbering system actually ended probably back before I even came. See, the original members did this, and they did it a lot to protect and perpetuate hand arts and crafts. And a lot of the people who really had the numbers were the people who were dealing more into silver and turquoise jewelry, and that's where they used the stamp with the numbering system. No, I didn't have a number, and really, by the time I became an Association member, this really wasn't a big part of it at that time--by that time it was really an association more for needs of the traders, the members that belonged to it, whatever need they may be, whether it was negotiating leases or whatever--negotiating leases or any problem that came up was pretty much what it was when I came on. 

Cole: Could you explain what the numbering system, how it came about and what it was for? 

Blair: Well, the way I understand it--now, I'm not too sure I know all this--but when the original people, charter members who established the Association, they all was dealin' heavy in arts and crafts, and particularly in jewelry. One of the ladies, I think, called you--this Allison Romero. See, she's doin' a history on C. W. Wallace, which I know was one of the charter members, and he had a number. And the stamp that stamped his number on there, and Dobbs Mouth [phonetic spelling] was also another brother-in-law of George Bloomfield. See, he had a number. And he and Fern both are gone. And they had Berrego [phonetic spelling] Pass Trading Post. So they had numbers. I think the purpose was so that.... See, they had silversmiths, a lot of these people had silversmiths who either worked for them, or they worked in their own homes or hogans, and they brought the silver in and they bought it from 'em, just like we were buying the rugs and whatever from 'em. And this really, when they stamped their number on this, this authenticated this was a genuine silver and turquoise made by a Navajo Indian, or a Zuni, or whoever made it. And this guy was actually verifying that. That's why they had the stamp. (aside about tape) 

Underhill: This is Karen Underhill with NAU, and it is Monday, February 9. We're at Dinnebito Trading Company in <Page Arizona>, interviewing Elijah Blair. Present are Lew Steiger and also Brad Cole. It is now 1:45 p.m. 

Steiger: This is the third tape of three, so far. 

Underhill: We were talking about the United Indian Traders Association, and taking it back before you were a member, to get your perspective and historical knowledge about the organization. I believe while we were off camera we talked about the stamps and numbers for the Association that were issued. You have a piece that has a number 31, but you were kind of guessing, there may have been around thirty or so members? 

Blair: Yes. Here again, I really don't know. I have this piece that's marked 31, and I was thinkin' there was thirty-some people, I think. Grace Herring may be able to tell you more. She had a brother-in-law named Don Smouse. She may have some information on Don, which as I know was a member, and had a stamp with a number. And these people were basically dealing in jewelry--a lot. Now, they were talking about all handmade Indian art and crafts, but the stamp was issued, I believe, basically to stamp the jewelry. And there's C. W. Wallace, I know of one, Don Smouse, Charles Herring, Woodard in <Farmington>, and I think his name was Don Woodard. There's a Don Woodard's son, but I think his name was also Don Woodard. His son also, Tom Woodard, lives in <Santa Fe>, promised me that he has information, and he would like to meet with you folks and give you all the information he can. So you're going to have to get it, I think, from someone other than me. I really don't know that much about it. 

Underhill: While you were involved with the Association and all the way to the present, what were some of the big issues? We've talked about the 1972 FTC hearings. What were some of the other issues that got people involved? 

Blair: Well, I think probably the first one may have been the 1955 lease negotiations with the tribe and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. That may have been first, or I'm not sure whether that one, but anyway, that was one of the big issues, 1955. And then the other big issues was the sales tax, charging sales tax on the reservation, which the Traders Association actually took the State of Arizona to court and it was called the Warren Trading Post versus the State of Arizona, and it went all the way to the Supreme Court, in which they won the case against charging sales tax on the reservation. I think basically this case is the one that set the precedent where that there isn't sales tax charged on any Native American reservation. Now, I'm not sure about this, but I know on the <Navajo Reservation>s, and these other reservations, there is not a sales tax charged, and this was a case that was won by United Indian Traders Association, and the Warren Trading Post was owned by Babbitt Trading Company at that time. And that was one of the things. The other thing, as I say, the negotiated lease, and the leases in '55, I guess, that was one.

And then the FTC hearings. That took up a lot of time. And in other times, there was individual little things that came up. Oh, I know that we and the board one time, when they came up with the endangered birds, the feathers that could be used on kachina dolls, and ones that couldn't be used. That was some of the things that we talked about, and I don't know that we did a lot with that, but it was these type things-- whatever affected a group of traders, not just an individual trader, but sometime if there's an individual problem that one individual trader had that was common, could be common to all, then the Association would take up [the cause]. Whatever the need for the membership, you know, arose, then the Association, we had an attorney which actually was Charles Tansey most of the time I was there. And then we would, you know, attorneys writes letters and negotiate or whatever. But the legal cases, our legal case was actually the FTC one, and the Arizona sales tax. FTC actually wasn't a legal case, because we didn't take it to court or anything. But that is the big ones that I think about, rather than any individual problem that someone had. Basically that's the only big ones that I really think of. 

Underhill: Was it Charles Tansey who took the case to the Supreme Court then? 

Blair: No, he was with the Navajo.... No, no, that wouldn't have been Charles. I really think that the attorney on the sales tax.... See, this is really happened just about the time I came, or I just came.... Well, '55, see, I had really been there about six, seven years, but I don't really remember too much about it. I know they did it, and I don't know who the attorney was. I think in the records, you know, the Trader Association records, you will probably find that there. And I'm not sure, but it wasn't Charles Tansey, I don't think. 

Underhill: How would you describe the workings of the Association? You had a board, and you've been the president. Did you have regular meetings, or just as needed? 

Blair: No, we usually had regular meetings, and we always had one annual meeting. We had a regular meeting. The president of the board could call special meetings in case there was something going on that we needed to get together and discuss. But we did have a regular meeting, and we always had an annual meeting. I think most of the annual meetings were like in the fall, sometime in September, something like that. And then at that time the membership actually voted for the board, and also they voted for their president. You had an election at that time, and then the board was elected. There was staggered board, like, you know, you'd have two going off, or three staying on-- whatever. They were staggered. There was always an election every year for some board members. And at that time, also, there was a nomination from the floor from the board itself who would be nominated. A member would be nominated to be a director, and then there would also be nominated who would be voted as the president. And that's at the annual meeting--this happened every year at annual. And then we also usually would have a dinner and a dance and whatever at that social. That was the social outlet for that annual meeting. And we staggered 'em. We would go, like, from <Flagstaff> one year, to <Gallup>, and then to <Farmington>. Those were the three places. We rotated around and had those meetings at one of those towns, depending on whose turn it was. 

Underhill: Would you describe it as a fairly cohesive group with common goals? Or were there dissenting opinions about what the Association should be doing? 

Blair: Well, I really think we all had about common goals. But, you know, anytime you get a committee bigger than three, someone's always doesn't agree with what-all you're doin', or "you should be doin' this." But, you know, you had a certain amount of this. Some people kinda disagreed with whether or not we should spend the money to have drinks at the socials. But, you know, I'm [not] so sure that I wasn't one of those (laughter) arguing against that. But that was a question to come up annually. (laughter) But we always had drinks at the meetings and socials. (laughter) 

Underhill: Within the Association, how were some of the bigger trading companies like Babbitt Brothers viewed? 

Blair: I saw that question on your list, and I really don't.... There was a lot of traders' families, like Roscoe McGee and Jewel and them--they owned four or five tradin' posts themselves. Springer, Harold and they had a group that owned three or four tradin' posts. I don't think they were viewed any other way, particularly the Babbitts. See, but one thing you have to realize about the Babbitt family, by the time I got there, there was no Babbitts that run a tradin' post. They were all absentee owners, and I think just practically every store I've ever been into, I've been competing with a Babbitt store. So it wasn't.... They was just another tradin' post. No good, bad, or whatever--they were just another store. It would depend a lot on the manager. You actually was competing more with the individual trader. And this was really what made the trading post itself, was whoever--I always said, "Well...." I always tell the kids, "The only thing, the difference between you and your competitor, is who bellies up to that counter." And that's really it. Who made the trading posts good or bad was the trader--whoever ran the store is what made the good stores. And his attitude. And so depending on what the larger stores, like you say, with the Babbitt stores, there was really no difference. Frankly, I would much rather compete with an absentee owner than I did the owner himself. My biggest competitors was my brothers. (laughter) And we were all associated, actually. My brother Brad and I, had the same partner in two different stores. But boy, I liked to compete with my brothers. They was competitors. You know, they ran the store, and they ran a good store. Lots of times you get just managers. They didn't have the same goals, they didn't have the same interest as just a guy who owned it, or who become a junior partner like we all did in the tradin' posts. So it was.... Absentee owners was good for you, if you was an owner that was competing with 'em, frankly. 

Underhill: What differences, if any, exist between traders who were actually operating on the reservation, and those who were in the border towns? 

Blair: I don't really know that there was a lot of traders actually in a border town who really operated the same way we did. There was a few, now. There was, later on, like that Navajo Shopping Center in <Gallup>. They basically did the same thing I did. I think one of the biggest things, they had an advantage over us because they didn't have all these rules and regulations that we had to do with. And if they wanted to make a capital improvement on their building, they could do it. They really could compete with a lot easier, because they had a different set of rules. They owned their own land, owned their own building, and they actually operated a lot like we did. They had the pawning systems we already covered. The off- reservation stores were legally doin' what the State said they could do, but they were charging twice as much for the cash. Annual percentage rate to them was twice as much as what we were charging, yet we was the ones they said, "Hey, you can't do that." And there wasn't very many like we were. There is a few, but not a lot. 

Underhill: Was the United Indian Traders Association involved in Navajo politics at all? 

Blair: Not at all. They really wasn't. That's one of the things in our lease with the--which actually came out with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, it's a federal lease. We were licensed. One of the stipulations in there was that we would not get involved, as an association or as a trader, in the politics. So neither one really was. 

Underhill: How has the Navajo-Hopi land dispute affected trading? 

Blair: Well, it affected the trader that was there in the middle, like myself. Well, it really caused the traders there and the Navajo people.... Like with us, for instance, see Dinnebito, they got done with relocating the Navajos, there's very few people there. So we just really relocated and came over here and abandoned the business. Now, later on it opened up as a small convenience store--it's operated by a Navajo family. But to me, there wasn't enough people left, see, there, to do it. So it practically, you know, moved a lot of people off of there. I know Cow Springs, which was a Babbitt store, is no longer there. I don't know whether they closed because of that, but I'm sure it affected them. Piñon.... But see, Dinnebito was really right in the middle of it, actually. They just barely went right around us, and then relocated everybody around it. Some of the best customers that we had ended up somewhere else, so it was probably more affected [than] a lot of the other stores were. If they relocated the customers, then it affected them. 

Cole: Did the Association have any involvement or opinion on the Navajo-Hopi relocation? 

Blair: Huh. No, not really, because it was such a magnitude that it was something that was untouchable. And there wasn't that many traders who was involved. Let's see.... I asked Charles Tansey a question one time about it, 'cause I was definitely involved, and I said something about, "Can they really just take your store? Can the federal government really just completely destroy your store and not reimburse you for this?" And Charles' answer was, he said, "Well, the same federal government who rounded up all of the Japanese-Americans and put 'em in concentration camps. So does that answer your question?" (laughter) 

Underhill: Or as any legal counsel says, "Don't ask your attorney something you don't want to know." (laughter) 

Blair: That's pretty good. You didn't ask this, but I'm gonna say it anyway. But see, this is another-- there was a book written by Jerry Kramer [phonetic spelling]. He's with The Arizona Republic now, and he called the book The Second Long Walk. You know where the original long walk was, when they were down to Whetistee [phonetic spelling] with <Fort Sumner>. And this really was. As I said before, anytime the federal government did anything to a Native American, there was 999 better ways to have done it. This situation was created by the federal government. The Navajo had nothing to do with it, the Hopi had nothing to do with it. It was completely created by Washing-tone, as the Navajo calls it. And they fool around with it, and it just made it worse. It is as bad a ripoff of the Navajo consumer, the Navajo people, as the FTC hearing was. It did the same thing. It was the most inhumane thing that ever--one of the many that they have endured--that ever happened to the Navajos as [relocatees?]. And it was completely.... So many different ways it could have been handled, rather than this. But here again, the decisions are made back there in those asphalt jungles, talking to people who really didn't know, didn't listen to it. The news media got involved. I think one of the things that hurt really the Navajo cause of Big Mountain--and I was in the middle of it. We had so many of these militants, where they were Anglos, whatever, American Indian Movement people. They moved in there, and they was really gonna save the Navajo. But they really hurt the cause, in my opinion. Now, they would probably disagree with me, but they hurt the cause of the Navajo people. And here again, I'm not saying the Hopis didn't have the right to the land. The Hopis was basically given the land, but I don't know if you understand. It was set aside by President Arthur, and he says, "We're settin' this land aside for the Hopi Indians and any other Indians who would need to live there." Well, when he did it, the Navajo was already livin' there. That was in 1868. So a hundred years later they try to solve it. Just think how many Navajo was born and how big the population of Navajos grew there. So if they were gonna do that, they should have done it a long time ago. But I'll quit. I could talk all day. (laughs) 

Underhill: How would you say that traders have influenced Native American art? You've touched on that in terms of showing designs to various weavers. Anything else come to mind about ways you've influenced art? 

Blair: Well, I would just reiterate the thing. If you find a good weaving area where good rugs come from, there was a trader there that influenced. He had a special interest in the weavin', and he also liked.... He appreciated the weaving, he appreciated what it went into, so he tried to direct--not exactly direct it--but encourage weavin' and other art, but weavin' is a big thing, biggest for the Navajo, the biggest thing. You just tried to improve it by talkin' to the people. And you know the Navajos were so receptive, the weavers were, of good traders who was interested in what they do, because they knew that when they made it good, that they would be better off. They also knew that you was gonna be better off, but they encouraged you to do it.

I always, in my office in Dinnebito, it was a big office like this, had a six by eight window out in front. And I always would hang up the rugs across this wall, and you would see the ladies sometimes when I was in the office, they would stand like this, looking through, to see if their rug was on Jahi's wall. And then they would always come in and they would say, they'd come up to the ladies, Sadie, Cardy, or Rose Dan. They'd come up and say, "Jahi, what do I make for you now?" They always would come up, say "give me the picture," 'cause, see, I always passed out pictures. Now, I wasn't the only one that did this. But this is what I did, and this is why we probably, until they scattered all of those people, they became some of the finest rug producers ever was. And it still gets back, the trader knew the trends. He knew the market. He knew he was gonna hafta sell it, so he encouraged colors that were complementary to the decor, ladies' fashions, or whatever happened that would be acceptable, depending on what the decor for that period was. We went through the all naturals, the golds, and the pastels, which has really been good. And all these colors, and the trader encouraged this, and he knew this. And if you was really, as you asked me about, when I was accepted.... Really, the trader really was accepted, then these ladies came in and says, (in Navajo) "What kind I make?" And they always would ask you, and so you'd say, "Make this one," or "Make this one, do this." And traders come back--you know, you think of the Ganado red. Okay, Ganado red is one that Hubbell’s [phonetic spelling] pushed. It has a red background. While we were at Dinnebito, Jim came up, said, "Well, why don't we have a Dinnebito black?"--my son Jim. And one of the most popular rugs that we have right now is a Dinnebito black. People [ask for] Dinnebito black. You just switched the background from red to black, or gray, or white. See, these have grays. One thing at Dinnebito, "Oh, I've got to encourage 'em to do red background." That was before Jim came along. Used to, a lot of stores, you would see only the gray background, or something like this. So we'd keep switchin' it around, but the Dinnebito black is becoming one that Jim pushed, so it's the trader always changed with the times and encouraged the weavers. And this is why you had the good weavers. Some traders were not involved at all. At the trader... Aneth Trading Company, when I went there, <Aneth> was never a real big weavin' area, because the traders were there before me, the families, they just weren't into art. So I was there about thirteen years, and I finally started gettin' a little bit of good weavers there, and there is some good weavers around there, but not a lot. They just weren't. It has to be developed by an interest and appreciation by the trader--somewhere. Now, if he isn't on the reservation anymore, Jahi's in <Page Arizona>; or the Foutzs are in <Shiprock>; or Burnhams are down at Newlands or something like that. But somewhere, there's a trader family that is... appreciates and encouraging this. 

Underhill: How did improvement in transportation affect trade? and since there were more vehicles on the reservation. 

Blair: Well, by this time, you know, this is one of the big changes that you had to do. And a lot of the traders changed, some of the traders didn't change. Guys like a lot of us saw, "Hey, you can't just sit here in a room that is twenty by thirty or forty, behind the counter, and satisfy the needs of all these customers." So then you had to change, you had to make a larger store or trade area with a large inventory with a larger selection of goods. So transportation did that. In order to keep your customer tradin' with you, you had to be competitive with off-reservation stores and your shoppin' centers that came in--or actually off-reservation mostly. And this is where the biggest change was, and that's the biggest effect that they had, is when.... If you didn't change, you sit there and run just a small pop and mom operation, which actually, originally, they were all kind of pop and mom operations. But as the need grew, as the change came on, in order to be successful, you had to change with the times. And I think this is what made, again, the good trader, the progressive trader. And to try to hold his customers, he had to have what they needed, in a bigger store. 

Underhill: How has the Thriftway syndrome impacted trading? 

Blair: Well, you have to realize that Thriftway came into effect because the traders were actually forced, because of the new regulations governing them, to sell out or just close up and leave. So there is really no comparison between Thriftway and the traders, because they're doin' exactly 180o opposite of what you did. Thriftway is a type that, you know, it's a convenience store. You buy the merchandise, you put it on the shelf, and you put a girl up at the checkout stand, and then they buy it, and you add it up and take their money. There's none of the service that is involved with the traders. You know, they don't do the pawn, the credit--strictly cash and carry. So when all the things I've said about what the trader did--see, these people done none of this. All they are is just there--gas, pop, chips, a little groceries, and stuff like that. So they had none of the buckskins or the baskets for any ceremonial purposes. They served none of these purposes that the trader fulfilled to all the needs of all the customers in that particular area around there. So the Thriftway is a cash and carry convenience store. That doesn't even compare to the service that the trader gives. Although, it was better than nothin' when the traders all left. At least they took up some of the slack. At least they could buy-- rather than drivin' seventy-five miles to get a loaf of bread, they could go down here and get a loaf of bread a little bit closer, if they had the money to pay for it. At least they do serve a purpose, now that the traders are gone. See, the trader isn't gonna go back there. This'll never happen again. So the Thriftway, there needs to be a store there. At least it takes-- they can get some things, staples that they need. And the Thriftway store, as far as I'm concerned, was priced comparably to what the tradin' post charged-- they still are. Their mark-up is about what ours was. The only difference is, you pay for it--you didn't trade your lamb or whatever. 

Underhill: What was the standard mark-up for most items? 

Blair: Well, I don't really know that you could really.... You know, there was so many different things that you marked up, so you really couldn't say, "Well, this...." Every manager that I ever hired in my life always said, "Well, give me a mark-up, a percentage of mark-up." Well, if you run a business, Karen, you can't do that. Every item has its own acceptable mark-up in the marketplace, so you have to determine that on each item as you go through there. 

Underhill: You've described what you have now here in <Page> at Dinnebito Trading Company as a gallery. Where do you see the future of trading companies? 

Blair: Well, to me, the future of trading--the trading has already gone. Okay? See, there's no future as a trader, what we have been talkin' about all day. This is the next era. You know, I said the trading, actually it's the end of an era. What we've talked about all day is actually an end of an era of the general merchandise, a service-oriented trading post. But then you have the tradin' families, like myself. And there's quite a few of 'em. There's some of 'em still even out there on the reservation that do a little bit of the convenience store--Hank, for instance, he does a convenience store, also arts and crafts. You know, kind of a combination. But he doesn't do all this other trade. But then you have families like me who have good rapport and acceptance with the Navajo people. And we love what we're doin'. See, we do this because we like it, and because we can still do it. And we also know that there is a demand for Indian art. And we like it, so then we come to do a gallery. We also have the pawn shop off the reservation. We mentioned pawn on the reservation, all the regulations for it. I'd just like to mention, explain why a trader comes off the reservation if he does pawn. See, the reason he's doin' pawn, see, he's still servicin' his customers. See, the Navajo, Native American, particularly Navajo, see, he cannot go to conventional financial institutions and borrow money. He has no collateral, he doesn't have anything.... If he has a pickup, his equity in it is already gone. You know, he can't borrow anything against this again. Now, they do, some pawn shops hock, you know, trailers and stuff like that. But basically, the Navajo cannot, through conventional financial institutions, cannot borrow money. Now, the bankers take offense to me. I did a talk to the Rotarian ladies here one time, and I said that, and the banker was there. He jumps and says, "Oh, yeah, we do!" Well, he may do less than one- hundredth of one percent deals with the Native Americans. So they come to us to pawn to get money to pay car payments or buy food or whatever, because they cannot get money anywhere else. That's why you have hundreds of pawn shops on border towns around the reservation. We do it because anytime there's a need for a business, some entrepreneur will come in and put it in. Well, us traders, that's what we are. We know the business is there, we know that they need this, there's no place they can get it, so that's why we do the pawn shop.

Another thing about the pawn shop does, it attracts all these artisans now in this gallery here, the people we want to deal with. We want to draw the artisan in to us. I have been all over the reservation, five or six different locations, so many people know me, so we get lots of artisans anyway. But the pawn shop still services the people. I had a lady here just recently come in and she says in Navajo, "Thank you, Jahi, for comin' and takin' care of us, because without you, we would never have any money." That is what so many of them say, and so many people think. So pawn shops has historically been looked at as kind of a sleazy operation. I mean, this is, we know this, but to the Native American, it is a service that they have to have. And we do it because we're still servicin'. The gallery is part of it, and I think people who, families who appreciate and want to deal with Native Americans.... See, like I told someone one time, I said.... He said, "What are you doin' out there? What do you do that for?" I said, "Hey, guy, I could make a livin' somewhere else. I like what I'm doin'."

I went to <Australia> one time, and I told the travel agency, I said, "I want to go to the Outback in <Australia>." He said, "What do you want to do that for?! It's just like West Texas." I said, "Hey, guy, I spent forty years on the <Navajo Reservation> 'cause I liked it. It was my choice to be there, so I want to go to the Outback." 

Underhill: What are you most proud of in your career as a trader? 

Blair: Hm. I knew you was gonna ask that. Oh.... I don't know, it's maybe the acceptance, the rapport that you had with the people. I think Bruce said the Navajo made us feel ten foot tall. We were so accepted. We were, if you was a good trader, the Navajo--and that's a lot of it, I think--we were good guys. My mom always said, "Hey, you gotta go be somebody." Well, I think we were, we did become somebody. To the Navajo people, see, we were somebody. We were. I guess to bein' accepted and to bein' dealin' with them and living in another culture, I think it was so broadening to live in another culture. I think everyone should live in another culture. And I can get philosophical here if you want me to, but I really--when you live in another culture--and I think I lived in a culture in Eastern <Kentucky>, and now I came out and I've been in a Western one. Now I ended up in the Navajo culture. And it is so broadening to realize.... See, there's no one has all the answers. You know, everybody comes out in the Native American culture. They go to BIA schools, or they go to the missionary and we practice paternalism on 'em, tell 'em how they gotta be like the white man. Well, it makes it realize we don't, we have no crystal ball, we don't have a red phone on the desk that goes upstairs and tells how things are, you know, particularly from the mystical standpoint or whatever. And it makes you realize, it's a little humblin' to realize that you, that no one has all the answers. It just.... I think it is very broadening. I think it was for my children. You know, you just had so much to learn, just from observin' that there's another world, another world. The Navajo culture made you realize, "Hey, we have our culture, we have our religion, like Christianity, and they have their Navajo religion." Then think of all the Islamic or all the other religions in the world, and who can say "we're absolute"? And that's what I think people have done to the Native Americans, and I think this makes me realize there's no absolutes, there's no one knows, and it's great to--they taught you this. 

Underhill: And what did you teach in return? 

Blair: Ha! Gosh. Well, I taught 'em how to do a rug. (laughter) I didn't teach 'em how to do the rug, I really taught, oh.... I guess I encouraged them how to make a rug that would be acceptable to the market, I guess, to market their products. I hope that I taught them that every white man in the world wasn't alike. I don't really know what--I guess you'll have to ask the Navajo what I taught. I don't really know. I hope that I made 'em realize that there was different people, individuals. 

Underhill: Your children grew up with Navajo culture. Were they accepted and part of the community as they were growing up? 

Blair: Well, the kids at different stages, see, were--Cathy was the first, you know. She probably had more to do with the individuals, 'cause we were on the reservation then--a little different than the rest of 'em did. The Navajo accepts anybody and everything, so there is no.... I don't see any way that they was any difference. They were accepted. It still gets back to if the parents accepts them, or visa versa, then they accept them. But the Navajo would accept any child. In fact, they accept anyone. You have to really be a bad guy for the Navajo not to tolerate you. You have to really.... They are so benevolent and tolerating with everybody that they just accept you. They're tolerant and they get along. The kids got along, as much as kids do. Our kids had to go off reservation to go to school, so they were there some of the time, but not all the time. 

Underhill: Where did they go to school? 

Blair: Well, they went to school in <Cortez Colorado>. That's where _________. See, when the kids _____________, when the kids got old enough to go to school, we moved and built our home in <Cortez>, and all three of the kids went to school and high school there in <Cortez>, except Jim, he went to a private school in <Durango>, which was CTA. But they went mostly in <Colorado> there. 

Underhill: If there's anything you could change about the past fifty years, in dealing with the Navajo, is there anything you would change? 

Blair: I think I would have relocated Dinnebito a little earlier than I did. It was such a, you know hard to do that, and probably stayed a little longer than we should have. We should have come a little earlier, but I had to get this place set up, 'cause I knew it was gonna happen because of relocation, and we had to get ready for it. I came over here. I had actually basically sold out at <Kayenta> and Whetherill Inn which we owned, and was really ready to quit, been there long enough. And it destroyed a good store. Probably stayed a little longer. Other than that.... I don't know any other place, I don't know anything that.... Unt-uh. I guess, like I said, sometime I wanted to get recycled, go back and do it again. (laughter) But I would want the situation to be the same. I don't think I'd want to come back now and go back out there and start all over at the present time. 

Cole: Just one question for clarification. You mentioned Bruce several times. Who's that? 

Blair: Bruce Burnham. 

Underhill: Is there anything else you'd like to add for this particular interview? 

Blair: (big sigh) I think that we probably did a pretty good job. 

Underhill: For a first round, yeah! (laughter) 

Blair: You mean we're gonna do this again?! Yeah, I don't know anything.... And I said, you know, there's so many things that we could have done, touched on, [but] I think we covered it. 

Underhill: Well, I would like to thank you on behalf of the United Indian Traders Association Project. Thank you very much. 

Blair: We're glad to do it. Long as we're talkin' about the Navajos, I can do this all day. 


