NAU.OH.74.2.2

Shirley Sager, Lois Land

Interviews in English

1974

Tuba City, Arizona

Transcribed by Bahe Katenay



SHIRLEY SAGER INTERVIEW



SHIRLEY SAGER: [Portions inaudible due to background noises] ...not be ashamed..Navajo... Our kids don’t realize that there’s a difference like in school. ...When a new boy was in class... ..was he Navajo or not?  He says, "I don’t know. I didn’t asked him." ... didn’t realize there was differences. I think the teacher should --shouldn’t treat them any differently, either. ..They should be proud of that who they are, Navajo, and not be treated any way differently. 

We’ve been on the reservation for four years and we’re finding that, we don’t know a whole lot about, yet, because we have been more or less isolated from hogans and so forth, being with the school. And it’s a little bit difficult to answer that, ---uh, as to what their values and so forth are. I really don’t know much about it that I could really answer that one. ...I feel what the main difference would be. I guess they don’t --one thing that they don’t do is the way they teach their children is..., they don’t discipline their children. And I guess they love their children but don’t give them a lot of discipline. Of course, they have more feeling for the past, for their ancestor and so forth, respect for the elders which we should have more of I think especially now. 

This means schools on the reservation?

Off-microphone Voice: Yeah. 

SHIRLEY SAGER: Of course, we’ve been here, this is our fourth year now that we’re starting. And I think the more public schools is probably the biggest change after having so many boarding schools. Having public schools that are accessible, which seems to us, to be a better answer than having so many boarding schools. There can be roads that are improved enough so that they don’t have to bus so far. See, we have some friends that teach at a place where the children have to get into the public school, but the children have to get on the bus before six o’clock in the morning and to get there, <Red Mesa>. Of course, for the little children it’s difficult. So, I think if there can be more public school maybe smaller ones so they don’t have to come so far.. [inaudible] ...would be a good thing. 

Now, we of course don’t know a whole lot about what life in the hogan or what hogan life is either. I never lived in one myself, but we been in some visiting but not a whole lot. I supposed it’s.. ...a lot of them are a lot different from the way we are now, of course they came from that, too. I think some people two that.. [inaudible] ..have said are retiring from working.. [inaudible]  ..in <Ganado> where they are building their retirement home of hogan. Because, they feel this has been important in past and which is modernized and changed from the original hogan. But they are building it in the same style because it has significances. And I think especially for the weather around here, it’s probably good. 

[Very noisy pause]

I had a man stopped here the other day, but he couldn’t read English and he had his daughter’s report card... [inaudible] ..And he pointed to the report card and he meant, he wanted to know if I would read it for him. Tell him what the grades meant and explain to him so...  [inaudible]  

Maybe this is a Navajo father who has come to school to talk to the principal and to get... or doesn’t understand what the report card is for and perhaps, they are having an open house, too. And he has come and wants to know what the school is doing. It doesn’t look to me like this school man looks very friendly and I don’t know if it is meant that way or not but he looks like he has rather a frown. Or whether he’s frowning because he can’t understand the man’s Navajo and because he is the old traditional Navajo and perhaps, in some way doesn’t approve of the fact that he thinks he is not modern enough. And cannot understand what the man is asking, and the Indian looks like he is rather puzzled that the fact that he can’t communicate either. There’s a lot of misunderstanding between both of them as to what each one is thinking which is probably a big problem with the whole school system. A lack of understanding. 

INTERVIEWER: What would happen to each of them?

SHIRLEY SAGER: Well, the Indian will probably go back home discouraged and somewhat turn against the school system. Perhaps, he rather have his child at home anyway, and he feels the principal don’t understand him so probably don’t understand his child either. The school man he’s got somewhat of a fist clenched there, too, like he is determined more than ever that he is going to change these Navajos one way or the other. So, he’ll probably go on the same way as he has. So then before and there won’t be any things from... [inaudible]  

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 



LOIS LAND INTERVIEW



LOIS LAND: I think the importance of the Navajo -- Hopi way of life being taught in the schools is the similarities be emphasized rather than the differences because there are many similarities in any different cultures. The schools have changed some in the last ten years. They’re becoming a little more involving of the parents. These changes make me happier. They’re becoming a little more free in the grading systems. They’re.. They should be --some of them are not, but the trend is toward a change in the grading system to: a child must compete with himself instead of competing with his class mates. 

The life inside the hogan is very much like a small family or a large family living near each other. Inside, there is little space but much love. The children are quiet and respectful of their elders. I think the people feel safe inside. 

The Anglo is, he looks sad and maybe he pities the poor Indian. The Indian doesn’t look too happy and he looks more angry than sad. I think they might come to agreement, or a happy ending if they can communicate, if either of them have enough of the other language to communicate.

INTERVIEWER: What do you think will happen to each one of them if they go on far?

LOIS LAND: I think the Indian will go on learning more about his tribe’s future. I think he has great hopes for it. I believe the majority of them do. But there are some who are still bitter and don’t believe that the best will come to happen. 

He looks like he might get to be cynical, a little sad, because the Indian --maybe because the Indian is not progressing as fast as he thinks he should, or would like for him to. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you.      

