MILDRED HEFLIN INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.40

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1] 

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's July 15, 1999. We're visiting today with Mildred Heflin. We're going to talk about her experiences in the Indian trade business. This is an interview that's part of the United Indian Trader Association Oral History Project. [Lew Steiger is running the recording equipment, and also makes a few comments.] 

Cole: Mildred, if we could start with the very beginning, and I'll just ask you when and where you were born. 

Heflin: I was born in <Farmington New Mexico>, in 1913. <Farmington New Mexico>, was a small town in northwestern <New Mexico>. 

Cole: Who were your parents? 

Heflin: O. J. Carson and Jessie Carson. 

Cole: And what are your memories of growing up in <Farmington>? 

Heflin: Well, I was very small. I don't really remember much about growing up in <Farmington>. We lived on a small ranch, and we went out to the reservation when I was about two-and-a-half, three-and-a-half. We had to cross the <San Juan River>, because there was only one bridge on the <San Juan River> at that time, and that was way down at <Shiprock>, and there were no roads, just trails. So when we went out to the reservation, we went up to--there were not many places where you could cross the <San Juan River> at that time, because that was before they put in the big dam, and it was quite--in the springtime, it flooded, and it was very difficult. You had to know where to cross it, or you'd get bogged down in the quicksand. And so my uncles went with us and we went up to where we would cross the river, and my father had a very special horse which he trusted. So he took my sister and I--my sister was about one-and- a-half at the time--took her in front in the saddle, and I sat behind him, and we went across the river, forded the river. And then when we got across the river.... Well, my uncle helped us get across the river. Then when we got across the river, we were in a covered wagon, we had to carry our own food and all of our supplies. And as I recall, we had a crateload of chickens. That was very necessary, because there were no places to buy eggs or anything of the sort out there on the reservation.

Anyway, in going out, unfortunately the crate of chickens fell off and all the chickens got away. But we had a wonderful dog, his name was Old Billy. He was a bobtail shepherd of some kind. I don't know what he was. But anyway, he caught all these thirteen chickens, and (laughs) my dad was able to get 'em back in the cage, which was very important.

And so it took us three days, camping each night, to get to <Star Lake>. And that's a place in <New Mexico>. Nobody ever heard of it, and right now I think.... I don't know who the big coal mining companies are in there now, but anyway, at that time, it was--kind of had sort of a little valley under a hill, and you could walk back up on top of the hill, and there would be smoke coming out of the cracks all along. The coal was burning underneath. But I understand they put out the fires, of course, and now they're mining it and using it for various things. I don't know whether they have a slurry line, like they do up on <Black Mesa>, or whether they have a train, which carries the coal down to a place between <Grants> and <Gallup>, and that's where they pulverize it or do whatever they do with it to make power.

And let's see, what else did I jot down here? 

Cole: Who were your uncles you mentioned? 

Heflin: Howard Smith. They had lived on the ranch there near <Farmington>. 

Cole: I should ask real quickly before I forget, what brought your mom and dad to <Farmington>? 

Heflin: Oh, they were raised there. My grandfather was an Irish Canadian, and the whole family, I imagine they were driven out of <Ireland> by famine--I really don't know, I never could find out. But they were driven to <Canada>, and they _________ <Canada>, and he was very interested in mining. And so he was up in the Colorado Mountains and was fortunate enough to find a gold mine, which he sold for $5,000. That was a lot of money in those days! (laughs) So he was considered a wealthy man, and he came down to <Farmington> on the <San Juan River>.... No, this was on the Animas River--there are two rivers coming down there. And he was on the Animas and he bought a small ranch there, and that's where they lived, and he raised his family there. And my grandmother, her parents had come down there in very early days. The only connection you had with any civilization was <Pueblo Colorado>. My grandfather would take the oxen team. They'd make butter, if you can imagine, and he would take the butter, and the hides, or whatever they had, and cart it over the mountain to <Pueblo Colorado>. And that took a whole month to go over there and back, which was a long time, but that was a long ways in those days. 

Cole: And then how did your dad decide to get involved in trading? 

Heflin: Oh, in the trading post business? Well, he and my mother had a small ranch there at <Farmington>, and they couldn't see much future in this, so my Uncle Bob lived out on the Navajo Reservation, and he knew of a trader--well, he was a German--who owned a small trading post. Goodness knows how he got that, but he did. Near <Cuba New Mexico>. So my Dad went out there to work for him. And our only connection with civilization was.... It was thirty-five miles to <Cuba>, and this was a small town, mostly Mexicans, and there were many bootleggers down there, and that's where we got our mail. And we always had a Navajo carry the mail for us. But no matter how drunk he was, he seemed to think that this mail was very important. He might stagger into the house and fall over, but he always brought the mail (laughs) which we thought was really great. 

Cole: And that was at <Star Lake>? 

Heflin: That was at <Star Lake>, uh-huh. 

Cole: So how long was your family there? 

Heflin: We lived there about a year-and-a-half, and then we moved over to--my dad bought a--he met somebody who wanted to sell their trading post over near <Farmington New Mexico>, which was what we called Carson's now. And it was only thirty miles out of <Farmington>, so he decided that'd be a much better place to live, because we children had to go to school sometime, and it'd be easier to get us into school. My grandmother still lived in <Farmington>, so we could go and live with her in the winter and go to school. So that's why they moved back to the trading post nearer <Farmington>.

I was going to tell you about my uncle who used to travel back and forth between my Uncle Bob's place and <Star Lake>. One day he took us, we were going over to <Ojo Encino>--that's where my uncle lived--to visit him. We had a team of Navajo horses, and they were fine, as long as you could get 'em started. But if you ever stopped 'em, it was just too bad. Well, we got out about, say, twenty miles, and it was very sandy, and it was hot. So he felt very sorry for the horses, so he stopped 'em. Well, then he couldn't get 'em started. (laughter) And there we sat in the sand for I don't know how long before he finally got 'em to go again. (laughs) But we used to have that problem all the time.

And let's see now....

I mentioned the water dogs that used to come up out of <Star Lake>. Well, whatever they were, they were about this long, and they were very ugly little critters. Well, where's that thing I had here? Oh, it's over there, out of that funny little.... 

Steiger: This? 

Heflin: Yeah. It was something like that, only they were black and really ugly, and they just crawled along on the ground. (laughs) Anyway, it used to frighten me to death. I was scared to death of 'em, whatever they were. But anyway, they were ugly little things. 

Cole: So <Star Lake>, did it actually have a lake? Or was it intermittent? 

Heflin: There was water in that lake most of the time, which was very strange, because most lakes dry up in the summer. But there was water there all the year round, which I always thought was extremely interesting. 

Cole: When you were at <Star Lake>, how many brothers and sisters.... 

Heflin: I had one sister. 

Cole: What was her name? 

Heflin: Josephine--Jo. 

Cole: So what kinds of things would you do as a small girl, growing up at the trading post? 

Heflin: Oh, we'd walk out on the top of the hills. Then when we moved back to Carson's, there was a missionary lady came to live out there. When we were about, I guess I was eight years old--eight or nine-- she used to teach us for two hours every day. My sister and I would go down there, and that's where we learned reading, writing, and 'rithmetic. I never went to school 'til I was twelve years old, and then I went to <Farmington>--went to public school, I mean. 

Cole: And then you'd live in town during the winter, you said? 

Heflin: I lived with my grandmother and grandfather, my sister and I. And let me see, what was I going to say? (pause) I guess I've already told you that. 

Cole: I'll ask you another question while you're scannin'. What were the living conditions like for your family at the trading post? Or if you could just kind of describe the trading post and what it was like. 

Heflin: Oh! the trading post. Well, there were very high counters, because one reason they had the high counters, oftentimes our customers would come to the store very drunk, and it was easier to handle 'em if they couldn't get over the counter. (laughs) Because some of 'em, when they got drunk, they'd be very belligerent, and hard to deal with. So anyway, we had very high counters, and we sold flour, Arbuckle's coffee. You've never heard of it. Well, it used to come in great big wooden boxes. Oh! they made wonderful play houses. And they were about in pound packages. You can imagine. It was just paper packages. You can imagine what the flavor was. (laughter) And I don't know where that coffee came from, I really don't. But anyway, that's what we sold. And then, of course, flour and sugar and lard. Of course the Indians all had their own meat. They had cattle and they had sheep, so actually they had a fairly good diet, and they raised their little corn. In certain sections out there, they could plant corn in the summer, and they'd have these nice crops of corn, which everybody enjoyed, and that was good. 

Cole: What about your family? Did you have any kind of a vegetable garden? 

Heflin: No. We didn't have enough water. We barely had enough water.... Well, we had to haul all our drinking water from <Ojo Encino>. That was about twenty miles away. So you can imagine we were very frugal with water, and we couldn't have a garden. That soil was actually nothing but coal dust, most of it, so we couldn't raise anything. 

Cole: That was at <Star Lake>? 

Heflin: That was at <Star Lake>. 

Cole: What about at Carson? 

Heflin: Oh, at Carson's? Well, we didn't have enough water. My dad put in a windmill down in the arroyo, which was about a quarter of a mile from the house, and pumped water up on the hill. And then we could have a small garden. But water was a very scarce commodity out there on the reservation. 

Cole: Would your mother work in the trading post at all? 

Heflin: Oh, yes, she worked in the trading post. My dad would freight and haul merchandise, go to town, shop, do all that stuff--and she stayed home and ran the trading post and took care of the kids. (laughter) 

Cole: How did she get along? 

Heflin: Oh, she liked it, she didn't mind. She liked the Indians, see, and she visited with them and she enjoyed that. She was very fond of the Indians anyway. 

Cole: Did she speak Navajo then? 

Heflin: Yeah, she spoke Navajo. 

Cole: And did she ever get a Navajo nickname, do you know? 

Heflin: I don't think so. I don't really know. Can't remember now what they called her. But anyhow.... 

Cole: Overall, how would you describe the Navajo's living conditions then at Carson? 

Heflin: Well, they were very primitive. They lived in hogans--log and dirt, you know--round and covered with dirt. They were very warm in the winter and cool in the summer, very comfortable. And in the summertime they would build little shelters out of brush. And that was nice and cool. The air would blow through, and they could put up their weaving looms out there and work out there. It was quite comfortable, so they got along very well. And the only bad thing about it, they had no--at that time, I don't even think they had anybody on the--maybe at <Shiprock>--any doctors or anybody to give them any medical assistance if they needed it. People went untreated. And when they had the smallpox, a lot of people died with the smallpox. That was about 19.... Hm.... Probably about 1918 or 1919, somewhere in there, when the World War was going on. And that was very bad, because they had no help whatsoever. They were very smart: when anybody got smallpox, most of the families would isolate them. They were smart enough to do that, see. Nobody told 'em anything, they just knew. And they would isolate 'em from the rest of the family, so the whole family didn't get smallpox--just one or two--which I always thought was very intelligent. 

Cole: Were your mom and dad ever called on to fill the role as doctor? 

Heflin: Oh, well, they'd come and ask them, yeah, for whatever. They didn't have.... How would they know what to give them or treat them with? But they were always being called on to come and bury the dead, because Navajos are very, very frightened of corpses. Something very evil happens when you die, so they would always come and ask my parents to come and bury the dead for 'em, or make a box for 'em. If we had any lumber, then my father would make a box and go out and help them bury the dead.

And I have to tell you one of the stories that one of the men who had the flu told us when he got well. He crossed over and went to the other side, you see. But on this side, they couldn't find his horse, and they hadn't killed it, and so he couldn't go on with the rest of the people to the other side, and he came back, 'cause he didn't have his horse. That was Jim Pierce. (laughs) Anyway.... 

Cole: So then once you were in school in <Farmington>, you came back to the trading post in summers? 

Heflin: We came back every weekend. We'd come back on the weekends--do our laundry and sometimes do a little studying--not much--and go out and play on the hills. Right near the trading post there were a lot of clay hills, and these clay hills were full of rattlesnakes, and we used to play up there all the time. In the winter that was safe enough. But one time I remember coming up over a little rise in the clay hill, and I looked right into what I thought were the eyes of a rattlesnake. So we didn't tarry very long. (laughing) We took off for home!

Sometimes the snakes would come up around the house. I remember one time my mother was--we had kind of a cellar, and she ran up to look over the top of this cellar, put her hand on the roof, and there was a rattlesnake right there. (laughter) So she didn't tarry very long. But anyway, nobody ever got bitten. We think of them as being very dangerous, but Navajos lived with 'em all the time, and so did we. (laughs) Got along fine. 

Cole: When did your parents get any kind of light generation at Carson? Did they have a generator? 

Heflin: Oh, well, when the mission in <Farmington> decided to put a missionary up there--her name was Miss Wilcox--and they sent her out to give out medication to the Navajos and help them if they were poor and all this kind of stuff--which she did. And she's the one who used to teach us two hours every day, 'til we got old enough to go to <Farmington>. Went to <Farmington>, as I said, when I was in the sixth grade. 

Cole: Do you remember what her religious affiliation was--Miss Wilcox? 

Heflin: Hm, let me see. It was Methodist. They sent her out first. And then the Episcopalians took over and built a little chapel across the wash. And later on they took over the little mission there near us. Anyway, there weren't very many white people around.

And as I said, we didn't have any roads, there were no highways. But we did have about.... Let me see, Simpsons must have been.... About twelve miles away there was a telephone. There was a man who lived down at this other trading post, and I think he was English. And what he was doing out there, goodness knows, but he had a trading post. And he had put in a telephone line to <Farmington>. Now, that was a big accomplishment in those days. We don't think anything about it anymore, but at that time, it meant a lot. And so about, I guess, 1922 or 1923, my father was able to build a telephone line and connect with Mr. Simpson's telephone line, so we could talk to <Farmington>, and that was a big deal, I want to tell you! to think we could call people and talk to them. Called my grandmother, and that was great.

And let's see.... 

Cole: Now, did you and your sister get put to work in the trading post at all? 

Heflin: Yeah, when we were all growing up we used to help in the trading post, uh-huh. We weren't very helpful, though. I don't think we did much until we were in our teens. We used to spend our time out playing Navajo. We had our long skirts and our blouses and we'd go out and make tents and take the dogs and (chuckles) play around in the sand. 

Cole: Did you have Navajo friends? 

Heflin: You know, we didn't have any Navajo friends. I never learned to speak real good Navajo, 'cause I never had any kids to play with. They all lived too far away. We often wished we had some Navajo kids to play with. Some friends of ours who lived at another trading post about twenty miles away, their children all spoke fluent Navajo because they had a Navajo family that lived very near them, and they could play together. And that's the way you pick it up, really--the best way. But I never had that opportunity.

Let me see, what else? 

Cole: You went to school, I assume, and eventually graduated from high school. 

Heflin: Uh-huh. 

Cole: And then what did you do after that? 

Heflin: I went on to Fort Lewis College, a small college near <Durango Colorado>, which has now moved into <Durango>. And I went there for two years. And then I came back to the reservation and taught school for about a year-and-a-half. And then I married Reuben Heflin, who was a schoolteacher in <Farmington>. He taught school for about, I guess, a couple of years, then we decided to go to a trading post--or my parents knew about a trading post that was for sale down at <Oljato>, and that was way over in <Utah>, about 135 miles from <Farmington>, which in those days was a long way out, because there were no bridges across.... The Chinle Wash then was a big arroyo and in the springtime it would flood and you couldn't cross it--nobody could cross it. Until we got a bridge across that, we had to go all the way around through <Utah> to get to <Farmington>, and that would be a trip of about 200 miles. And we had to bring most of our groceries we got out of <Farmington> at that time. Later on, when we moved over to <Shonto>, which is another trading post, we got most of our supplies out of <Flagstaff>, because it was so much closer, and the roads were so much better. But we didn't have a great deal. As I said, we had coffee, syrup, flour, and sugar, and saddles and bridles. Sometimes we sold harnesses and sometimes wagons. And of course we always had canned tomatoes, canned peaches, and what else did we have in the way of fruit? Oh, chiles! We always had little chiles. The Indians liked those chiles. And let's see....

We bought <Shonto> from Mr. Rorick, who was married to a very wealthy lady, and I can't imagine how come. I guess she thought it'd be a big adventure to come out and live at a trading post. So she came out and lived there about a year, I think, and then she got up, she left. (chuckles) She wouldn't stay there any longer. So then he decided to sell the trading post. He didn't want to stay there either. He was an older man, and he wanted to get out of it, so he sold us <Shonto> Trading Post, which is down in a deep little canyon. It's very pretty down there. I think I mentioned this before, we could have a lawn down there. And that was a great thing, we enjoyed that very much. And we lived there for about ten years. A lot of our trade came in from Navajo Mountain, which was a very isolated place. It was even more isolated than <Shonto>. They'd bring the wool in on burros. They'd bag it up and pack it on these burros and carry it in that way. There weren't any wagon roads--they didn't have any wagons. So they'd bring the wool in, in the spring, that way. Then my husband always had it re-sacked, because there might be rocks in the bags of wool, you never could tell. And it was full of sand, so you had to shake it all, clean it, and then re-sack it again. 

Cole: Did you take chickens and stuff down there, too, at <Shonto>? 

Heflin: We didn't have any chickens at <Shonto> because they had some kind of.... I don't know what they were--little black mites. And if you had chickens, they thrived on chickens, and then they thrived on you, and you didn't dare go to the chicken yard (chuckles) without disinfecting your clothes or taking a bath. So we didn't have any chickens down at <Shonto>. We had to buy our eggs in <Flagstaff>. But it was easier to get to <Flagstaff> than it was to <Farmington>, because at that time there was a paved road into <Tuba City>--or it was paved most of the way--and that made it much easier to get to <Flagstaff>. So we bought most of our supplies out of <Flagstaff> then, from Babbitt Brothers. They had a big wholesale house in those days, and they supplied everybody.

And then when we moved to town to send the children to school, I thought Arizona schools were much better than New Mexico schools, so we moved in here to <Flagstaff> and sent our kids to school. We rented a place at first, and a little later on, this place was for sale, so we bought it from Mr. Houston, about 1945, I believe it was--somewhere along in there. 

Cole: And how many children do you have? 

Heflin: I have three daughters. 

Cole: And were they all born at <Shonto>? 

Heflin: Yeah. Well, they weren't born at <Shonto>. I went out to <Farmington> or wherever. Anyway, let's see, one's a computer programmer for the City of Phoenix, and the other one runs Burger Kings. She's got four Burger Kings she runs out on the reservation. And my youngest daughter has a candy store in <Albuquerque>, and her husband works for IBM. So they're all on their own and doing okay, for which I'm thankful. 

Cole: And I should ask, how did you meet your husband? 

Heflin: Oh. Well, let me see, how did I meet him? Oh, we went to the same high school. I really never knew him in high school, I met him later on through his sister, I guess. I used to go there with her for parties and things, and that's where I met him. 

Cole: You said he was a schoolteacher but he became an Indian trader. (

Heflin: Yeah.) Did you influence him on that? Or was that his own decision? 

Heflin: Well, I expect I influenced him quite a bit. (chuckles) Anyway, I always liked the reservation, and he grew to like it very much. And he was very fond of the Indians, and they all liked him, and that was a big help. You have to like people, or you don't get along too well. 

Cole: Describe <Shonto> for us, if you could. 

Heflin: Well, <Shonto> was down in a deep canyon. And let me see, how many rooms? We had two bedrooms and a small room I used for a schoolroom, and a kitchen, and then a front room, which had a fireplace which smoked all the time. As I said, we had a lawn. And then across the lawn, about, say, twenty-five feet, he had built two bedrooms--one bedroom on either side of a bathroom. The bathroom was about half as big as this room. You can't imagine! We heated it with a wooden stove in the wintertime, which worked pretty good. 

Cole: Did you have a well there, or was it just running water? 

Heflin: No, we had a well. Actually, though, they had what they called a range rider who looked after, watched out for the Indians and got various things for 'em and so forth. So therefore, the government had come in and drilled a well, and it was fairly good water. That was a blessing, because the water at <Oljato> was not very good--very bad water, full of alkali. 

Cole: I'm a little confused. Did you folks actually buy <Oljato>, or did you just lease it? 

Heflin: Yes, we bought it. My dad helped us buy it. He loaned us some money so that we could make a down payment, and then we paid him back, so we actually bought it ourselves. And then we just bought <Shonto> from Mr. Rorick. We were able to do that. We sold <Oljato> to one of my cousins, Fred Carson, and so he moved out there and we moved over to <Shonto> and lived there for ten years. And then from there we moved over to <Kayenta> and bought the trading post over there from John Wetherill and his family. I lived there about, I guess, fifteen years. And after we'd lived there for a while, my husband decided to put in a small motel, because people would come in to stay at the Wetherills, and they didn't have room enough for them. So he put in a small motel of twenty rooms, up on the hill above us, and we ran that for about ten years, I guess. And then he built the.... When the highway came through in 19.... I guess it was about 1960, 1961, 1962, somewhere in there, then he built the Holiday Inn up on the highway, which was.... I think we had, what, eighty rooms or something like that. The Crowleys [phonetic spelling] had a small restaurant, and so they ran a restaurant. We didn't have to run that, which was a God's blessing. I lived out there until.... When did I come to town? About 1974 or 1976 I moved into <Flagstaff>. Sold the whole thing and moved into <Flagstaff>. 

Cole: So even though you folks lived at <Flagstaff>, you still had your interest __________. 

Heflin: Yes, for a while, we still had the trading post and had the motel--had that for quite a while after we moved to <Flagstaff>. 

Cole: What was your father doing during all this period? Was he still running his post at Carson? 

Heflin: Well, he was running the post at Carson's, and then he later on bought the post at <Oljato> and ran that for about ten years. Then they moved into <Farmington>, lived there for a short while. 

Cole: To switch gears a little bit, if you could describe for us how--or if you were gonna describe to somebody that was unfamiliar with trading, how the Navajo-Anglo trade enterprise worked, could you explain that? 

Heflin: Oh. Well, in the wintertime, a lot of the people came in and put their jewelry and whatever-- bracelets, beads, belts--in pawn, and we gave them credit. They bought merchandise in exchange for that. We had to build a cement vault, and we kept the pawn in the vault. Then we would keep it there for them, and they'd come back in the springtime when they sheared their sheep and pay it off and take it out. Sometimes they'd leave it all year round because they said it was safer there. They didn't have anyplace to put it out in the hogan, you see--no vault or anyplace they could lock up. So a lot of 'em would rather leave it. And they'd come in and borrow it if they wanted to go to a sing or something. And the trustworthy ones, we let them take their pawn out and wear it to the sing and then bring it back. (chuckles)

Anyway, I think we're dealing with a whole different class of Navajos now. All they think of is how they can get the better of people. And the older folks I think were more trusting. I don't understand the difference. Anyway, it's a whole different group of people living out there now, I think. Maybe they learned all the white man's bad habits--I don't know what happened. It's all changed. Anyway, they're great people. 

Cole: Do they have a totally different view of economics than, like, you and your husband would? 

Heflin: Well, they don't.... I don't think they can look into the future and plan--not many of 'em can look into the future and plan for saving money or putting groceries away or whatever. They sort of live on a day-to-day basis. At least that's the way I see it. And I don't.... Well, maybe it's just as well. Some few people were farsighted enough that they’d put flour and sugar and coffee in a fairly safe place--safe as they could make it--and sort of keep it there, so they had an extra source of food if anything happened.

And of course when they took the sheep off the reservation, that was a terrible blow to everybody, because a lot of the families were reduced to living on welfare. There was no work. They had to do something, so the government provided welfare, which I don't think is very good for anybody, and I hope somehow or other they'll work their way out of it. 

Cole: When you were talking about removing the sheep, was that the 1930 reduction? 

Heflin: Let's see, we were still down at <Oljato>. That was 19.... (pause) I guess that was about 19.... Probably about 1939, somewhere in there, when they were reducing all the sheep on the reservation because of the big dam down here at.... What do I want to say? 

Cole: Lake Mead? 

Heflin: Yeah, Hoover Dam is what I'm trying to say. All the sediment was washing and filling up Hoover Dam, so the Navajos would have to reduce their livestock. That was a very bad time for everybody. 

Cole: So you were at <Oljato> when that happened? 

Heflin: Yes. 

Cole: What about weavers and artisans? Did you have.... 

Heflin: The weavers at <Oljato> weren't very good weavers. When we moved over to <Shonto>, there were many women over there who did very fine weaving. I think they had learned some of that from <Tuba City> people. I don't know whether the government had sent out somebody to help them weave better rugs or what, but anyway they did a better type of weaving, so we got better rugs over at <Shonto> than we did at <Oljato>. The rugs at <Oljato> were very poor quality--at that time. I think they've improved lately. Well, they're not doing that much weaving anymore--people don't have to weave. They can go out and get jobs, or they get welfare, and they don't have to weave. Weaving is hard work when you have to wash the wool, dye it, spin it. That's not easy. And then put up your looms, because you have to have a permanent place to put your loom. You can't take it down every few days and move. 

Cole: So when you were out in that Navajo Mountain country, did you and your husband ever venture out onto Navajo Mountain yourself? 

Heflin: No, we actually didn't go into Navajo Mountain, because the only way we could get in there would be with a pack outfit, or horses, and we didn't have any horses at that time to ride, so we didn't get into the Navajo Mountain area very much. It's full of deep canyons, and unless you know your way you'd get lost anyway.

And then when uranium mining came in, they employed some of the Navajos to mine the uranium, which was very dangerous, people found out later, and a lot of the Indians got very ill and died. They've closed up all those mines now, although I understand that the pits are still there. I mean, you could go and fall into it and get lost forever, I suppose. 

Cole: Was that in the 1940s they were doing that, or the fifties? 

Heflin: Probably 1950, when they were doing all that--yeah, about 1950. 

Cole: What happened, do you recall when World War II broke out? Did a lot of the Navajos from your area.... 

Heflin: A lot of the Navajos from our area went out to work on the railroads. There were very few people who spoke English well enough in the area we lived in, to be drafted into the Army, but they were taken out to work on the railroad. My husband used to take 'em out and put 'em on.... Let's see, he took 'em to <Flagstaff> and put 'em on the train there, and then they'd send 'em to various places in the <U.S.> to work on the railroad. They got a lot of education, they learned a lot, because a lot of those people had never been off the reservation, you see. So that was a real experience for them. It was good. 

Cole: Did that create change in the trading post? 

Heflin: Yes, it did, to some extent. They came back and they wanted different commodities. Some of the foodstuffs were different. And I guess.... I was trying to think about what time they began to buy cars. My goodness! I guess after we moved over to--probably about 19 ... 57 or 1960, somewhere in there, they began to buy cars. 

Steiger: Up until then, it was all horse and wagon and foot? 

Heflin: Uh-huh, and foot--pack horse and wagon and foot, uh-huh. g 

Cole: When you were in <Kayenta>, I know that Wetherills ran a lot of pack trips and stuff like that. 

Heflin: Yes, John Wetherill did, he used to take horseback trips. Took Teddy Roosevelt back into the Navajo Mountain area. He was a very pleasant, wonderful man, John Wetherill was. And then we knew Louise. In fact, we bought Louise and Clyde Caldwell's [phonetic spelling] place there at <Kayenta>. And then my husband built a bigger trading post and we lived there for some time. 

Cole: What was that trading post called? 

Heflin: Kayenta Trading Post. 

Cole: But you didn't continue taking dudes out into.... 

Heflin: Oh, no. No, no. That took extra skill, and you had to like it. John Wetherill was a special person. 

Steiger: How so? 

Heflin: Well, he was a person that inspired trust in people. I guess that's the only way I can put it. And he was a very quiet, gentle man, but people trusted him. 

Cole: And then your trading post in <Kayenta>, was that still a bullpen operation, or behind the counter? 

Heflin: No, we made a modern trading post this time. My husband built a modern trading post, and people could go help themselves off the shelves. Then they brought it up. We had a little checkout stand. So it was a modern, yes. This one was a modern one, not the old type with the bullpen and all that stuff. 

Steiger: And what predicated that change? 

Heflin: Well, my husband just felt that people should be--we should all grow a little bit, and it would be easier for us and better for the Navajos if they had a modern type trading post there. And it did. It did increase the business a great deal, because people felt free to come in and pick up stuff, bring it up and have it checked out. 

Cole: And so what year would that have been, when you made that change? 

Heflin: Probably in the sixties, 1962 or 1963, somewhere in there. I don't really remember, and I don't have anything to look it up by. 

Cole: I assume you had to have leases. 

Heflin: Oh, yes. 

Cole: How did that work? 

Heflin: Well, you had to go to <Window Rock> and get permission to put a trading post, or buy a lease. You couldn't just go out and buy a lease from the Wetherills or whoever you were buying [the post] from-- you had to go to <Window Rock> and get permission from the government over there, and from the Navajo Tribe, before you ever went into the trading post business, or ever bought the trading post. Otherwise, you couldn't go on the reservation. 

Cole: Would you ever have any problem with that, or was it pretty simple to do? 

Heflin: I think it was pretty.... I know it was fairly simple to do. But they did.... I think the reason for this, they were trying to keep--What do I say?--thieves and robbers going out there and living on the reservation and stealing from the Indians. They sort of had to know about your character, your background, and what you'd done before you went there, and what kind of a reputation you had--more or less. It wasn't very detailed, but they did check it to some extent--which I guess was good, I don't know. 

Cole: What separates a good trader from a bad one? 

Heflin: Well, one that's honest with the Indians-- that's the first requirement. And they know when they're being cheated. They're not stupid. And the only reason they went to some of these trading posts, I want to tell you, is because they could get bootleg liquor. And that's a very bad thing to say, but it's the honest to goodness truth. Not many of 'em--very few. There's always a few that spoil the pot, but there were a few who did that. But they didn't last very long, either, and that was good. 

Cole: So what would you say you learned from the Navajo? 

Heflin: Well, I learned there's very little difference between my skin (chuckles) and their skin. For one thing, I think I learned to be patient. They're really very patient. You can't believe it, but most of 'em are very patient people. I think I learned to be tolerant of other people. They may not like your skin color, but they treat you nice, you see--or they did when I lived out there. The only people I ever heard them say anything against--they don't particularly like black people for some reason. I don't know why that is. I mean, I really don't know, because I haven't had that much experience with black people. I don't know. Strange how we people are--get prejudices for no reason. 

Cole: Do you think they learned anything from you? 

Heflin: No, I doubt it. They said all white people were crazy, didn't matter. They looked down on us, they think we're a bunch of renegades, most of the time. But that's all right. I think the younger ones are getting much more tolerant, because they've been out in the world. Many, many of them go out to <Phoenix>, <Los Angeles>, and get good jobs. And they live out there. Unfortunately, they don't ever come back to the reservation, and the people on the reservation, I don't think have grown very much. If you don't get off the reservation, I don't think you grow. 

Cole: And then if you could, describe what your husband was like. 

Heflin: My husband was a short, fat man, and he liked everybody. He really liked the Navajos, and because he liked them, they liked him. He got along fine with 'em. 

Cole: Did he learn to speak Navajo? 

Heflin: Yeah, he learned to speak it fairly well-- enough to get along in the trading post business. They called him "the fat one." They liked him, I think, because they felt that he gave them a fair bargain, and he always paid the highest prices he possibly could for their livestock--their lambs, their wool, or whatever. He used to buy most of the wool out there at <Shonto>, in that area. People would bring it to him from Navajo Mountain and various places, just because he paid 'em a good price. And he was honest with 'em, even though he did take the bags apart to see how many rocks were in it. (laughter) They appreciated that. 

Steiger: We interviewed a guy named Bob Bolton, who was a salesman, and he told us a story about your dad gettin' a sack of wool that had a differential in it. Do you remember that? 

Heflin: I vaguely remember something about it. I know we got bags of wool with rocks in 'em, but I'd forgotten he got that. 

Steiger: He told this story, he said your dad got this wool with the differential in it, and so he took the differential out and kept it and when that same guy came back the next spring, he put it in his seed corn. (laughter) 

Heflin: (laughing) I don't remember what he did with it anyway. That could have happened. But anyway, it's all part of life. 

Cole: One thing that's kind of interested Lew and I--we've heard different traders tell stories about experiences they had with Navajo medicine men or mystic experiences. Did you have anything like that happen to you? 

Heflin: Well, they're very.... Huh, what should I say? Maybe superstitious isn't the word, but they do believe in mysticism very, very much. And all these medicine men, they frighten people by telling 'em stories. And there are some strange things which happened. I remember one time one of our clerks in the store, Dick Brown, came in and we were at lunch. He came in and he was just almost shaking. One of the old medicine men had come in and put a curse on him, and he said, "I have to go right now. I've got to go have a sing, 'cause I don't want this thing to happen." So of course we let him. He left and went out and had a ceremony to get rid of the curse. It's very, very important to them. And I do think--or at least I gather, from what my children tell me--that all this big change that's come about out there has made them more superstitious than ever. I guess wouldn't you say because they're frightened? I mean, we're all frightened of change, and I think that's one of the things that's going on right now. So it isn't something that's diminishing, it's something that's increasing. And I suppose it will, until they get more education. 

[END SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's July 15, 1999. This is Tape 2 of an interview with Mrs. Mildred Heflin.

I was sort of curious, Mildred, if you and your husband were ever members of the United Indian Traders Association? 

Heflin: Uh-huh. 

Cole: Do you remember when you joined? 

Heflin: I honestly don't remember. I hadn't paid that much attention. But he used to go to the meetings all the time in <Gallup>, I know that. But when we joined, I don't remember. 

Cole: Would you ever go with him to the meetings? 

Heflin: No, I stayed home and ran the trading post. I never had time to go to <Gallup>. (laughter) 

Cole: Would Reuben talk about what went on at all when he came back? 

Heflin: Yeah. They discussed what was going on out in the world, and how it related to our situation on the reservation and so forth, which was very important. 

Cole: Do you remember any of the bigger issues the organization dealt with? 

Heflin: Isn't that awful? I don't even remember that. (pause) I do remember that they were very concerned about the stock reduction, of course. Everybody was concerned about that. But I don't think they took any active part in trying to stop it, because it wasn't anything that anybody out here in this little group out here in the West could do anything about.

But they were concerned about people being honest with the Indians and treating them right. It was very important, you know. That much I do remember about it. 

Cole: At one point in time, the Association gave out--they called 'em hallmark numbers, where a trader got a number that they were supposed to attach to rugs they sold, or jewelry. Do you know if you ever had a.... 

Heflin: We left the trading post business before that time happened. My nephew who lives in <Albuquerque>, did that, I know, because I heard him mention it. But that was after we had left the reservation. 

Cole: What's your nephew's name? 

Heflin: Raymond Drolet. He's a professor over at the U of A. 

Cole: Yeah, Willow's mentioned his name. 

Heflin: Uh-huh. 

Cole: How were the bigger trading companies, like the Babbitts, perceived among the traders, do you know? 

Heflin: Well, I don't know how some people thought they were bad, but we always got along, we thought they were great. I mean, they always treated us well, and they were fair in whatever they did. We never had any difficulty. But I guess some people didn't much.... There's always somebody that complains, you know, no matter what. (laughter) 

Cole: Do you remember any of the people at Babbitts that you worked with? 

Heflin: (pause) Well, actually, I didn't work with them that much. My husband would have remembered, but I really don't. 

Cole: And then did you folks ever--was there any animosity, or how did you perceive traders that lived in the border towns? Were they the same as you, or different? 

Heflin: Well, some of those traders that lived in border towns sold liquor--they could sell liquor. Of course that didn't make us very happy, because we didn't have any police protection. I think we had one policeman for the whole Kayenta District. That would be thousands of miles. John Long was his name, and he used to come up every now and then, ride through the area, and let people know he was around, but actually, I don't think we had that many problems then. (pause) Even though they did have bootleg liquor and people would get drunk, and bash each other's heads in every now and then. I guess it was all kept very quiet. Nobody said much about it. They didn't bother us, so.... 

Cole: How would you describe how trading has changed over time? 

Heflin: Well, the credit is the biggest thing. The credit and pawn is the biggest thing that has changed. When they put in all these new regulations about pawn, the traders just didn't put up with it, they wouldn't take it--I mean, they couldn't afford to. So all the pawn went off the reservation to pawn brokers. And of course pawn brokers, they sell it after a little while. So many of the good old pieces are long gone to collectors or somebody else. And that's one of the biggest changes I see.

And then, of course, the strange high counters and merchandise all behind the counter--it's all out in modern stores now, and people can help themselves like anybody else, and take it up to the checkout counter. Those are the biggest changes. And I know it's for the best. 

Cole: Were you still in business when the whole change in pawn regulation happened? 

Heflin: No, we weren't in the trading post business at that time. But I do know from hearing from other people that they just wouldn't take it. They couldn't take it under those conditions. So a lot of it went off the reservation. 

Cole: If you had to describe your favorite memories from the different posts you have lived at, do you have one or two you'd like to tell us? 

Heflin: Well, I think my favorite memories at <Oljato> were seeing these people come in from Navajo Mountain with their donkeys laden with bags of wool. The poor little things were practically hidden. They would drive them in there, and we always had a hogan out there where they could spend the night. So they'd bring their wool in, unload the donkeys. My husband would weigh it up. Then they'd come in probably-- they'd buy a few groceries that night, and then the next day they'd come in and spend the whole day trading, because that's where they bought, sometimes, almost a year's supply of stuff to take back to their hogans. 

Cole: Why do you think you and your husband stayed in the trading business? 

Heflin: I guess because we liked the Indians, we felt comfortable, and liked it out there. And we liked the area. Most people don't, but I did. (laughter) They think it's a dreadful place. 

Cole: Do you have any Navajo friends that you see now? 

Heflin: Well, my adopted son is a full-blood Navajo. I see his family off and on. I see his mother. You know, so many of my friends have died, I really don't have any left anymore, which makes me very sad, but that's the way it is when you get to be my age. (laughter) 

Cole: What do you think the future of the trading business is? 

Heflin: Well, like anyplace else, all modern stores, which they say is probably a very good thing. Basha's is out there now, and they have big grocery stores, quite modern, very nice. And that's fine. I think that's very good. I'm glad. 

Cole: Do you have any other questions, Lew? Lew always has great questions I've never thought of. 

Steiger: Well, not always! (laughs) 

Cole: Now I've put him on the spot! 

Steiger: No, nothing leaps instantly to mind, but I know you've made some notes, and you made a little list of stuff that you thought was noteworthy that you've been referring to. Have we covered all of that? 

Heflin: Yes, we've covered it. 

Steiger: I guess the only thing I could think of to ask is your dad seems to figure in pretty prominently in all of this, and I know Willow has already written this book about him, but if you wouldn't mind maybe just describing him a little bit, just for our project, because people mention him a lot--just what kind of guy he was and stuff like that. 

Heflin: Well, of course I'm prejudiced. (laughter) I see my father as a very outgoing person, he liked everybody: liked Indians and Mexicans, anybody. He just liked people. He was Irish. His father was Irish. His father came down from <Canada>. Anyway, he liked to talk, and he liked to tell stories. We kids used to like to hear him tell stories that his grandfather's family told him. And I always remember the story he told us about my Grandfather Carson when he was courting my grandmother, who lived on the south side of the <San Juan River>, and they had to cross the river. Well, my great-grandfather Phelps [phonetic spelling] would come across in a little boat and pick these--it was my grandfather and his brother who were going over and courting these young ladies on the other side of the river. Anyway, they got in a small boat, and my grandfather stood up, and of course the boat turned over right in the middle of the river and they all got soaking wet. (laughter) And my Grandfather Phelps didn't think much of that. He thought that was kind of foolish, called him "the damned puke." (laughter) Oh, dear.

But you know, you wonder how they made a livelihood when you see the barren country up there, and think there were no irrigation ditches or anything. You wonder how they ever survived. Guess people are tough. 

Cole: They all seem like they did a lot of different things to get by. Now we all have one job. 

Heflin: That's right. They had to do a lot of different things, or they couldn't survive. Yeah, you're right. 

Cole: Well, if you could go back and change anything about your life, would you do that? 

Heflin: Well, I think the only thing I would do, I would try to get more education. I think that's very important--in this day and age anyway. 

Cole: Well, it looks, with all these books around here, like you're doin' a pretty good job. 

Heflin: (laughs) Well, I wouldn't say that. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Heflin: I don't think there's anything I can think of right now. 

Cole: Well, thank you very much. 

Heflin: You're very welcome. 


