Grand Canyon River Guides Oral History Collection

Julie Munger Interview

Interview number: NAU.OH.53.76

Steiger: OK this is April 7, 2007. It’s the River Runners Oral History Project and I’m sitting here in the Canyon Exporations warehouse in <Flagstaff> with Julie Munger. And because I don’t have a release for you to sign... (laughter) [ 

MUNGER: You want a verbal release?] 

STEIGER: Well maybe, I mean I don’t know if this will work or not but... [ 

MUNGER: You have my permission to tape this conversation and use it for your own purposes.] 

STEIGER: ... well, just so you know, basically the way this thing works is we’ll do this interview and somebody’ll transcribe it. Maybe me, I don’t know, we’ll see if I’m still... I’ve done a couple. In the past we’ve usually sent em off down to... there???s this really good transcriptionist in <Tucson>, Barb Jardee, and she does them and then sends me the transcript and usually I review the transcript, try to correct all the spellings and stuff, and then I’m supposed to send that to you and you’re supposed to look it over and make sure that this is all right and it all looks good to you and you sign off on it and then it goes into the archives at Cline Library at NAU and it sits in there as a part of the River Runners Oral History Project. And in the past, God, I mean I shudder to think of what’s on the tapes that I have made... (laughter) with my friends and stuff... I’m not kidding. I mean I’ve said all kinds of indiscrete stuff thinking that nobody would ever really take the time to listen to the tapes. Cause when I first started doing this, I kinda researched it.... (aside about mic noise) It used to be, in the olden days, people would just go-they wanted the transcript and very few people would ever listen to the tape, you know, because you had to physically go to the library and get the machine out and sit there and you can read a transcript way faster than you can do that.... so I didn’t worry too much about the tape. But then what happened was the internet came along, and these guys over there at Cline Library thought it would be really cool to post these on the web (laughter). So now, what we’re up against here is the possibility that... you know, they like to post them on the web and stuff. So, you know, whatever you’re saying, you want to keep in mind that maybe God and everybody could actually listen to it. I think really the only one in danger as far as the project so far is ME (laughter) having said incriminating stuff. But I think what might be an issue for you is if you said something that hurt somebody’s feelings. I didn’t used to worry about that stuff. But through putting stuff in the BQR... I mean, I’ve managed to piss a lot of people off. So that’s just the caveat that I’m giving you for starters here. OK, so that’s the preamble there. With that said, I guess we might as well launch into this deal. What I usually do is ask people... kind of the easiest way for me to keep track of all this stuff is just to go chronological and start at the beginning of a person’s river running career. But I don’t know... I do want to make sure we talk about your swim and stuff and I don’t know how much gas you’re going to have in the tank [this interview takes place immediately following a Wilderness First Responder Course taught by Julie]. 

MUNGER: I’m good to go. I’m used to long days. 

STEIGER: And those are long. We’re sitting here, it’s like 7 o’clock at night. But anyway, how about if we start with just a little bit about your family circumstances? Just what was your childhood like? Not a whole lot but just enough to put your perceptions in perspective and stuff. Kinda just a real quick thumbnail biography of your background before you ever got to the rivers. 

MUNGER: Well I grew up outside pretty much my whole life, and my first passion outdoors was horses. Did a lot of competitive trail riding and cross country endurance riding. But all the way through growing up as a kid I saw pictures of my dad kayaking. And some of my first memories were of being pushed out in an eddy- at the end of a long throw bag in a kayak-out into an eddy. So even though my first river trip wasn’t until I was fifteen, I was always very aware of the river and kayaking. But very much a land based person as a kid. 

STEIGER: Now somebody mentioned your dad to me. What was up with him? 

MUNGER: He learned how to kayak in the service over in <Germany> in the ‘50s and then they actually saw how they were building kayaks in <Germany> and came back and made their own moulds and started building kayaks in <California> in the early ‘50s. You know he was on a trip with Georgie White before they filled <Glen Canyon> that went all the way from Green River all the way through <Glen Canyon> and <Grand Canyon>. So he-you know especially before he got married and had kids-was an avid river runner. Maynard Munger. 

STEIGER: And what did he do for a living? 

MUNGER: The funny part... he was actually Lou Elliott’s first safety kayaker, when he did his first commercial trip ever, on the Columbia River in <Canada>, I think. At that point they were just starting getting commercial river running going. But he decided, since he’d got married and his wife got pregnant relatively soon after, that a more responsible route would be to go into real estate. So he had actually- he and Bryce Whitmore, who started Wilderness Waterways, were best friends; and when Bryce Whitmore started Wilderness Waterways, my dad almost went that way, and then went the other way, and got into real estate. So he was a real estate broker for his whole life. [

STEIGER: And just boated for fun.] And boated for fun. [ 

STEIGER: Lucky for him. ( both laugh) 

MUNGER: Anyway, so your dad put you out there... so did you have brothers and sisters and stuff?] I had one brother. [

STEIGER: And how old were you in the kayak, at the end of the throw bag?] Oh, like one, two, three. Cause he was competitive racing. He went to the Kayak Slalom World Chamionships in ’62, which was the year I was born. So he was still racing slalom when I was a baby. 

STEIGER: So he put you in there without a spray skirt, but he gave you a paddle? 

MUNGER: No, no, no, he just set us in the cockpit and just pushed us out in the eddy at the end of the throw bag and then would pull us back in. Push us out, pull us back in. Yeah, so I spent a lot of time with him and then a lot of time with my mom on horses. I actually never got in the water on a river until I was fifteen but was always around them. 

STEIGER: Meaning kayaks and boats? 

MUNGER: Yeah, uh-huh. Right. There was a period of time... cause my parents were divorced when I was about seven or eight... so there was a long section of time I’d say, from the time I was like five until I was fifteen, that I wasn’t around rivers at all. But, so really early when they were still together and then later. [

STEIGER: Cause you went with your mom and were into horses?] I did. Yeah, and then was not exposed to rivers at all. 

STEIGER: So how about just a kind of an overview of your river running career? How has that gone? And also just a general biography of where that fits in, in the big picture of your life? 

MUNGER: Well, you know I’m one of the... how many of us are there? There are so many of us, that our first river trip was the <Grand Canyon> with our parents, I think, that eventually became <Grand Canyon> guides. At least I know so many guides that I’ve worked with where that’s the case. So, my first river trip was a Sanderson motor trip in 1977 and Schmedley... do you remember Schmedley? He’s the boatman I remember most vividly because he had such a dynamic personality. But no, it was just one of those magic motor trips where it was all families and kids and all the kids would hang out and cause trouble and all the adults would hang out with Schmedley at night and get drunk and have no idea what their kids were doing. (laughter) [ 

STEIGER: Didn’t care!] 

MUNGER: Didn’t care. So you know, we hiked a lot and that definitely... you know we hiked during the day and slept on the boats at night. The motor boatmen let all the kids sleep on one boat and they slept on the other boat. So that definitely started us... 

STEIGER: The boatmen let the kids sleep on the motor boat? 

MUNGER: Can you believe it? They were really young, the other boatmen. Must’ve been. Yeah, there were at least two nights where all of us-we were all between thirteen and seventeen... we all slept on the motor boats for a couple nights. 

STEIGER: Oh man. That must have been really cool. 

MUNGER: It was really cool. So it was a great introduction, and it was a very adventurous trip because we had a guy on there that went psycho and was chasing the boatmen with a knife and ended up getting tranquilized and flown out at <Nankoweap>. So that was an interesting juncture in the trip. But dealing with that brought everybody closer, especially as a group, so it was a very impactful first river trip. I was fifteen. 

And then from there, the next couple of summers my dad started to teach me to row and I learned how to kayak right after that trip. I mean it definitely instilled a passion. Although I have to tell you I was terrified of the water. I probably took longer to learn how to kayak and river guide than anybody I’ve ever known. Because I was absolutely terrified of the water. It took me a very long time to do anything more than Class Two, especially in a kayak. [ 

STEIGER: Despite being put in one at one year old?] 

MUNGER: Yeah. You know my mom had almost drowned when she was pregnant with me cause my dad had taken her canoeing on some crazy Class Two section. So I don’t know if there’s anything true to that: imprinting. But I was very terrified, especially in a kayak. So I was always much better in a raft. I liked being in a raft. And learning how to row I felt like I had a lot more control. 

STEIGER: Was your mom scared of the water? 

MUNGER: Uh-huh. She was terrified of the water too. Because of that experience, yeah. Cause my dad tried to drown her. Yeah. [ 

STEIGER: Maybe that factored into their divorce!] (laughter) 

MUNGER: Maybe. It probably wasn’t a very good start. Yeah. So... so we did the Middle Fork of the Salmon. I mean we did a ten day family trip with my dad and his new wife and one of her kids and my brother and I. And then we did the Tuolumne River in <California> a bunch before I got to college. And then when I got to college I needed a summer job. I started river guiding in the summer. But my attraction to whitewater was actually more where rivers go than whitewater itself in the beginning. It was like, I loved being outside. I loved camping. I loved being in the woods. And "rivers" was the most.... rivers go to beautiful places, incredible places. So that was my incentive in the beginning, was just being transported to wild places. And then over the next years I definitely developed a passion for whitewater too, but that took a long time. 

STEIGER: But you were rowing on the Tuolumne? 

MUNGER: Yeah. You know, I got into boating, in my opinion, in the magical time-in that time frame before self-bailing rafts. So I was comfortable in Class Four, which was a kind of a bigger deal then because the rafts weren’t self-bailing. So I started working on the Tuolumne for Sierra Mac right in the transition from non self-bailing boats to self-bailing boats. So I was running little fourteen foot Adventurers down the Tuolumne and then Sierra Mac was also the only company that was running Cherry Creek, which was Class Five at that time. And we were running it on pontoon rafts. Those big old Huck Finn type pontoon rafts and I was a high-sider. So I was becoming really comfortable with bigger water and then self-bailing rafts came and it was just a great time to be a paddle guide and have a lot of opportunities to work different places. 

STEIGER: A pontoon raft is like an early cataraft? 

MUNGER: Uh-huh. But instead of just having two tubes it had four tubes lashed together. [ 

STEIGER: Just to get around the bailing thing?] 

MUNGER: Yeah, and that’s how Marty Mac and Wilderness Waterways, Bryce Whitmore and Marty, those were the boats they designed. And they were incredible boats, just tubes strapped right to each other and then the gear fits in between the tubes and is strapped down and the people sit in front, so the boatman is in the back in the middle and then all the gear right in front of the boatman and then the people are in the front of that. 

STEIGER: And are the tubes unbroken? You’re sitting on top of the tubes? There are actually holes...? 

MUNGER: They’re laced together. So they’re four individual cataraft tubes with grommets all the way around and all laced together. Yeah, with a big, kind of steel frame and you have to make your own seat out of some kind of box that you’d rig, as a guide, that you had to figure out how to strap down on the back of the cataraft to row from. ...Yeah, you’re right on top. Just like an old Huck Finn raft. 

STEIGER: Wow do you have pictures of that? 

MUNGER: Uh-huh. Yeah. They’re incredible. They’re really manueverable and fast. And if somebody’s on top of there that can high-side you can take them just about anywhere. They track really well. And that was another thing that was helpful in my boating career was learning how to row those boats, because you always had to use your load to push you where you wanted to go. So it was all downstream ferries. Which is often a hard time that low water boaters have switching to high water, is learning how to do downstream ferries. Well that’s all you could do with those Huck Finns. Everything was downstream ferries. It was just slower. But you had to get the load to push you where you wanted to go. You can never do an upstream ferry because the load would be tracking you downstream. So it was a great way to learn how to row, from the very beginning. 

STEIGER: And your load... I guess, so your load was really the people up there? That’s where all your weight was. 

MUNGER: Uh-huh. Right. Right off the front. Their feet would almost be hanging in the water. They’d be sitting in the front and the boxes would kind of be laying on their sides on the tube and then their personal gear would go in these big long black bags that you basically tie off like you were tying off a goat’s foot, with clove hitches. You just lash them together and tighten them and then rig that over the top of your coolers and boxes, and that would be the padding and it would be their backrest. So it was like being on a couch, and so much fun for people because all four people are sitting right in the front looking at the whitewater, and the whitewater is coming right in ther face the whole time. So those boats were really ingenious. 

STEIGER: I’ve never done the Tuolumne, but I did the Selway and I’ve heard those are similar... How would you describe the Tuolumne to somebody who just grew up on the <Grand Canyon>? It’s markedly different, isn’t it? 

MUNGER: It is. It’s, you know, of course a much smaller river bed. A low flow on the Tuolumne is a thousand cfs. Three or four thousand is medium, and then anything above four thousand started to get high... so a lot lower, tighter, narrower, just quicker. Lot of maneuvering. Million rocks. [ 

STEIGER: Bigger drops?] 

MUNGER: Yeah, bigger drops. I think the gradient on the lower Tuolumne is about sixty-five or seventy feet a mile. So, just continuous. Continuous rapids. Really a lot of fun. Not a whole lot of slow water. Pool-drop, but the pools weren’t very long before the next drop. And of course there’s Clavey Falls. Every river has to have its, you know, <Lava Falls>... and Clavey Falls was always the big rapid cause it was a rapid where you’d go over a really steep fifteen foot ramped drop, with all the current racing towards a wall and you had to make a move to miss a big hole. So it was always an exciting part of the trip. But just really beautiful, all granite, very safe river, beautiful side creeks to swim in and just short... eighteen miles was the run on the Tuolumne. One, two and mostly three days. Working for Sierra Mac at that time we did mostly three day trips. So that was great. 

STEIGER: So where’d it go from there? 

MUNGER: Well, I was in college during that time and I was studying international relations and so of course I wanted to be an international river guide. So right when self-bailers came out, some friends of mine and I started an all women’s exploratory team. Cause there were a lot of rivers that had been kayaked in <California> at that time but hadn’t been rafted. So we just started running these rivers just for fun in the middle of nowhere. It was really a great time. There’d just be six of us and we’d just take one boat, which of course isn’t, you know, the safest, now that I teach Swiftwater Rescue. But, you know, it was adventurous, it was going into remote beautiful canyons, it was right up my alley and a way to get there and explore them. So we started doing that. At that time we were figuring out how to run paddle-boats anyway on Class Five on the upper Tuolumne and so I was getting a lot of experience in steeper water. And what really changed my career was, we took our raft over a twenty-two foot waterfall and there happened to be a photographer there and we got on the cover of River Runner Magazine and then we got to go do an exploratory in Borneo with Richard Bangs for Sobek with the Dayaks, and that’s what kind of launched my international... viability, to be able to do international trips, was that whole thing. Just kind of a freak-one thing leads to another. And then I just, I mean I worked as a river guide for twenty-five years so that’s a lot of years of playing around, but after that I started to work for Steve Curry Expeditions. I got a lot of opportunities because there weren’t a lot of people who were paddle guiding at that time. 

STEIGER: Where’d you work for Steve Curry at? 

MUNGER: I started on the Bio-Bio in <Chile> and worked about six seasons there and then, you know, we’d do the circuit: the Bio-Bio and then... Tibet or <Nepal> in the fall. The Bio-Bio in the winter and then I’d work either the <Grand Canyon> or <Alaska> in the summer for awhile. So my career kind of went all over the place. I worked in <Idaho> for awhile. 

STEIGER: So <Grand Canyon> would be just like a couple trips a year kind of thing? 

MUNGER: Well I started in <Grand Canyon> I think in ’94 or ’95, right at the end of the Bio-Bio season... so I worked for AZRA full time for seven or eight years. [ 

STEIGER: So full time would be like six trips or something?] 

MUNGER: Yeah, mm-hmmm. 

STEIGER: But you were a full time guide? That’s how you made a living? 

MUNGER: That’s how I made a living. Yep. For a lot of years. 

STEIGER: And did you take a degree in international relations? 

MUNGER: Uh-huh. I did. 

STEIGER: What’s that all about? 

MUNGER: It’s about being an international raft guide, of course. (both laugh) 

STEIGER: Yeah, but I mean, what did the university think it was about? I mean, what does somebody who has a degree... ? 

MUNGER: It’s political science and economics and... you can take it anywhere you want. Geography. So, you know, I was headed towards the State Department or international law. [ 

STEIGER: Typically that’s where the graduates would go?] 

MUNGER: Yeah. It’s politics, or... 

STEIGER: Do you keep in touch with your classmates? 

MUNGER: Only my boating classmates. That was definitely where my focus was, even when I came out of school. Because I worked an internship for awhile for an environmental lobbyist in <Sacramento> and learned very quickly that I did not want to live in the city. And so I bought a little place up in the foothills of the Sierras, and basically made it work for me there. So for a couple of years when there was a drought, I mean I’ve done every different kind of job, probably... I mean I was a hotshot fire fighter for a season. I was a waitress and a school bus driver and a carpenter and a laborer, and I dug ditches one year, and I cleared brush one year. Because when I was a hotshot we learned how to use a chainsaw. 

STEIGER: This is after you had your degree in international relations? 

MUNGER: Yeah, exactly, but you know I couldn’t work doing that in the foothills of the Sierras at that time. (laughter) And I didn’t have any other... you don’t really have any employable skills when you graduate from college. So I developed them very quickly by pretty much doing..."I can do that!" [ 

STEIGER: (laughs) "That sounds like fun! That’s oudoors!"] 

MUNGER: Yeah. So I was a laborer. Basically a laborer. In between guiding seasons or when there was a drought. Because there were six years that I was a river guide before I ever got into any international stuff, or really got out of <California>. So I spent a lot of time building up a base of skills before I did anything else. 

STEIGER: So what about this swim? When did that first...? 

MUNGER: The swim materialized on a training trip where we were doing Wilderness First Responder stuff, but also Swiftwater stuff. And I was teaching Swiftwater and whenever I teach Swiftwater I always have river-boards with me, cause they’re the most incredible teaching tool, I think, for anybody wanting to learn how the river works. And so I had three or four river-boards on an AZRA training trip, and Connie Tibbitts and I pretty much spent almost the whole river trip on those river-boards, and it was actually her idea, originally, to do a self-supported river-board trip. And of course, I thought that was the greatest idea ever. Cause we’d talk about it. Just, "This is so much fun." It’s so intimate with the water being on a river-board because you’re at water level. You’re still floating. you’re still on top of the river, but you’re just right there and the waves are all around you. It’s a really intimate experience with the river. And so, we loved it. And she loved it. So it was her idea, and we spent three or four years trying to get a private permit. 

[break- battery change.] 

STEIGER: So where were we? You were talking about... [ 

MUNGER: Connie Tibbitts] 

STEIGER: and swimming. 

MUNGER: Not swimming, we were floating. [ 

STEIGER: What’s the difference?] 

MUNGER: Well, there’s a big difference, actually, if you’re trying to get permission to go. [ 

STEIGER: You’re not supposed to be swimming. You had a craft...] 

MUNGER: Exactly [ 

STEIGER: ...which was your boogie-board. And a boogie-board is what? What are the dimensions of that thing?] 

MUNGER: Oh, five feet by three feet by about five inches. A hundred and sixty pounds of flotation. So you’re actually floating. You’re not swimming. [ 

STEIGER: Up out of the water!] 

MUNGER: Exactly. (laughter) Well you can say swimming, but it was definitely a big issue in the getting-permission-to-go process. But we aren’t really there yet. 

STEIGER: Ok, so, at some point... I don’t want to digress from the swim story but don’t let me forget either, just how you got into Swiftwater Rescue and kind of what are the basic tenets of that? I mean it seems like that probably influenced you too in that regard... but anyway, I should shut up and let you tell the story. Where were we? 

MUNGER: Connie. You know, she was working full seasons down there at that time and I was. And you know, you spend so much time around people. What a great adventure to just have two people on river-boards doing a self-supported trip. So we individually tried for about three years to get a private trip cancellation, because we were both on the waiting list. And tried. And I finally got a cancellation in the fall, like a November 24th put in. And Connie’s idea of the time of year to have a fun river-board trip (laughter) was not November. Being that she was a little older and more sensible than me, I guess. So... and she had another experience on a really cold day on a river-board and decided that November or December would not be any fun but that I should go do it anyway. Cause you know, we tried for like three or four years. It was like, "We’re never going to get a cancellation in the summer. We’re both working in the summer. Let’s go in the fall." So it looked like, you know, "take it or it might never happen." So at that point I’d been talking to Theresa Yates quite a bit about it, and she was really excited about the idea. And I’d approached Connie anyway, cause three seemed like a better number to me than two, just safer if something goes wrong or somebody needs help-you’ve got one person to stay with the person and the other to set up camp or whatever, just three seemed like a really safe number. And Theresa was fine with doing it in the winter. So Connie was pretty... she was always supportive, like, " You guys have a great time, but I don’t want to go in the winter." And so we started planning for the trip and I got another friend of mine, Kelly Kalafatich, who I’ve boated with for twenty-five years. She’s like a sister. I know her really well, I trust her. We did a lot of cataraft boating together in <California>. Paddled on the US Women’s rafting team... so a big history of paddling together. Somebody I really trust, had been in a lot of situations all over the place with. You know, a bud. So the three of us started to plan for the trip. And there were all sorts of things to figure out, namely, one, "How do you river-board and carry enough gear to make it for fourteen or fifteen days down the river?" And really when I got a November cancellation... and I think I got that cancellation in the beginning of October, so I didn’t have a lot of time to plan and figure out all the logistics. So we had some interesting, creative ideas about how to deal with our food situation, one of which involved burying a few cans and having a little treasure map to find the cans on our way down there.... [aside about mic cord] but the only way that we could really figure out to carry our gear was in small daypacks and then a little drybag that was rigged to the front of the board. So we had it pretty much figured out, and we had a good enough plan that I think we would have made it. 

But we went to <Lee's Ferry> on our put-in day, we had all of our required equipment with us, and this was in 1999, fall of ’99, and I had actually called and asked one of the rangers a question about fire-pans, so I didn’t think it was going to be a surprise to anybody that we were showing up with river-boards, because even on the permit I had written river-boards as our craft, but evidently it was a surprise. We were paddling around in the eddy waiting for our checkout... and I can’t remember who was the ranger at that time... but there was also a body recovery search going on, so there were a bunch of <Glen Canyon> rangers around too, and, you know, someone came walking-"What are you...what are you guys doing?" It was like, " Well we’re putting in for a private trip." "Well where’s your boat?" I go "We don’t have a boat. These are our boats" And they just were laughing at us, basically. So somebody made a call to the River District ranger, who didn’t think that that was an appropriate way to go down the river and alerted the ranger that he was not allowed to let us go. So he came down to us and basically said "You can’t go. Without a boat." We said "Why not?" and-that’s why I was making jokes about the whole swimming thing. It’s like "’Cause you’re swimming in the river, and it’s illegal to swim the river." "Well we’re not swimming the river. We’re river-boarding the river. We’re not swimming." "Well are you using a swimming motion to propel your craft? You’re swimming." [

STEIGER: "Says so right here in the book."] Yeah. Basically it became... it was very clear that we were not going to be allowed to go, and that if we tried to go... [ 

STEIGER: They were gonna get ya.] 

MUNGER: They were going to arrest us. Yeah. But he said "You can go get a boat and come back to the put-in and go. With a boat." And to me that didn’t make any sense. "What, we go with a boat, with these river-boards? We’re not allowed to get in the water with the river-boards, so we have to go with them on....?" It was just not a good thing. So we contested the decision. I contested the decision, as the permit holder, and said-and that was Theresa Yates and Kelly Kalafatich and I that were there, and just said "I believe that we’re being denied to a public resource without an adequate reason. We’re not swimming. These are watercraft. We should be allowed to go. So... respecting you, we’re going home, we’re not coming back with a boat, but we’re contesting the decision." And so that’s when we started to develop a document that documented why we believed we should be allowed to go. And Ruth Stoner was actually a key part of that whole process. We basically went back to Theresa Yates’ house and for about a week, five days, just did research. We put together a document that, there’s a section in the document that explains the historical evolution of watercraft in the Canyon-all the different crafts that have been used through the <Grand Canyon>-we documented our experience, we documented our expense and all the things that we’d gone through, all the equipment we had to show that was in our permit requirements, and we documented that by the definition of the Coast Guard, a river-board is a watercraft. Cause there are a few places in Coast Guard literature that said "a watercraft is anything that transports people on water." So we showed that we were floating and not only were we floating but we had more flotation than a kayaker has. Because a kayak, you know, a plastic kayak has a lot less than 165 lbs. of flotation. So we basically wrote up a legal document without being lawyers, in a way, and put it into sections and made an appoiment with Mr. Hattaway, who was the River District Ranger at that time, and took all our equipment to his office, (laughs) the poor guy, in the parking lot there, and showed him our document and just said "We believe that we should go. Be able to go." And he didn’t disagree with us, he didn’t agree with us. He said he’d have to, you know, "look into the matter." And so I called him about every month and said "Have you looked into the matter?" And that went on for about a year and then, when Mike McGinnis got his job he was one of the rangers that had been at <Glen Canyon> when we first were there and so he actually looked into it and actually took it further than our document, than just... [ 

STEIGER: So... so when Patrick Hattaway said he was going to look into it, that really just meant "I’m not going to make a decision.... (but it’s not going to happen on my watch.)"?] 

MUNGER: No I don’t think he was stalling, I think he was just involved in other things. You know, I don’t think it was ever at the top of his list of things that he needed to do. No. I never felt like... I mean I felt like all the rangers were exceptionally respectful of us. I just really felt like it was a misunderstanding. I mean, a river-board is not a craft that people are really familiar with. It’s a relatively new watercraft that people aren’t using a lot. And you know I think their concerns were legitimate and that... and also, Patrick Hattaway at that time,was interpreting a law that was really, in my opinion... which eventually-Rob Elliott and I, and Rob Elliott did most of the work but I was definitely... I ended up quitting being a river guide in <Grand Canyon> over it: over the whole swimming interpretation. Because the law that they were basing our denial on was the same law that was affecting a lot of river guides for awhile... it was like "no swimming or bathing in any pool or riffle or eddy or any rapid." [ 

STEIGER: Cause they’d heard that people were swimming the rapids and they didn’tlike that idea?] 

MUNGER: Right. They were worried about the liability of it but when you look at that law in context of the document, it’s a great law because it’s in... it’s right after, you know, you can’t build campfires on the river, it, definitely when you look at the whole picture it looks like it’s dedicated to hikers. It doesn’t have anything to do with river running. It’s in the section of law that wasn’t about river running. It’s about hiking. So it’s a great law. The law wasn’t the problem. It was just at that point he had decided to interpret the law to apply to river runners. And me being the Swiftwater Rescue instructor... so he had made a comment to the outfitters, like, "Your passengers are not allowed to float in the rapids or float in the river at all," and some companies didn’t take it extremely seriously, but some companies did. I mean here’s the River District ranger saying "You can not float your clients in the water anymore," and for me as a Swiftwater Rescue instructor, to me that.... me following that law would be negligence. Because I know that people who are afraid of the water, who are uncomfortable in the water, need to get in their lifejackets and float around a little bit, so they understand that they can float, in order to survive a big swim at <Lava> or <Granite>. I mean some people are going to be fine and some people are going to panic. And so for me-I didn’t feel like I could obey that law. And that’s ultimately why I quit working for AZRA. 

STEIGER: So when you’re orienting your people, if somebody’s nervous you have them go ahead and get in and...? 

MUNGER: I do. I float them all the time. If I’m guiding a paddle-boat I do a lot of flip drills in the flat water so that they’re used to... you know the big deal is people going underwater and having to come up and deal with the boat being upside down or being under the boat. So I do a lot of practice like that. I always have as a paddle guide. And getting them to float... expecially if somebody’s scared or old... you know, on one of the trips I did for AZRA we had, you know, seventy year olds in the paddle-boats. We actually waited at <Lava> for the water to go down because it was like, "If one of these guys falls out of this paddle boat on the right side of <Lava>..." and that’s what really made the decison for me-because I wasn’t allowed to put them in the water before <Lava>. And it made me realize "If one of these guys falls out and hasn’t had the experience of being in the water-I’m negligent." Whether anybody sees me that way legally, I’m negligent. Because I know better. And I know that people need to float in rapids... if they’re older, they don’t.... yeah. So it’s just what I believe and what I’ve seen and.... oh, so anyway, that was quite a tangent, but it all ties in. 

STEIGER: So you quit over that principle? 

MUNGER: I quit over that principle. Because it was either: lie to the company and say "Oh I’m not going to swim my people." and then swim them. Or just, realizing, you know, "I can’t work under these circumstances." And I couldn’t. So Rob Elliott and I had long conversations about it and eventually he got a lawyer to look into it and that’s one of the reasons that the interpretation of that law has been re-evaluated. 

STEIGER: So did Rob and those guys decide to change the company policy on that? 

MUNGER: I believe that they have. I ‘m not positive, but I know that they’re at least not as concerned or worried or strict with their own policies about it anymore. I mean I think that’s really something of the past. And all my conversations with Mike McGinnis are "As long as it’s training related and related to people’s survivability" they’re very supportive of that kind of training. But it’s at the river guide’s discretion. It doesn’t mean you drop your people off at the top of <Hermit> and let them float through, but... well at least not anymore! But... that’s definitely a thing of the past. But you know, at least... which is completely understandable. I mean, I wouldn’t swim <Hermit> in a life jacket, personally. I’m not brave enough. [ 

STEIGER: Maybe not the way it is now. Back in the eighties maybe...] 

MUNGER: Still. I like to be on top of the water. I don’t like to be under the water. 

STEIGER: So a year went by. Mike McGinnis got in and you approached him... 

MUNGER: Right. I didn’t have to approach him because one of the first things that fell on his desk was our document. And I think because, at least... you know he had been there that day, so he had seen us there. I think he just felt "Look, I owe it to these guys to at least look into it." And the way that I understand it is, the solicitor for the Park Service looked at the document and it was basically McGinnis’s call. They just said "It’s your call." Whether or not you let them go. And he made a decision, mostly based on our experience level, that we could go. 

STEIGER: Was that when Rob Arnberger was the superintendent still? Or was it Joe Alston? 

MUNGER: I don’t remember who it was. Because my only interaction was with McGinnis-when he called me and said he was going to let us go, that it was a one-time thing and-it was really brave of him, I think. To just make a decison like that that no one had made before. 

STEIGER: I think it speaks well of whoever was the superintendent too. Just to say "Allright. Well, that’s your job. So you go ahead and figure it out then." I’m sure there’ve been people in there who would just say "What do I gain from this?" Like if something went wrong you lose, but otherwise what do you win? Probably a lot of people in that position would just automatically say "Nah. Not on my watch." 

MUNGER: Right. A big hassle is what’s in it for me if something goes wrong. You know, they have to be able to defend their decision. And you couldn’t blame them, really. 

STEIGER: I guess depending on how you view your job. 

MUNGER: Yeah. But I think because he is more of a river type person, he had a better understanding of what we were trying to do and realized that it was a fine thing to do. That there wasn’t anything inherently dangerous or crazy about it. 

STEIGER: So... "Oh shit!" Now you had to go do it. 

MUNGER: Yeah! How great is that?! So, I think he let us know that we could go in like September or October and we got a permit for November of the following year. I got really attached to the idea of doing it in the winter, because nobody would be down there. It would just be the three of us and it would be an adventure. You know? And that was one of the great things about it, was figuring out everything. How to make it work. The backpack/little bag on the front might’ve worked but certainly there had to be a better way and it was a matter of trying to figure that out. 

STEIGER: Were they waterproof backpacks or just...? 

MUNGER: Yeah. Just waterproof daypacks and then a small Watershed bag with all our sleeping gear attached to the board that we were riding. Which I was concerned with because I just didn’t want any extra weight on our actual board. At least one of us needed to have a complete board free of gear, for just maneuverability and speed and... you know going over drops and having a twenty pound weight right in front of your head is different than not. And so it was a matter of trying to figure out something else, so I tried abalone floats that divers use, you know, maybe we could tow those behind us. "What can we use to tow our gear, and Kelly just had an epiphany one day, like "Well, duh, what are we thinking? We can just use another river-board to put our gear on." And it was really brilliant. But we came up with it relatively closely to our launch date so the first time we actually tried it was on our trip. But we knew it would work. 

STEIGER: You just had the stuff tied down really good on this other board? 

MUNGER: Right. It was great. From dragging stuff around it made it really obvious that it would need to be floating, and that would float it. And so we designed a system with a-basically a floating water-ski handle that would attach to the board and we modified a throw-bag. So we all had quick-release Live-Bait lifejackets and a ten-foot tether where we would tow the boards in the flat water and then any sign, any little riffle, just because a rope in water, as my friend Mike Mather likes to say "is an evil serpent looking to do nothing but harm, at any time... 

STEIGER: Yeah. Someday, not now, but I should tell you my Bill Beer story, that he told me himself. 

MUNGER: ...anyway, so I was adamant, cause I know how many people have drowned entangled in ropes, that even a little riffle... so every time a little riffle would come up we’d stuff the rope all the way in the bag, seal the bag off, and we’d just ride side by side with the gear board. 

STEIGER: And just kind of let it go if you had to, or...? 

MUNGER: If we’d needed to but we were trying to hold onto it, realizing that just letting it float the whole way was going to use a lot more energy than was necessary. So just by floating right next to it we kind of became like a cataraft. Because we’d just grab on the side of the gear... and it was really stable, actually. More flotation, stability, everything. If we went up on a wave and it kind of flipped over you just push it back down. So that worked great. So we floated side by side through a lot of the rapids that way. Every rapid was different. It was like "Well what... ok now we’re at <Hance>. That’s not going to really work at <Hance>. It was still relatively low water when we got to <Hance>, it was like 12,000 I think, so we had to run the left side and there’s a lot of exposed rocks, so the idea of kind of maneuvering that through.... we wanted to be able to run the pour-overs and not worry about the gear board. 

STEIGER: You ran the left side? Wow. Instead of down the middle you were like far-left? 

MUNGER: Just kind of the normal boat run. The left run. The left boating run. 

STEIGER: Did you go to the left of the square rock or to the right of it? 

MUNGER: The left. [ 

STEIGER: You did? And caught that eddy and came across?] 

MUNGER: And caught that eddy. What we did is we caught that eddy and then ferried out with our board and then at that point let go of the gear board, because at that point, once you made that move, the gear board wasn’t in danger of getting caught in the rocks on the left. So we couldn’t just let the gear board go, and that was a horrible rapid to do that-in <Hance>-but that worked out perfectly, I mean we caught the eddy, made the move out a little bit and then let go of it so we could run the pour-overs just with us and our board. Got into the tail waves, looked around for the board, paddled over to it and grabbed it and did the lower part with the board. 

STEIGER: Did you go to the right or the left of the Whale rock? 

MUNGER: To the right. Everything went to the right. So we didn’t let go of our boards until we were clear of the rocks. [

STEIGER: Wow.] Yeah. And then we caught them in the tail-waves, and that worked out great. And then <Sockdolager> we just let go of the-you know at kind of the entrance waves, let go of it, went through the big wave, and then reconnected. So places... and I think <Sockdolager> it wasn’t even... I can’t remember if we actually held onto the board the whole time, or, or not. But the rest of the rapids in there were fine. Then the water came up to about 18,000 after we passed <Phantom Ranch>. 

STEIGER: Boy I was thinking...because man, that 11-12 thousand right in there, that’s an exciting stage for swimming <Sapphire>. 

MUNGER: Yeah I’ll have to look in my notes. I have my journal, I’ll have to look at the water levels. 

STEIGER: Of course, 18,000 at <Granite> or <Crystal>... what would you do? 

MUNGER: Just ran the right. Easy. Piece of Cake. <Crystal>. Just the right run. It might have been 8,000 and came up to 13,000. I should remember that. It was only five years ago. ....Really every different rapid had its challenges. 

STEIGER: How many days was the whole thing? 

MUNGER: Nineteen. Because we actually got a ride right up to the base of <Glen Canyon Dam>... that was a kind of a dramatic thing for me because I went up there with my dad. He came down for our launch and he hadn’t been above <Lee's Ferry> since the dam was built. So the last time he’d come down that part was on that Georgie White trip. So we went all the way up to the base of the dam and started our trip there. 

STEIGER: And he came down to see you off? That’s pretty cool. 

MUNGER: Yeah, It was really cool. It was great. So we went all the way from the base of <Glen Canyon Dam> to <Pearce Ferry>. 

STEIGER: Awesome. (laughs) Now what’d you do with your human waste? Oops. Ok we’ll cut that out. (more laughter). Individual little zip-lock baggies and uh, you had a special pack for that? 

MUNGER: No, I can answer that. We had abs plastic tubes, right? So we each had two cylinders that were about eighteen inches long. that had, you know, a corner on the bottom and a clean-out on the top. So... and you know, even when I got to <Phantom Ranch> I said "Anybody who wants to take a look in here is welcome to!" (laughs) 

STEIGER: Oh yeah. And nobody wanted to check it out. 

MUNGER: Nobody wanted to check it out. So you know, what we actually had in those abs tubes will always be our business, I guess. 

STEIGER: Right. But I didn’t mean to interrupt. So.... so what else about the swim? What stands out for you now? 

MUNGER: What stands out for me now? Well I’ve always definitely been bummed that Theresa Yates couldn’t make it, because her life really changed in those years. She was there with us at the put-in and there with us through all the stuff... with all the documentation... and then got married and her husband was having some heart difficulties at that time and so she ultimately wasn’t able to join us. So that’s always been a... I’ve always wished that she was able to go. Because it was definitely a passion of hers and she was really instrumental in making it happen. And it also would have great if Ruthie Stoner could have come with us. Because she still... and Connie! So even though I know that they were all there with us in spirit, it would have been great to actually physically have been on the water with them. So looking back on it, I mean even though Rebecca Rusch is the third woman who ended up joining us, you know she was also part of Kelly and my paddling team... and it’s incredible that the three of us were there-but I’ve always felt that, you know, there really were six of us involved, not just the three of us that actually did it. I think it’s like any kind of adventure that takes a long time to put together. The people that actually do it aren’t the only people... you know are really just a small part of whole picture: which is everybody that put energy into making it happen. So I look back on it as more of a whole, encompassing event. There were just so many pieces that went into it. And that’s as valuable as the actual trip. 

STEIGER: Yeah, I guess Ruthie helped because having worked so long for the Park she knew how... was her contribution like: "Look if you file these papers, there’ll be such and such a process..."? and da-da-da. 

MUNGER: No not so much that as she did all the internet research. Because none of us were internet compliant then. 

STEIGER: So she looked up the laws themselves? 

MUNGER: Exactly. And it was like, you know: "We need to get the definition of a water-craft." And she would go and she’d find it. "Well we need all the historical information about how river-boards are used." You know, commercially, recreationally... and she would find that information on the internet for us. Which at that time was... so she built the base of our document. 

STEIGER: So how about actually running... how’d that go? I mean actually figuring out... I guess you got pretty good with those things then? I got to talk to Bill Beer, pretty intimately, you know, we sat down and did a pretty good, long interview with him and he talked about swimming and stuff, but you didn’t get the sense that those guys were all that... they had more water... you didn’t get the sense that they were really all... the way they were set up they weren’t that maneuverable. It seemed like it was just kind of thrash out there and go where you were going and tuck and roll and survive. Sounds like you guys got pretty... how did that go? Just in terms of the evolution of your own techniques for getting down there. 

MUNGER: Oh, it was great and that was part of the adventure too. I’ve always been a really conservative river runner. I mean I don’t just run down the middle of stuff haphazardly. I’m very into scouting and running specific lines and being in control and knowing where you are. So in the beginning it was really funny because it took us awhile to figure out how to rig our boards so that they wouldn’t tip over all the time. We pulled out of the eddy at <Lee's Ferry> and our gear boards instantly just tipped over. So part of it was figuring out how to rig the gear low and wide, so they’d be more stable, and that helped a lot just in our maneuverability. But, you know, river-boards are kind of- they’re a misunderstood part of boating in that they’re incredibly maneuverable. Your visibility is different because you’re water level but if you scout and you can read the river or you know the river like I did, I mean I know the river really well... so we could run rapids in very specific spots, where... every rapid was very calculated. "Can we... we’re just going to go down the middle of this one." It’s great because everybody says the <Grand Canyon> is eighty-five percent flat water-well not when you’re on a river-board. It’s pretty much continuous. All those little riffles that you just float over in a boat are so much fun. They’re just-you know you’re going all the time. Everywhere. And so, we were very precise in the lines that we picked and how we ran. We got to <House Rock>, it was low water and we scouted it and we picked our route. In <House Rock> and in <Granite> and in <Lava> we portaged our gear boards to the eddy at the bottom and just tied them off there and then we’d run the rapid and catch the eddy and pick up the gear boards then. So, no, we were very precise. And it took awhile to get in shape. And relax. A lot of it is just learning how to relax and use your fins to steer and... one of the reasons I love river-boards in teaching rescue stuff is they’re very responsive to ferry angles and very unresponsive if you’re at the wrong angle. So once you learn... if you’ve got a good ferry angle the board will do all the work for you. Just like any boat. So it’s just a lot of learning. Getting intimate with running. 

STEIGER: Now is it all kick? You’re not using your arms? 

MUNGER: I use my arms quite a bit because actually if I kick in the swimming pool, I go backwards. (laughter) I’m not a very good kicker. But with fins I’m pretty good. But yeah, you’re just-usually you can get up on your elbows and just kick along. It’s a very relaxing motion really. It’s not very difficult. Just get used to kicking along... 

STEIGER: Man, that run that you described in <Hance>, that’s pretty impressive. I mean that always puckered me up enough when I was rowing it, much less swimming. Musta got your attention as you were floating in there to do that, eh? Interesting current there too. Kind of goes more right than you think. 

MUNGER: Yeah, which was good for us. We took advantage of that current. 

STEIGER: What was the most exciting run you did? 

MUNGER: Well, <Lava>, I would say. The interesting thing is just that not having been in big water very much at that time on a river-board, just not knowing how it would handle. And being concerned about "Well if you go over a big pour-over, what exactly is the board going to do?" But uh, you know, it’s much safer to go down the Colorado on a river-board than it is in a raft. I can definitely say that. Because you know when you think about it: you’re prepared for a swim. You’ve got a helmet on, you’ve got a dry-suit on, you’ve got thermal protection, you’ve got gloves, you’ve got fins. If you flip over you just flip right back up. If you fall off you have a hundred and sixy-five pounds of flotation floating with you. So a lot of it was just discovering how... what a great craft it is. Especially for the <Grand Canyon>. It’s the perfect... 

STEIGER: Can’t fall out of bed if you’re laying on the floor. (laughter) 

MUNGER: Well I guess that’s another way of looking at it. But it’s just the perfect craft for the <Grand Canyon>. So a lot of it was just figuring out the capacity of the board itself. <Lava Falls>... we got to <Lava>... I think it was right around 12,000 cfs. I think it was one of those stages where we could’ve-it was right at the cutoff for the right or the left run. And I spent a lot of time looking at the water in <Lava>. Any time it gets down there a little bit like that, you know the black rock and some of those lava sieves on the right are really concerning to me. 

STEIGER: To me 11,000 is the perfect corner-pocket water. Right in there. 

MUNGER: Exactly. And you know, we were doing the trip expedition style anyway. I mean we were... it wasn’t about where you run it, it was about running it and being on line and being good with the way that you were running it. So we, I felt at that level that the left run would be a better run for us. We looked at it and talked about it and said "Yeah, let’s go left." But the pour-overs were pretty bitey at that level and I got a little bit too far right in the big pour-over. Not anywhere near the ledge hole, but... 

STEIGER: Sent you over to the domer. 

MUNGER: Yeah. So I went off that thing and just went completely underwater. I mean I gained a new respect for the board because I went over and just ducked and went under and got tumbled over once but came right out, just right with the board and everything. Jumped back on and it really wasn’t a problem. But <Lava> was definitely the biggest hit, at that level. 

STEIGER: God it must... was it hard to see where you were going floating into that? 

MUNGER: Oh yeah. It’s really funny in the DVD because I had run it once and... had some things going on that day... didn’t really want to run it again. And Rebecca was doing great. But she was the least experienced river-runner. She’s one of the most famous adventure racers in the world, but just didn’t have a lot of time on the river so she was most timid. And so she went out to run it herself and did the classic, kicked way too far out to the middle and was heading right for the ledge-hole. And I was standing there watching her and I thought, "you know I’m just going to try.".. and I just started to point over and she saw me out of the corner of her eye and just got it right away and turned at ninety degrees and kicked to the left, and she had a great run. She had a really good run. And then Kelly, who was at the bottom filming it, and then hiked back up to run it? She barely even got her hair wet. She just slicked it. She’s a really good-she’s an amazing river runner anyway and she just duck-dove all the waves. Didn’t get her hair wet. But the most catastrophic thing that happened on the trip was an msr stove that blew up at South Canyon. That’s the closest we came to not completing the trip. Had nothing to do with the river. Had to do with a stove. 

STEIGER: It just blew up on you? 

MUNGER: We were having trouble, we had two msr stoves and we were having trouble with them from the very beginning. Well now I think what it was was we just had some bad fuel? You know the sand in the canyon and fuel, and we didn’t take multi-fuel stoves, they were just regular fuel. We’d been priming it and having trouble and Rebecca went to turn it off and it just exploded with this huge fire-flame, and it caught her arm on fire and her hand on fire, she had a down jacket; so her hand and her arm jacket were on fire. All our gear was on fire. I mean there was white gas flame everywhere. It just shot out. I mean the pictures I have of it. The whole stove, the fuel bottle, everything just melted. Cause it just went. 

STEIGER: You got pictures of it? 

MUNGER: Mm-hmm. It sprayed everywhere. So she doused her hand in the sand and we ran to the river and she put her hand right in the river. Kelly just basically took her straight to the river. And that was a pretty tense moment-slash-night. 

STEIGER: Were you shooting with a video camera or something? How did you end up...? 

MUNGER: Kelly was. Well, Carr Clifton had hiked into South Canyon to just meet up with us and get some shots. He had hiked in. And so he had... I’m pretty sure it was Kelly’s camera that got those shots, though. I think that as soon as she ran down and put Rebecca’s hand in the water she came back and started filming. So that was pretty tense. I don’t think I’ve ever been so happy to see somebody start blistering. Because that was the thing, "Was it going to be second degree or third degree? Because third degree would’ve ended her trip for sure, right there. She would’ve been hiking out at South Canyon. But they blistered, she had blisters all over her hand and we just were there with a needle and we were popping them as fast as they started to fill up, so that her skin loss would be minimal, on the top of her hand. And she probably lost, oh I’d say at least a third of the skin on the top of her hand. 

STEIGER: I never heard that. Is that a WFR thing? 

MUNGER: Well it is for me. It’s kind of a field experience thing. If you’re getting a blister and you’re not going to do anything with that then you can let it keep filling with fluid and then the body will re-absorb the fluid and it will go back down. But if you actually want to lose it, you know the longer you let it start filling up with fluid the more skin is going to de-laminate, the bigger the wound you’re going to have to deal with. So we were just popping the blisters as quick as they came up. Just trying to keep the wound small. 

STEIGER: And that was like, right there on the spot? 

MUNGER: Right there on the spot, yeah, as soon as her hand came out of the water, and it was blistering. So, we got the whiskey bottle out. Little pain medication. She woke up in the morning and had some more blisters that we popped and just, you know put some aloe vera and gauze and taped them up and put her hand in a glove and kept going. By the end of the trip her hand was almost healed. It’s a perfect environment to heal wounds... it’d heat up to body temperature during the day. 

STEIGER: So you guys were wearing one-piece, full dry-suits? That was comfortable? 

MUNGER: Yeah. Very comfortable. But we definitely had a lot of gear issues to solve. I had gotten a brand new dry suit from Kokatat. Kokatat had pretty much given me a dry-suit with Gore-Tex feet. And Kelly and Rebecca were a little bit... slower about their gear stuff, and had decided to rent dry-suits, dive dry-suits from a dive shop. I think they’d gotten them donated, but they were still rentals. 

STEIGER: So they leaked a little bit... 

MUNGER: More than a little bit. And that’s one thing. We had backups for everything. They had backup dry-suits and I had a backup wetsuit and we had gaskets and we had glue. We actually had some feet FedExed to <Marble Canyon>, that a friend hiked in at <Badger>. Because we had, right away we saw when we came down from <Glen Canyon> that those suits were not going to work. They were going to have to use their reserve suits. And those suits didn’t have feet. They had spare gaskets, but they didn’t have feet, and that would have been just miserable. So we had a lot of gear challenges but we had really good repair kits and as things... as we needed to fix things we had the capacity to, except the stoves. We ended up not... we had complete repair kits for those stoves and they both failed completely, We ended up cooking on fires. Luckily we had an adequate fire-pan. Cause our stoves failed by day four. Luckily I’d been doing a driftwood survey. So I knew where all the good driftwood was. I was on a science trip and part of it was noticing and recording where all the driftwood piles had ended up. So that was just part of the survey. And so, we would camp where there was wood. Well, we never camped in any normal camp. It was always some remote, obscure place. 

STEIGER: Wow. What an adventure. 

MUNGER: it was a great adventure. It was a great time. We were very well received by the <Phantom Ranch> crew, that made a big... it was a big boost. They knew we were coming because a really good friend of Rebecca’s... you know how tight that community is, and one of Rebecca’s best friends had a best friend working there. So, oh yeah, they were waiting for us. They were ready. 

STEIGER: Now November, was that really a lot colder? Or does it even matter once you’re in the water? 

MUNGER: Well that’s what a lot of people don’t realize. The air temperature and the water temperature were about the same. It was 46 degrees in the water and I’d say it was mid-forties to low sixties most of the trip. No, you know we had bunny suits under our dry suits. The days are so short, so we were definitely... we’d get up before light, and we were on the river at first light, at like 7:15 in the morning so we’d have... you know it was dark by 5:15 at night. So we definitely used all of our daylight everyday. 

STEIGER: Boy. I wonder what else I should ask....? How did you-how does Swiftwater Rescue tie into all that stuff? How did you get involved in that and how did your knowledge there cross over? 

MUNGER: The way it really influenced the trip was that I’d been using river-boards so much in training that I became familiar with what an incredible craft they really are. 

STEIGER: I’ve never taken... I need to take a Swiftwater class. The idea is you use the board, that’s good because you can grab one up out of wherever and jump out of the chopper or run down the slope or whatever? They’re mobile. Is that how that evolved? Cause that’s the most mobile device you can use to get to somebody in a hurry? 

MUNGER: Yeah. Depending on your experience level. You know, I mean a good Swiftwater Rescuer, you have to access the person. So if somebody’s on Big Red in <Crystal>, you have to get out there to them. So in Swiftwater, really, the more different crafts you can paddle or the better you are at swimming or wading or paddling or boarding, the more options you have available to you if you have to access somebody to rescue them. So a river board is just one of many ways to access. And then as an instructor there-it’s an incredible teaching tool. When you think of a lot of river guides, they’re used to being on top of the water but they’re not used to being in the water. And to me the fact-that’s the reason I left over the whole swimming thing. Swimming is not fun. If you’re swimming accidentally, you know, you’re under the water a lot of the time, you’re barely getting air, you’re susceptible to all the whirlpool currents which are pulling you under. So swimming to me is not a fun experience in whitewater. And the river-board gets you closer to the water and on the water and more intimate with the water, without actually having to swim. So that’s a really great tool. You know a lot of people who learn on boats don’t have as intimate of an understanding as you get when you’re swimming. It’s in between. You’re not getting trashed like you do when you swim, but you’re able to see the river from that different perspective. So that’s how I got into river-boarding and I have eight river-boards that I use in all my Swiftwater classes. You take somebody who’s never been on a river at all before and want to teach them how to ferry-you show them swimming, which is very forgiving ferry-angle wise and then you put them on a river-board and that’s when they really get what a ferry angle is. If you don’t do it you won’t go anywhere. So that’s how I got into... that’s how it all ties in. 

STEIGER: Now here you’ve been all over the world... <Nepal>, <Alaska>, <Chile>, Borneo... how do you spell Dayaks? And what does that mean? 

MUNGER: That’s the indigenous people in Borneo. Yeah. .. Spent a lot of time in <Russia>. That’s one of my favorite places. [ 

STEIGER: Boating?] 

MUNGER: Mmm-hmm. 

STEIGER: I remember Dugald [Bremner] went off, and they were making these boats out of skins, was it? Just these wild crafts they were coming up with. 

MUNGER: Yeah. Because the boaters were isolated from each other, by cities, and no communication. So just whatever materials they could find they’d have to try to make into a boat. 

STEIGER: And they were sewing together, like, skins and inflating them? Or some kind of... these weird bladders. You saw stuff like that? 

MUNGER: Oh yeah. Because that’s really all you can boat in. You have to be able-it has to be able to fit on your back, most of the time, to get it to a river. So a lot of them were using rubber bladders and then the kind of catarafts that I was using most of the time were old convertible tops from Czechoslovakia that had been discarded, and they take the convertible tops and sew them into a vinyl cover for the rubber bladders, so that you could just take the tube and roll it up and put it in your backpack and then get to a river, take two tubes of course, and then chop saplings down and basically construct your boat out of the saplings, to tie these two tubes together, that were made out of convertible car tops. 

STEIGER: And they were tying the saplings with rope? 

MUNGER: Yeah. Mm-hmm. Lashing it together. Yeah, and then you’d go, you know, a half a mile or mile and someone would get a hole in their tube, so you’d pull over and patch it and that was all part of it. 

STEIGER: Now how did you get... were you getting paid to do that? Or you were putting together expeditions and there’d be that international relations aspect? 

MUNGER: No. I met all those guys through our paddle raft racing. Because for awhile when all the races were mixed up, our women’s team was doing really well and the Russians were like, "Why are they... how come these women can paddle so fast?" So they ultimately invited us over to explore their rivers so they could see what our racing techniques were. Which, we didn’t really have any racing techniques. But you know, they just said "Hey. Any time you guys want to come and paddle, come on." So a couple of us took them up on it. Just went to one city and have a group of river runners meet you and take you to their favorite river for a couple weeks and then they’d bring you back and put you on a train and you’d go to another city with another group of river runners... so that’s how I went to <Russia>. I did go back and lead an expedition for Steve Curry, but that was after I’d spent time just having fun. 

STEIGER: Boy, I bet you could tell stories all night about these things. 

MUNGER: I get off on too many tangents with you, Lew. 

STEIGER: Well I think that’s my fault. (laughter) I think that’s me. ADD. Me and Don Briggs. Oh, I’m just trying to put it all in perspective. Or just thinking about the big picture, I mean, rivers all over the world, that’s pretty unique, and pretty interesting. If you had to tell one international boating story that leaps right away to your mind as something you’d want to put down here, what would it be? 

MUNGER: Oh I don’t know, it would definitely be something that involves <Russia>, because that was just the most... I mean it was the time when the dollar was really strong, so you could rent a Russian military helicopter for about thirty bucks an hour and fly into any mountain range you wanted to. So there were a couple trips I did there where... one time we were with a bunch of kids. I was with some counselors and a couple teachers-there were like four adults and a bunch of sixteen year olds and we flew in to Siberia, into the mountains, and the helicopter got lost and dropped us off somewhere where nobody knew where we were. So that was quite an adventure, just being in a high alpine meadow and constructing the boats and finding a little creek and "Well, we’ve got to go downriver. We got boats. We got food. Here’s a creek. So hopefully it goes to a bigger river that we??ll get eventually..." we were on a tributary to a tributary of the river we were supposed to be on. So, you know, I could tell stories like that about <Russia>. That’s probably the most impactful part for me, was just those times of hanging out with the Russians and how innovative they were, and creative. 

STEIGER: I guess some of those places make <Grand Canyon> seem pretty tame. Or do they? 

MUNGER: There is no place like the <Grand Canyon>. I mean every place is unique to itself but the <Grand Canyon> is so incredible to me for so many different reasons. For one thing it’s an environment that’s accessible to anybody, because of all the different watercrafts that can go down there. So, you know, somebody from the middle of nowhere that doesn’t have any wilderness experience at all can get on a motorboat and be transported to this incredibly beautiful place that’s going to change their life forever. And they can hike up a side canyon that... you know there’s just no place like it and there’s no place that’s as accessible to so many people. And I just think that that’s just an incredible gift that the <Grand Canyon> gives to humanity. You know, to be able to go to a wild beautiful place like that in so many different boats. And how many people can go down there and have their own individual life changing experience. So... that’s always been the most important thing to me, is being in wild places and sharing that with different people. And there’s no place like the <Grand Canyon> for doing that, in that way. Because it provides a different opportunity for everybody. 

STEIGER: I remember you said when you first got into river running, the rivers were fun but it was more like where they were taking you. What was it about all that? Being in those places, what was the attraction there? 

MUNGER: Well I think it’s the way that we can best survive as a group away from mechanized society together. So it’s about exploring people in places... and even in international relations, I mean when you think about it, as someone who is really passionate about systems and politics and places and how people get along and inter-relate with each other... And a river goes everywhere. It starts in the mountains and it goes to a major city... so being on a river in the mountains you get a glimpse as to how people in the mountains are living in that country, and you interact with them. You end up buying food from them and figuring out how to do logistics and transport. So, you know, as far as international relations, there’s no better way to understand the world than a river. And then, just sharing experiences with people and figuring out what’s important to you in your life. I mean you still have to make the transition when you get back to your normal life about.. well what are you going to do with it? But it’such a great place to reflect, yourself, and make decisions about your life. And it is that unique experience, it’s that two week experience that transports you somewhere else. To me the big challenge is actually taking that and transferring it back to your life, but it is an opportuity to just be in a place that’s honest. I mean it’s a hundred percent honest. You can’t lie, you can’t cheat. You can either run the line or you can’t. You can either deal with yourself, or you can’t. And once you get people away from mechanized society, it strips you down. So I’ve always like that honesty that the wilderness brings. Besides just,of course, the selfishness of just being in a beautiful, spiritual, wonderful place. There’s so many other elements that you don’t find anywhere else except on a river. 

STEIGER: Yeah, just the earth itself... I mean when you get away from all the man-made stuff there’s so much beauty just... that was here before we ever showed up. 

MUNGER: Yeah. And it becomes harder and harder, I think, for people to do that. You know, satellite phones now. It’s not like it was when we started. Really. I mean in a way, and that’s one of the reasons that we didn’t take... the only communication we took on our river-board trip was old style. We had signal mirrors and the flags. No sat-phone. That was not an option for me. And that’s... it’s a bigger challenge now because people do have sat-phones. So you don’t necessarily go out with the kind of self-reliant attitude that you had to ten years ago, fifteen years ago. And I’m not saying that you don’t go out with that attidtude, but you’re not required to anymore. You know, if you need advice or you don’t know how to repair a boat, you can get on the phone and call somebody, where that wasn’t an option before. 

STEIGER: Boy, I tell you, I just flashed back to your dad-seeing kayakers over there in... was it <Germany> did you say? And then coming over here and they made their own moulds and built their own kayaks because there weren’t any in America, huh? 

MUNGER: Right. There weren’t. And apparently he had, they had, kind of a rule-it was "40 bucks, 40 hours, 40 pounds." so that was their goal with their boats. They had to... it could only take 40 hours to build, only cost 40 bucks, only weigh 40 pounds. And that was kind of their motto. 

STEIGER: How did they come up with that? 

MUNGER: Who knows? Drinking whiskey one night. (laughter) The rule of the 40s, or whatever. 

STEIGER: Well... and he went with Georgie White, all the way through. There was no <Glen Canyon Dam>. 

MUNGER: Right. In the early days. 

STEIGER: When he told you about that, what sticks out for you? Did he tell you the story of that trip? 

MUNGER: You know, he never told me enough stories about that trip, really. It was a Sierra Club trip and it was kind of an awareness trip, to bring more awareness to the fact that this beautiful place was about to get-they’d started construction on the dam, or it was in the planning phases. You know it was kind of a last effort to draw attention to stop it; and so that was really impactful for him and they drove all the way out. I think he had a kayak rack on top of his Porsche. They took their kayks out and met with Georgie White gosh knows where, and I think different people would come and join the expedition for awhile and then leave, and more people would come in. So not everybody was there the whole way. But I think the thing that stands out in my mind, mostly, were all his stories about <Glen Canyon>. Just what an incredible place that was. And that was also really impactful for him when he came with us to put in on our river-board trip. Being there was just very emotional with him, coming up there, seeing the dam, remembering back forty, almost fifty years at that point. So I have some black and white pictures that he took, but <Glen Canyon> was always an incredibly special place for those people that had that experience. He was definitely one of those. 

STEIGER: Yeah, Katie Lee... she’s never got over it. She’s still mad about that one. Really mad about it. 

MUNGER: Yeah. 

STEIGER: Well I could talk to you all night but I know it’s really been a long day. What am I forgetting though? Just for this little... I always forget the most important question to ask, or I’ll think about it when I’m driving home. What do you think? I think we’re kind of winding down here. But if you think of something.... when are you coming back to <Arizona>? 

MUNGER: Well I know I’ll be back in October. I’m just not sure I’ll be back before then. 

STEIGER: Well if you think of something maybe we can tack it on there. Theoretically I would have this transcript done by then. That’d be the theory but god only knows, the way these things go. So you’re not doing too many trips this year? What are you doing instead? 

MUNGER: Teaching full time. 

STEIGER: It’s all Swiftwater... or that and the WFR? 

MUNGER: Yeah. And technical rope rescue and... yeah, I just love it. 

STEIGER: Is that like, so do you do a lot of climbing too? 

MUNGER: No, I don’t do any climbing, so it’s all... you know, steep canyon based or over the bank with a litter. Low angle and high angle litter raises. There’s a car over the edge, how do you get people down there? Get people out of the car, get them in the litter and get them back up. So it’s technical rope system rescue oriented more than climbing oriented. It’s a whole different discipline, different equipment. But you know, Swiftwater Rescue is definitely a passion of mine, because I, I just don’t... I’m a huge prevention believer. I believe most river accidents are preventable. Unfortunately the percentage of them are going up relative to the people in the industry, so I’d like to see that turn around. 

STEIGER: Yeah, somebody just drowned in <Crystal>. 

MUNGER: Yeah, I think that... sounds like that was a heart attack. Right? They don’t... I think they don’t know yet. 

STEIGER: Actually, I just saw the thing in the email from GCRG that somebody tipped over and they went for a long swim and got out, and he was conscious when he... 

MUNGER: Oh, I didn’t read it yet. I just heard it was a heart attack, but haven’t read anything. 

STEIGER: Well, blah, blah... ok last chance to record something for this historic document... 

MUNGER: Oh, I feel like I should have talked more about the Canyon. That’s really more interesting than anything else. 

STEIGER: Well, what would you say? 

MUNGER: I don’t know. It’s really hard talking about yourself. I’m not used to talking about myself or my own experiences somewhere. 

STEIGER: Well... Schmedley. 

MUNGER: Schmedley, yeah. 

STEIGER: That psycho guy, he just wigged out? I don’t know. Was he on some kind of drugs or something? 

MUNGER: He was on an early anti-depressant. Early anti-depressant crowd-an insurance salesman from <Chicago> or something that just freaked out. He thought the walls were closing in on him. Got really claustrophobic and just said "I need to get out." It got worse from there. He thought we were all there on a plot to kill him. Got really paranoid. So the boatmen dealt with it really well. Chased him around at night. They ended up tying him up. Until the helicopter came in the next day. 

STEIGER: Did somebody sit with him and tell him it was going to be ok? 

MUNGER: I think at that point they were pretty upset with him. Cause he had... he’d gone after the boatmen... You know, this is from a fifteen year old’s perspective, remembering, but there was a knife involved and there were boatmen involved and there was a cut boat involved. So he’d been trying to cut the boats free and then had come at a boatman and they had tackled him and gotten the knife from him and then he was pretty much under 24 hour surveillance until the helicopter came to get him out. 

STEIGER: Yeah. I guess that would make you mad, if a guy cut your boat. 

MUNGER: Yeah. Exactly. "Nooo. Don’t do that." 

STEIGER: And they let you guys sleep on the boats. I remember my first- I was fifteen years old, I wanted to sleep on the boats so bad. There was no way. 

MUNGER: I know, that’s a big thing when you’re a kid. 

STEIGER: Those guys weren’t going to let me sleep on the boat. I mean you had to be crew to sleep on the boat, boy. That was half the fun of coming back next year was I got to finally sleep on the boat, then. 

MUNGER: Right. 

STEIGER: Ok, I’m turning this off then.. 

addendum 

On Apr 30, 2007, at 10:11 AM, LSteiger@aol.com wrote: 

Julie, 

I'm transcribing yr interview right now, last possible second of course... 

Couple things have occured to me- 

One, for the Humanities angle I screwed up by not asking you what it's been like to be a woman in this river running world? also: Why an all women's paddle team? Why an all-women swim? 

Sorry, I think those were important questions to ask and I just blew it. People accuse me of gender-discrimination but it's really not true, that kind of thing just doesn't come up on my screen all that much and it didn't while we were talking, but I think it's important to address if we can. 

Subject: Re: oral history, bqr first draft 

Hi Lew! 

It is a good week to be in touch! I am just back from about a month long teaching stint and should have time to get you what you need this week. I am glad you have some opportunities to add or delete some stuff....I think we were both tired and I feel I got onto some tangents that weren't really relevant to anything. Feel free to ask me questions as they come up. 

....and thanks for putting energy into this..... 

I think the "being a woman" question was easy to overlook. While I am a "woman"; when I am boating I am a "river runner." I feel as if I have always been treated as a part of the crew and judged by my abiilty to do the job. I was never hired because I was someone's girlfriend. I have always taken my boating and guiding skills seriously and considered myself a professional. I boated a lot of really scary rivers and the important thing was who you could rely on. We relied on each other. I worked with very few other women in the early days and never thought much about it. There just weren't as many women around that were passionate about working in the places I worked. Beth Rypins and I started an All Women's Exploratory team in l986 to start running rivers that had not been run by rafts because we thought it would be fun, that we could get more sponsorship with the novelty of all women, and because we were both working with all men in our respective companies at that time. We grabbed as many women as we could and started going off on these one boat exploratories. We ran a 22 foot waterfall and a bunch of rivers in <California> that self-bailers made possible. I was doing a lot of guiding on the Upper Tuolumne (Cherry Creek) at the time and we had developed really good paddle boat techniques (including fast portaging and scouting) that made our attempts possible. It was good fun for us and a novelty at the same time. 

The all women swim was again just because it happened to be women that got involved. It was Connie Tibbitts idea. At first it was just going to be the two of us. Then Teresa Yates was so excited by the idea we couldn't not include her. Three is a great number!...for safety, everything! Sounded great to us! Then, as Connie dropped off, my best friend of 20 years Kelley Kalafatich wanted to come. She took Connie's spot when Connie decided it was too cold in the winter. When Teresa couldn't come, Kelley and I asked Rebecca because of how tough she is. The three of us had just competed in an International Raft Race on the Futaleufu in <Chile>. We already had that bond that happens when you have to push yourself really hard and face fears; extreme challenge; disappointments. We knew each other well enough to know we would be a really good team for this challenge and that between the three of us we would find a way to laugh our way through adversitites that came up while making sensible decisions. It worked out great! We even kept our sense of humor somehow when Rebecca's hand caught on fire. 

I raced on the US Women's Raft team for 15 years. It is what we did for fun, self development, and learning to push ourselves to be better and better at what we did.

