[begin master tape 3]



STEIGER:  We were talking about Don Elston doing the core samples, and those were paleo-magnetic studies?

WILSON:  Yeah.  There was a lab at the Forest Service Station up on Highway 180, you know where... you go past the Snow Bowl turnoff and go down to the end of that long straight stretch and where that road dips down to the right, if you just go straight you go right into the Forest Service Station there, and they had occupied several buildings and turned two of them into labs.  They had these big gigantic coils where they would store the rocks to keep them from losing their magnetic field.  It was in a zero magnetic area, there, and they had these magnetometers, because they kept improving all the time, and they’d get--these students from Cal-Tech would come.  Gene Shoemaker would bring them and they would live in some of the other buildings, which were a lot like, they were just living quarters and so they’d get five or six students to a living quarters and then they’ go out and do field trips, and then they’d come back to the lab and spin these samples, and so quite a few of those trips were done with that type of a program.  Basically, Don or Gene wanted to drill all the red rocks in the <Grand Canyon>.  (STEIGER:  Why the red ones?)  They have iron in them.  Also, the molten materials too.  The ones with iron, it’s a sedimentary rock and when the particles lay down in the water they orient themselves to the North Pole as it was then, so if you orient the core, like you bore the hole and then they had a little device, this is all homemade stuff, basically.  The <Flagstaff> U.S.G.S. had a machine shop and so they had all this stuff built, you know, the McCullough chainsaw motor had a... basically it was a one-inch diameter diamond bit, and we had to haul water.  We were hauling water up cliffs, you know, to cool this core-drilling machine.  We would put a tube over it with a little slot in it so they could scribe the core with a brass marker and then we would orient it for strike and dip, what the core’s strike and dip was, and then the note-taker would come along and tell you what the beds were, and they take that information back and then they’d spin that whole core in the magnetometer.  Or they might chunk it in half or something.  But it was basically... it was a core.  It was about that long or so, with this little slot on it that told you... with all that data they had, and the notes in the field, they could spin it and in the process of spinning it create a magnetic field, from what I understand.  And they could tell where the magnetic pole was by the sediment particles in that rock.  The iron sediments. (STEIGER: Relative to the core itself.)  Exactly.  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that was a great revelation to me.  My friend Eric Sjoden showed me some cores that had been drilled up there at <Nankoweap> where it widens out.  Did you guys do those?  Or that might have been somebody after you, because I don’t think he was around here yet... and he had seen these guys drilling and was telling me this would identify where this rock was on Earth when it was being laid down.  And I was like "What?  You mean it wasn???t right here?  (laughter)

WILSON:  Well in all those rocks there were several----[?]... I mean there was a lot of stuff.  I knew more then than I do now.  That’s been a long time ago, you know, and I certainly never kept up with it.  But with Don that was the primary goal, those trips.  You know, that, and then we of course had steak and whiskey... and uh (laughter)  but we were, there was a huge beach across from the <Tanner Trail>, and we would camp there for like four or five days straight, and we just went up all those red-beds, up through there’s all that precambrian sedimentary rock.  We just, we worked hard in those sections up there.  Very very interesting.  As you go up, you know, you also wound up going way back into the canyons and stuff.  It was pretty interesting, doing that.

STEIGER:  So you were basically the outfitter for the U.S.G.S.??

WILSON:  We used my boats and they had a boat of their own.  I had two.  Marilyn and I together had two boats.  They built one of their own, which they called the giant arthropod.  So we used those three boats, and then I was their guide.  And I worked in the field.  I did anything, from packing the water, which was one of my big jobs, to boring the holes, to even orienting the cores.  I never took notes.  They didn’t trust me in that department.  (laughs)  

STEIGER: So what were the years there?

WILSON:  Well, ’71 was my first trip with them.  In October.

STEIGER:  And that was before they made the quota.  Huh?  So anybody then could’ve started a river company?

WILSON:  No.  They’d already said no new companies.  One permit became available and it was 20 [companies] and then for some reason it became 21 and that’s when Vladimir Kovalik got his.  A friend of mine that I worked with, who was area manager, Bob Hesselbrom, they wanted to get that permit and so the three of us worked together and did a proposal, but Vladimir beat them out.  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Not just Vladimir, that was Vladimir and Ronn Hayes.  That probably had a lot to do with it too.

WILSON:  Exactly.  That might be.  Yeah.  You know I ran into them a lot in <Flagstaff> during that time.  They were around there a lot, trying to get that together.  They stayed one night with Marilyn and I in the trailer house, where we were then.  Then I got to see them on their first commercial trip down there.  Well, they seemed to be doing all right.  It really was funny.  I didn’t know they were on the river.  But when we ran House Rock I... you do that little right hand cut and if everything works out right, which ordinarily it does, you slip around the holes and you go on down the river left.  Well I just cut a little too close to the shore and I spun in there to where they had the boats parked.  So I just reached under the load and I grabbed a six-pack of beer and I threw it to Vladimir and I said "Here’s some beer for you!" and I just backed out and left.  (STEIGER:  Like you’d meant to do it!)  Like I meant to do it!  (laughter)  (STEIGER:  Impressed them, no doubt.)  Yeah, I think it did.  At least he acted like he enjoyed it.  But anyway, so, yeah, I didn’t see too much of Vladimir after that, until I moved up here to <Oregon> and started running the Rogue River some and I ran into him a few times on the Rogue here.  And he actually remembered me, so... but that was about it for that.  

But prior to that October trip with the U.S.G.S. I had, I did two private trips, and David Kay from our other office, helped me get some people together for that.

STEIGER:  Yeah see, that made me think of that... so they didn’t feel like it was illegal for you to do a private trip... were you charging money to go?

WILSON:  Yeah what I did was charged em three hundred dollars a person for a three week trip.  Actually, I was making money, because the cost of the trip was way under that.  David got some pretty well to do people on some of those trips for me.  But you know the funny thing of it was, I perpetually would forget to fill out the form for the permit, and so I called, it was Warren Hill, I believe, was the ranger then... I’ll never forget, this one time I gave him a call and said "You know I’ve got a private trip coming up in just a month.  And I’m hoping I can get the permit for that."  And he says "Oh, what day?"  and I told him.  He goes "Well I’ll tell you what, I’ll mail the permit up to <Lee's Ferry> and you could just fill it out up there and everything will be free and clear for you."  So when I got to <Lee's Ferry> the ranger said "Oh, well you’ve gotta do this..."  and so I, real quick, it wasn’t much.  And did that.  So both of those trips, actually, were done really spur of the moment.

10:29



Allen Wilson

29 October 2007

Sound file:  "Allen Wilson 3.mp3" 63:04 min.

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides





(first 10 minutes has already been transcribed)



WILSON:  And he says, "Well, on what day?"  And I told him, and he goes, "Well, I’ll tell you what, I’ll mail the permit up to <Lee's Ferry>, and in doing that, you can just fill it out up there, and everything will be free and clear for you."  So when I got to <Lee's Ferry>, the ranger said, "You’ve gotta do this."  So I....

STEIGER:  Filled it out?

WILSON:  Real quick.  It wasn’t much.  And did that.  And so both those trips actually were done really spur of the moment, with no hassle, and the next year was the same way, but after that, it became more popular, and they had to start figuring out how to control that.

STEIGER:  I don’t remember seeing all that many rowin’ trips.  I guess when I started, I went as a passenger in ’71, and then started workin’ in ’72.  It’s funny, I know that all those guys were down there--all the current rowin’ companies--but I don’t remember, it seemed like it was so predominantly motorized.

WILSON:  Yeah, it was.

STEIGER:  Didn’t you have that sense?  Or did you?

WILSON:  Yeah, it was an odd occasion.  I witnessed, as a motorboatman, more private trips--people with some incredible pieces of stuff for a raft.  I mean, some just really outlandish-lookin’ contraptions that got down the river most of the time.  Moki Mac is the one that really sticks in my mind--and the Dories, Martin Litton.  That’s just off the top of my head.

STEIGER:  OARS.  I remember OARS was just kind of gettin’ started.

WILSON:  They were just getting started, yeah.  Yeah, that’s right.  What other stuff about that?

STEIGER:  You were sayin’ that they wouldn’t let you row, but you wanted to row?

WILSON:  Yeah, I wanted to row, so I built that boat and set up and did these two private trips.  And then I wound up goin’ to the university and gettin’ hooked up with Don Elston and doin’ this third trip in October.

STEIGER:  And then eventually doing eleven of those with those guys?

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  So at some point did you break in with the ARTA rowin’ deal?

WILSON:  No.

STEIGER:  They never did?

WILSON:  Oh, I did, yeah.  Marilyn and I ran motor rigs for one year, which must have been my fourth year down there.  I think we ran for one year.  And she quickly got a boat and started doin’ her own trips, and we were workin’ as a team of two-boat trips.  And I can look it up--I should have done that a little bit ago.  I’ll have to look and see what the year was when she started workin’ there.  And then I believe that we worked for three years together there.

STEIGER:  Each of you runnin’ your own motorboats.

WILSON:  And then we shifted over to ARTA’s oar trips.  Probably in about the first year after she was there, I think we must have quickly moved over to oar trips--I’m pretty sure.  I mean, she had proven herself well.  And [unclear] managers there were more apt to let her do that than if you went through the ARTA office, you know.  And so she just established herself.  It just worked really good.

	We took a Green Beret team down one time.  Two of the captains were gonna go to <Africa> and run Africa’s longest river, and they heard that the boats were gonna be similar to a <Grand Canyon> boat, so they called the first company on the list, which was ARTA, and booked a whole boat and brought a team down.

STEIGER:  These were workin’ Green Berets?

WILSON:  Workin??? Green Berets.

STEIGER:  Why were they gonna run this river in <Africa>?  Was there a military mission or something?

WILSON:  Turns out it was Ron Smith, and it was a multi-national set-up, where every country who had some....  I don’t know, the <U.S.> was one, and I suppose England.  They were all supposed to have a representative on this trip.  And so our representative was a captain on this Green Beret team, apparently, who was the funniest, craziest character.  You would never think that he was a military guy, because he was really off the wall.  But all the rest of 'em were very military.  I could not ask any one of the crew to help me with anything, unless I asked the sergeant in charge.  At night I’d say, "Oh, hey, would you go get a bucket of water for me?," or something, you know.  I look around and there’s nothin’.  "What happened?!  Where is he?!  Oh!  Shit!  I gotta go ask the sergeant."  So I go tell the sergeant, and he said, "Okay, go get that bucket of water," and bingo, it’s done right then.  Pretty interesting!

STEIGER:  That’s a little scary, that they wouldn’t do somethin’ unless the sergeant told 'em to.

WILSON:  That was it.

STEIGER:  The idea was you couldn’t be bossin’ 'em around?

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  They couldn’t just figure out, "We’re on this river trip and we’re gonna have to do ‘X,’ ‘Y,’ and ‘Z’?"

WILSON:  They didn’t even like the food. They would rather have their "K" rations, but we cooked all the food.

STEIGER:  Did you guys do any special exercises with 'em, or you just took 'em down the <Grand Canyon>?

WILSON:  We took 'em down the <Grand Canyon>.  The one guy, he ran the boat a lot, because that was what they were there for.

STEIGER:  To learn a little bit about that.

WILSON:  Yeah.  I did take 'em on hikes.  But I took 'em on several hikes, and after the first two or three hikes, the majority of 'em found it was a lot of work, so they just stayed down and played cards.  Three people hiked--actually four.  There was a private who was interested--the only private on the trip--and then there were three captains, and one sergeant was what did all the hikes with us.  Nobody else was interested in all that stuff.  But they were fun, and they had a good time.  Marilyn was the only girl on the trip, and they had a good time teasin’ her.

STEIGER:  Slobberin’ all over her.

WILSON:  Yeah, I guess.  So that was another interesting little thing that happened there.

STEIGER:  Well it’s funny, I’ve always had it in my mind that ARTA was kind of a real ground-breaker in accepting women in that position--you know, ARTA slash AZRA.  Those guys seemed like they had more....  They were really who sort of broke that perception, even, because there was Marilyn, and then pretty soon there was Suzanne and Martha...  Louise was before Suzanne.

WILSON:  Louise was right there with Marilyn, basically.  It’s just that she didn’t start rowing until just slightly later.

STEIGER:  She motored for a while?

WILSON:  They did motor trips, but she didn’t run a motor.

STEIGER:  But did she start runnin’ with Wesley Smith?

WILSON:  Well, her husband was Roger, and....  Well, Wes was workin’ then, and I’m sure she must have done a lot of trips with him.  I do know that she did a lot of trips with Marilyn and myself.

STEIGER:  And she was bein’ the helper?  Or you guys were all rowin’ snouts by then?

WILSON:  I did some motor trips with Marilyn and Louise and myself and one helper.  And then when we got over to the rowing part, where they let us start rowing, Marilyn and I then wound up doin’ several trips.  Actually, it seems like quite a few trips with Louise, there for quite a little while, different trips--enough so that she filled my ammo box up with donkey shit one morning.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Just to show you how much she appreciated ya’?

WILSON:  Well, it’s just that the practical joke stuff was really good.  But anyway, yeah, Louise was right there in the very beginning, and then Suzanne Jordan came along.  And then there was Becca Lawton, she was there.  They were all there about the same time.  It was just a matter of when they kind of got into the--where there was an opening, really.  You’re right, ARTA was the groundbreaker for this, they did it.  There was nobody else out there doin’ it.

STEIGER:  Georgie.  And then....  I mean, it wasn’t until the late seventies, early eighties, that I think other companies... where we really started seein’ it.  OARS, I guess they had a few.

WILSON:  I don’t know about them.  I’m sure they did.  Yeah, it wasn’t long.  And then Martha [Clark] got in there.  Martha was just getting there as I was leaving, if I remember.  I think people were talkin’ about Martha, but I don’t even know that I ever even said "hi" to her.  Then I left in ’76, came back for....  No, I didn’t either.  Left in ’76, and then about every two years I did a private trip for years after that.  Now it’s every ten years I do a private trip.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Yeah, that’s the way it’s been.

WILSON:  Yeah, what else was there that you were askin’ about there?  I guess that was it, huh?

STEIGER:  Pretty much, yeah.  It was just that you could get paid....  It was funny, you sayin’ that this guy in the front office was sending you these people--essentially clients--for you to take down the river.  Today they wouldn’t be lettin’ you do that.

WILSON:  No, they wouldn’t.

STEIGER:  But it’s interesting that even those....  I mean, it’s like you’re competin’ with your own company there.  And they didn’t care, they didn’t mind?

WILSON:  What the difference was, was I was doing three-week trips, twenty-one- and twenty-two-day trips.

STEIGER:  And ARTA was doin’ a week?

WILSON:  ARTA was doin’ twelve-day trips.  Their oar trips are twelve.  Their motor trips were eight.  So yeah.  And he’d just get these very few people who wanted to go and spend a lot of time, and he’d refer 'em to me.  I actuallyseveral of those folks became really good friends of mine, through up 'til now.  The same with the USGS trips--I became really quite close to several of those people.

I just marveled at how easy it was to get a permit--and what it’s like now!  I can’t even figure out where I stand in the permit system now.  I don’t know what I did, and I don’t know how it’s gonna work.

STEIGER:  Well, it’s a lottery.  You gotta put in every year.

WILSON:  Yeah, but I sent in and had 'em give me ten options or something.  I don’t know what it was.

STEIGER:  Yeah, and so are you gonna get 'em?

WILSON:  I don’t know how you do it.  I never read all that.  You know, I’ve been too busy to read that crap.  I really have.  I guess I’m still in their system--I just don’t know.  I should give 'em a call and find out, huh?

STEIGER:  Yeah, probably.  And if you’ve got your Internet going, there’s a website that I guess explains it.  I haven???t gotten to it yet.  But my understanding now with the lottery is, they’re clearing off the waiting list, but with the lottery deal, you have like a one-month window to get your name in the pot there, and then they draw.  And the idea is you shouldn’t be applyin’ if you don’t want to go this year.  Which probably makes sense.  That’s probably gonna work better than what they had goin’.

WILSON:  I hope so.

STEIGER:  And then there’s still cancellations, people still bail at the last second.  But if you applied during that one month, even if you didn’t get drawn, then you’re eligible to grab a cancellation.

WILSON:  I see how that works.

STEIGER:  So that’s why you gotta keep your name in there--if you’re wantin’ to go that year.  But if you don’t want to go this year, then don’t put it in.

WILSON:  Don’t worry.  Okay.

STEIGER:  But we should get back to....  So motorin’, did the equipment you were workin’ with evolve very much?

WILSON:  No, not much.  Most of the evolution of that equipment was in the motor box designed... which happened right before I got there.  The motor box, they implemented....  As a matter of fact, when we went up to <Lee's Ferry> for the first trip I was on, we had all these motor boxes that had never had the plywood put on 'em, they’d never been painted, and we went up three days ahead, and just the whole crew up there in the sun, we just started borin’ holes and puttin’ plywood on and paintin’ tubes.  I mean, the whole works.  And we painted the frames ARTA green.  I mean, it was just a madhouse.

STEIGER:  On the ramp at <Lee's Ferry>?

WILSON:  On the ramp at <Lee's Ferry>!  (laughs)  And we put the boats together, and it was the first time.  Prior to that, they had a different type of motor box, which I never really got to witness, and they had a lot of problems with it.  But that was the only real evolution, other than that they went from four-by-four frames for the load frame, to these aluminum tubing frames.  So yeah, everything stayed the same.

STEIGER:  And then, I guess in the history of ARTA....  So Rob was never on the scene when you were working?

WILSON:  No, he was there.

STEIGER:  He showed up ...

WILSON:  ... right towards the latter part of my stay there, yeah.  As a matter of fact, he was on the last trip that I did for a commercial trip.

STEIGER:  So how did it come to pass that you got out of it altogether, that you quit doin’ it?

WILSON:  Peter Winn and I decided to do it at the same time.  I decided to do it because it was really raising havoc with my diabetes.  I would have stayed, but I felt that I just....  My whole goal, once I got in there and started learning what was going on, was to give people a good and interesting trip, and I couldn’t do it with my diabetes the way it was.  I just couldn’t maintain very well.  So I was suffering from a really, really bad case of burnout, that I never really got over from one year to the next, right there at the end.  So after Marilyn and I broke up, I worked one more season.  It was a hard season for me to work, because I didn’t really want to be there, but then I didn’t know what else to do.

I went back to <Flagstaff> that winter, and Peter and I, we both knew we had to get out of it.  It was just really a struggle.  It wasn’t an easy thing to break away from that.  And it goes to show ya’, Peter now has started, years ago, before the Tiananmen Square incident, doing trips in <China>.  And then I, ten years ago, started working with the forest service to get a permit to do little tiny paddle trips on a little tiny river here in southwest <Oregon> for inflatable kayaks.  It’s one of those things.  And we managed to do that for, I think, about seven, eight years.  And Peter’s still doing it, and his kids are about to take over that whole operation.  It’s pretty cool, a pretty cool deal that they’re into it.  But, you know, I’ve never really been able to quite get out of it.  As everybody knows, it becomes part of you.  Oh God, there was another thing I was going to say, not in relationship to getting out of it, but....  Oh man, I hate that!

STEIGER:  It’ll come to you.

WILSON:  Oh!  Actually, we’re jumpin’ ahead here a little bit, but the last couple of years that I worked, one of the things I liked to do was do things that would just kind of make people go, "God, what is the story with this guy?!"  Jerry Jordan and I did a single-boat motor trip one time, and that was--I don’t know when it was any more, because it was when I was still doing motors.  But we were goin’, "God, what can we do to f*andk with the people’s minds?"

STEIGER:  So you embraced the moniker "Crazy Al."

WILSON:  Yeah.  Well, you know, it’s a good story.  What is the name of that little store that’s like a Buy-Mart that was there in <Flagstaff>?  Oh God!  They just had all kinds of stuff.  They had women’s clothes and men’s clothes and camping equipment.  It was all relatively cheap.  Anyway, we went into that store, Jerry and I, and here we were, two bearded guys, pretty unkempt, and we go over to the women’s department, and we’re looking through these racks of dresses, and a gal comes over and says, "What can I help you with?"  "Well, we need to find a dress.  Need a dress for both of us."  And of course Jerry was just so--I don’t know if you ever knew Jerry or not.

STEIGER:  Not really.  I met him a few times, and I palled around with Suzanne [Jerry’s sister] for a little bit.  One time I went over to see her, and he was there, [unclear], that was about it.

WILSON:  Yeah.  He had that--you know, he was a kind person underneath, but very few people ever got to see it.

STEIGER:  Yeah, he was kind of spooky.

WILSON:  And real gruff sounding, but he had the shy-lookin’ funny grin on his face when things were funny.  And so this gal, she’s just goin’, "God," you know.  So Jerry pulls a dress out and he holds it up, "What do you think?  Is it gonna fit me?  How am I gonna look in that?"  And she’s goin’, "Whhaaat?"  (laughs)  We both left there with these dresses.  So we did that motor trip, and what we’d do is, at the first lunch stop, we’d get our dresses on, and then we’d go the rest of the way with the dresses on.  Well, people couldn’t back out.

STEIGER:  On a private trip?

WILSON:  No, no, these are commercial trips.  Actually, this is a single-boat commercial trip that we did.  It was a motor rig.  A couple of things kind of interesting happened on that trip.

STEIGER:  So you wore a dress just for the rest of that Day One, or for the whole trip?

WILSON:  We did it for the whole trip.  (laughter)  Here’s these two weird characters in the back of the boat.  We’d go up front.  The big deal was to talk to the people.  And I had my library, which was a huge box of books.  And people were always goin’ in and gettin’ stuff out and lookin’ at it.  And I lost a lot of books right down into to the river.  But it was well worth it to have that stuff on board all the time.  Well anyway, we did this trip with these dresses, and we camped at--and these people were really, really a good bunch of people.  And when we got to <Elves Chasm>, we asked around, "How many people want to do Upper Elves?"  Well, Jerry and myself and I don’t know, really only three or four other people that were interested.  And so we took 'em up there, and as usual, gave a basic description of what to do.  The whole option there was to lay around and enjoy <Elves Chasm> and the peace and quiet of the place.  And we came back and there was nobody there.  We went down to the river, and everybody was on the boat, and everybody is obviously pissed.  They started complaining, "You just went off and left us," and "We didn’t have anything to do."  It was one of those learning experiences where we should have left one of us there to encourage 'em and do stuff with 'em, and go look around and do a few things--but we didn’t, and so they were pissed.  And that pissed condition went on down the river.  That night at camp, nobody was comin’ to eat dinner.  So several people came down and we said, "God, what’s the deal?  There’s nobody eatin’ dinner."  They said, "These people are really unhappy."  And Jerry said, "Well, f*%k 'em!  We’re gonna leave."  So we went and got on the boat and motored across the river and [showed off?], and we just sat over there for about two hours.  (laughs)  Then motored back.  And the next day, everybody was just as happy as could be.  It was amazing.  That was the worst type of thing I’ve ever done, but you know, that’s what would happen with Jerry, was kind of crap like that.

STEIGER:  They knew that you weren’t gonna leave 'em for good.

WILSON:  Well, they didn’t know.  And they knew Jerry.  They learned about Jerry by then, because he was this gruff kind of character who didn’t hesitate to tell 'em which pile of shit was which.  So that was an interesting trip.  It wasn’t what I would call a good trip in terms of passenger relations there towards the middle part of it, but the rest of it was pretty good.

STEIGER:  You guys pulled it out, huh?

WILSON:  Yeah.  (laughs)  God!  And then later, Peter Winn and I went and bought dresses, when he was first getting involved with Cindy, and we came back from the dress shop--same store, as a matter of fact--and then that’s when the dress thing really became something that I think was talked about more in terms of what goes on with boatmen.  I think those are the things that people remember, because a lot of people saw Peter and I dressed up in these dresses, but we didn’t wear 'em on the whole trip--we’d put 'em on once in a while.  My original concept of that, and it’s so interesting, the reason I did that was because I felt that the really macho river guide thing was way more than it needed to be, and it should be tempered somehow.  And so my way, one of my sadistic ways of tempering it, was to put a dress on, and flip it around in a funny way.  And the guys didn’t know what to think about it, the passengers didn’t know what to think about it.  And I never really said too much about that.  But that was my primary reason for doing it.

STEIGER:  So it was your idea?

WILSON:  Oh yeah.

STEIGER:  Not Jerry’s?

WILSON:  Ah, you know, I don’t think it was Jerry’s, but it might have been.  But, I mean, that was my rationale for that, and I’d been thinking about it for a while.

STEIGER:  Now, was there a specific thing that got you called Crazy Al?  Aside from puttin??? on the dress?  I mean, was there an incident that gave rise to that?

WILSON:  In ’69, when I was workin’ there with Deubner and Jim Elliott, it went from the outhouse hole on.  Everything I did, like I said, I would run.  They’d ask me to do something, and I’d just run and do it.  I just did the best I could.  I just overexerted myself a lot.  They saw that as bein’ a little bit hyper, you know, real hyper.  So they started callin’ me--I think it was Deubner that started callin’ me Crazy Al, but it’s hard to know for sure.  I think it happened on the first trip.  I think it happened on that trip where we went up to <Lee's Ferry> and painted all the frames and did all that stuff.

STEIGER:  That was your very first trip?

WILSON:  Yeah.  And that name hung around for years--I mean, even after I got off the river, people would call me Crazy.  It hasn’t happened for quite a while now.  And another thing....  Well, no, not really.  I did chew tobacco, and that was kind of a nasty habit.  I don’t know if a lot of people do that or not down there.

STEIGER:  Oh yeah.  I did for a while.  I loved it.  I had to quit.

WILSON:  Where are we in the time line of things here?

STEIGER:  We’re kind of all over the road.  But basically, just a thumbnail overview, let’s see if I got it right, you started in ’69, three trips that year.

WILSON:  Seven.

STEIGER:  Seven that year.  Three trips, and then you were in your own boat as a trip leader.

WILSON:  Well, I was in my own boat as a second boatman--two-boat trips.

STEIGER:  And then the next year you were a head boatman.

WILSON:  After seven trips I was a head boatman, yeah.  They made me a boatman right off the bat.  I was pretty nervous about that.

STEIGER:  So ’69 through ’76?

WILSON:  Yeah, I did a full season in ’76.

STEIGER:  And it was like ’73-’74 you hooked up with Marilyn and made the switch to rowin’ somewhere, like about halfway through?

WILSON:  I think it was.  I’d have to go look at that and see, but I think it was in that range.  Yeah.

STEIGER:  And the core crews that you worked with, starting out motoring, we’d better name some of those people that you worked with.  I don’t know if you’re into that.

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s all right.  Allen Deubner and Steve Dupuis.  There’s Hugh Wingfield.  Let’s see, John Elliott--Little John, Little John Elliott, not a family member.  That was the first main crew.  I can’t remember any of the other....  Steve Dupuis was an assistant on that trip.  And then when we divided the trips up, he got his own boat.  Then after that, then it was Hugh Wingfield and myself for the rest of that summer.  Then I can’t remember when Hugh went off to <Alaska>, but I think he worked another year down there, and he and I wound up running separate trips parallel to each other.  Those times are kind of tough for me to remember who the assistants were, and who the other boatmen were, because it just changed all the time.  Really, I never had the same assistant twice.  But it was during that period I took quite a few people on their first trip.  I was trying to think of his name--Tom, who wound up workin’ for OARS, I think.  God, why can’t I remember his name?

STEIGER:  Not Tom Olsen? 

WILSON:  Yeah, Tom Olsen.

STEIGER:  Wilderness World is who he worked for--Vladimir [Kovalik].

WILSON:  Oh, that’s right, yeah.  His first trip was on one of the motor trips I did.  We went out at <South Cove> then, and I think Hatch was going all the way to <Temple Bar>, and we would always camp within about a mile or two of <South Cove> and then go in that morning.  And that was really typical until the water came up high enough that we could go out at Pearce.  Then we started goin’ out there.  Then on the oar trips, they started pullin’ out--well, they did both.  Our first oar trips, we would get towed down to Pearce Ferry, unless there was some glitch and we had to go on around.  But I don’t recall anything like that.  And then I had talked to Lou about getting a big boat to put everybody in, because I came from the Rogue River where they have all these jet boats, you know.  And so I went over and talked to the mail boats to see about gettin’ a jet boat, and they had one, so I told Lou about it, and he flew up here and checked it out and bought it, and trailered it back down there.  And so we used that jet boat for really a long time.  And they finally, I know there’s been at least one built that actually works, probably since then.

STEIGER:  Oh, there’s a bunch of jet boats.

WILSON:  Are there a bunch down there now?

STEIGER:  Yeah, most companies that go down there use ‘em.  I don’t think AZRA even goes down there anymore, but most of 'em go--well, not most, but several companies, the ones that are goin’ down there, a jet boat comes and gets everybody so you don’t have to go.  So maybe you were the guy that brought jet boats to Lake Mead.

WILSON:  Well, I convinced Lou to do it, and it was the only boat there that did that work.  Yeah, he said--because I’d come up every once in a while to visit--and he just said, "When you’re up there next time, see if they’ve got anything and check it out.  I went around with a pocket knife and poked into the hull, it was a wood hull.  And it was sound.  I didn’t know much more about it than that.  I said, "Well, you’d have to talk to these guys, but it sounds like this is--it’s an old boat, but it may do the job, because it’s just goin’ on flat water."  But what I found was the guy that had it--and he worked down there for years, doing these take-outs for people--he was afraid to give it any throttle.

STEIGER:  Oh, he didn’t want to get it to go fast?

WILSON:  He wouldn’t get it up on the plane.  He wouldn’t do it.  And I never understood why, and I wasn’t gonna say anything.  So he was plowin’ water all the time, it was a slow trip.  So anyway, that’s that.

	We used to tour the boats out.  We put motors on it.  We’d have a boat come up and give us some motors, and we’d put a couple motors on 'em and drag some and motor with some--that sort of thing.  Then eventually we started goin’ out at Pearce.  Of course that was still the same ol’ trip.  You still had to get down there.  I think that’s when we were towin’ 'em all out to Pearce.  Then the jet boat came along and did that trip.

	What else now, in that time frame?

STEIGER:  You told a story when we were drivin’ back from the airport about Dennis Massey--just that you didn’t want to mess with him.  Are there other characters from other companies, just the characters that were down there when you first started that made an impression on you, that you think of?

WILSON:  Well, yeah.  Tim Means.  We ran parallel trips for I’d say a couple of years.  We did parallel trips.  Have I already talked about the boats being stuck at the bottom [unclear].

STEIGER:  I think so, how you guys got hung up.

WILSON:  And that was a result of the two of us just getting together and deciding what to do with our boats so we could get a good shot at the day.  With him, just as an example, we’d all pile up at <Badger Creek>, waiting for the last little dribble of water to come out of the dam so we could cover up a rock, and we’d run that.  We’d just all stand there with safety ropes, and throw a rope to a big rig that’s stuck on a rock.  It’s just that was the way it worked.  And so I always was very impressed with him.  He’s really a very neat guy.

	And then, oh, O.C. [Dale].  He was the other guy.  They worked together.  Saw a lot of him.  And then I was always impressed with Vern Taylor, but he wasn’t a commercial guide.  Gaylord Staveley.  I was always so impressed with that big ol’ boat that he put together to take the people down on.  So I was pretty impressed with the fact that he was involved with the wooden rowing trips, and went to that for a boat. ...Mike Castelli.

STEIGER:  From the Cataract boat to the Canyoneers boat, yeah.

WILSON:  Yeah.  Gosh, it’s been a long time for me.

STEIGER:  Gaylord never talks about it--or he won’t really talk to me--but I read something, he was being interviewed, and that kind of explained a lot.  He said he took the company over because he was married to Joanie and they wanted to resurrect it.  I think the Rigg brothers were okay with that, they made it possible, thought they ought to give it back to 'em.  So they ran a few years where they were using the wooden boats, and he talked about how it used to just piss him off, there were several times where they’d be down there portaging someplace, like Hance or something, here would come Georgie, and everybody’d be drinkin’ and whoopin’ and hollerin’, and they’d just drive on through.  He said that just made him so mad, and here’s all these people on this boat, and they could only carry two on the Cataract boats.  Finally they just said "screw it," and got a big boat too.

WILSON:  (laughs)  That’s too much!  Oh, gosh.  There was Peter Winn, I did one trip with Peter Winn towards the end of the thing.  That was a pretty good trip, but we were both gettin’ pretty burned out.  Oh, gosh, the contact I had, I had contact with....  Even after starting to row, I still had a lot of contact with Tim Means.  We’d come across him, and some of our best water fighting was with him.  Even when we got into rowing rigs.  It worked out so that in one part of the canyon, we were always there together, and that was kind of cool.  But you know, as far as a lot of the other companies, they would just mostly buzz right on by ya’.  And you know there’s the Tour West boats that they could hardly even smile at ya’.  And then there was....  Sanderson, we were off schedule then, never got to know any of those guys from Sanderson.  The Western boats, there was "J" rigs, there was a little bit of contact with them, but they moved a lot faster than we did, too.

I guess I should probably tell about the boat that got away.  Thinkin’ of Western made me think of it.  On the ledges, the manager of the company, David Kay and his wife came along.  She was a masseuse, so they decided they were gonna give me a massage that night on the ledges.  And I just....  I ordinarily slept on the boat, and that night I just went to sleep and didn’t wake up until I heard a crash.  And I got up and I had no flashlight, I had nothing.  I was just layin’ there, just awake from being dead asleep.  I got a light and I got to lookin’ around, and the boat was just flat gone.

STEIGER:  One-boat motor trip?

WILSON:  One-boat motor trip.  And so Gary Dubois, Steve Dubois’s brother, was my assistant on that trip, and I heard him yell, "What?!  The boat’s gone?!"  I was whispering to David, I said, "The boat’s gone."  And he goes, (loudly) "What?!  The boat’s gone?!"  I said, "Shhhhh!  Don’t wake everybody up!"

STEIGER:  Like they’re not gonna find out anyway.

WILSON:  But we took off.  We got a couple flashlights, and we just took off going downstream, and we went until it got daybreak.  I just went, "Oh, man, we can’t just keep on going."  So we came back and as we were walking into the camp, we hear somebody say, "Oh, the boat’s gone."  Everybody was just, "Well, the boat’s gone."  And it was like there was no panic whatsoever.  Dubois, he had that day taken all the life jackets off of the boat and piled 'em up.  He’d gotten breakfast out, so we had breakfast.  And so we just real quickly got--everybody packed their bags and I said, "You know, the only thing we can do is hitch a ride with somebody."  So we just stood there, and lo and behold, here comes Henry Falany with a great big empty boat.  And so he pulls in, and he just starts laughing when he found out.  David Kay was there, because Henry used to work for ARTA.

STEIGER:  He did?!  I didn’t know that.

WILSON:  Yeah, he got pissed at Lou and left and started his own company.  And so....

STEIGER:  So he knew David Kay.

WILSON:  He knew David Kay, and he thought that was the best thing in the world, that he was picking up David Kay with an ARTA trip.  And so then we go on down to <Havasu>, and at <Havasu> is this forty-four-foot "J" rig sittin’ there, and there’s like four or five people on it.  And so....  You know, I didn’t want my people to miss <Havasu>, if at all possible--I’d like 'em to stay.  So I talked to the Western boat, which I just can’t remember his name anymore.  And he said, "Well, why don’t you just come with us?"  We’ve got all the food.  We just had a bunch of no-shows, and we got all this stuff.  Might as well just go along with us.  I said "Well, that’s cool."

	So we transferred all of our stuff off of Henry’s boat and he went on down the river, and we’re settin’ there with a huge boat and went up <Havasu> and spent the day there.  And then we motored down late that afternoon to below <Lava>, right there on the right.

STEIGER:  Ran <Lava>, no sign of [your] boat.

WILSON:  No boat.  And we’re goin???, "Ah, shit," you know.  I mean, it was pretty worrisome for me in particular, because my insulin was on board the boat too.  And I had no way to medicate myself, and the longer you go without insulin, the worser you get.  Your thinking processes slow down, and my muscles would get really, really stiff, and I was feeling bad effects from it.  But I did run across--every boat that we saw, we asked them if anybody there was a diabetic and had any extra insulin.  We actually did find somebody finally, like half an hour before we found my boat that had insulin, and they gave it to me, but then I was able to give it right back to 'em again.  But anyway, we camped below <Lava> that night.  The next morning we get up, and Lee Eastman, the guy that had the two trips earlier, he was runnin’ the other single-boat trip, and what happened was, another Western trip was camped in the same spot that we had camped below <Lava> the night before, and they watched the boat come in there.  Somebody said, "Oh, there’s a boat!"  And so they ran upstream a little ways to watch it make the run, and it just made this beautiful run.  It got down to the bottom and started spinnin?? around.  They’re goin’, "There’s nobody on that boat!"  And so they motored out and they grabbed it.  And then the next morning, they took it down and gave it to Lee, because they knew he was just downstream someplace.  So they motored down the next morning and gave it to him.  And so he set there and waited for us, because we were a day behind by then.

	So then that winter I was doing trips in Big Bend on the Rio Grande for ARTA, and Vladimir shows up down there with some guys, some of 'em from Western.  I had no idea who they were--a bunch of guys.  And so we were out there in the parking lot at the lodge, up there in the Chisos Mountains, drinkin’ vodka.  We were getting drunker and drunker, and this guy starts tellin’ a story, and I’m just standin’ there.  He just tells this whole story, and I’m just thinking....  It was neat, because I just kept my mind in the idea I just wanted to hear what happened, without any deviation because of me being there.  And so at the end he says....  He tells the whole story about how it made the good run and everybody was excited, and they went out and grabbed it and brought it back to shore.  "God," he said, "amazingly there was an open box of oranges on top of the gas barrels, and I just took that for payment."  And I noticed right away that my oranges were gone.  I figured it fell off in the river or something.  And I go, "You’re the son of a bitch that stole my oranges!"  I mean, it just came out of my mouth.  (laughs)  So anyway, that’s the story that Melville used to tell all the time--probably still does.

STEIGER:  That’s good.

WILSON:  And then I lost two boats.  God!  What’s the hike where you go up <Carbon Creek>, and it crossed a little ridge down to <Lava Canyon>.

STEIGER:  Yeah, the Carbon-Chuar Loop.

WILSON:  Yeah.  We camped there.  I guess it was Boyce, Bill Breed, myself, and I can’t remember.

STEIGER:  Boyce McClung?  Bill Breed, now that’s Bill Breed the geologist?

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  He was a boatman for a while?

WILSON:  Peter Winn set up that thing with the museum, doing those museum trips, and they got some snout rigs put together.  Bill rowed some, although I don’t think he was rowing on that trip.  Yes! he was rowing!  No, he wasn’t.  Anyway, he did do a little rowing, but he wasn’t the primary boatman.  I’d have to think a little bit.  I don’t think it matters too much who they were.  It was Boyce and myself.  Oh! Jim Whitfield and myself.  I’ll think of the other guy in a little bit.

	Well anyway, I made this announcement in the morning.  I said, "These two boats here are going to go downstream, and then Boyce and I are going to go down and hike around backwards, and then you guys are gonna go over the other way," whatever the spiel was I gave 'em.  But I pointed out which two boats are going.  Well, I found out later that some overzealous passenger had untied those two boats and left the ropes layin’ in the trees.  He untied 'em like a long time before we were getting ready to leave.

STEIGER:  But didn’t put the lines up on the boats--left 'em.

WILSON:  Didn’t do anything, just left 'em.

STEIGER:  Water was down a little bit?  Or no, it would have been up down there.

WILSON:  It wasn’t down, it was up, yeah.  I mean, I didn’t notice it.  And the boats were tied far enough--they were fairly close together, but the ties were far enough apart that you didn’t just automatically see where one rope was going, versus where another one was going.  And so Jim, at the last second, said, "You know, I’d like to take my boat down and work on it down there, if that’s all right."  I said, "Sure, that’d be fine."  So instead, we took my boat and Whitfield’s boat down and parked.  And I had an older couple....  The reason I had made that announcement, because I said, "It’ll be hot.  Anybody who doesn’t want to do this hike can ride on the boats down, so you can get on those two boats."  Well, the end result of that was the old couple got on my boat, and then that was it.  Jim got on his boat and untied it and went down the river.  So Boyce and I get back there, we’re goin’, "Oh, shit!  What happened?!"

STEIGER:  These two boats were gone, that you guys--you went the reverse loop, and you needed some boats to get down to the rest of your trip.

WILSON:  Right.  Well, we had one boat sittin’ there.  We lost one.

STEIGER:  One was just sittin’ there untied?

WILSON:  No.  I took my boat, but the other boat, the changeover was where Jim and....  Jim and Boyce’s boat, I guess.  I don’t remember now.  Boyce rowed his boat down, so I don’t know what the deal is.  Anyway, I’d have to really stop and think about that for a minute.  But the end result was that when we walked back around, my boat had gone down along with Jim Whitfield’s boat.  Boyce’s boat was still parked there, because it was tied up.  So we’re driftin’ down, thinkin’, "This is terrible!" because the old couple was close to eighty.  Anyway, we wound up goin’ on down.  Boyce pulls in there, and my boat’s gone, at the mine.  We parked there where the little mine shaft is.  "Oh, shit!  What in the world happened?!"  So I went over, I said, "Jim, what happened to my boat?"  He just kind of laughed.  This is the sad part of the story.  He just kind of laughs and he goes, "Well, you know, that old couple, they saw that boat go by, and they jumped in your boat and took off after it."  And oh, God, I said "Boyce, would you take care of this?  Help Jim get his boat goin’.  I can’t deal with this.  I’m gonna go see if I can get the people."  ’Cause I wanted to kill him.  And so I ran up and got the people, and they all came down, and everybody got on two boats.  We only had half enough life jackets and all this stuff.  Went down and not too far downriver, just a little bit above <Tanner Trail>, there’s a big island on the left side, and the boat had swung in close to the island and got hung up in the rocks.  Actually, the stern line got hung up on a rock.  And so we saw it down there, and we’re goin’, "Oh shit, where’s the old couple at?  God!"  Somebody all of a sudden says, "There they are!  They’re over there!"  The old guy was out, towin’ the boat back upstream, because he got caught in that eddy and realized that he’d done a little bit too much, should never have left in the first place.  So he was gonna tow the boat back up to meet us again.  So we got back together.

STEIGER:  Whew!

WILSON:  Yeah, that was a pretty weird experience, to say the very least.

STEIGER:  To say the least.  If you were the trip leader on that, that would piss you off.  We’re about to run out of tape here.

WILSON:  Peter and I worked together and got Jim fired for that.

STEIGER:  Just for lettin’ those people go and not dealin’ with it.

WILSON:  Jim actually did a couple of things--not just on that trip, but on a couple of other trips.  And Peter was involved in one of 'em, and he thought it was very unsafe and very dangerous, and not good for the passengers--or anybody, including the company.  But I got full blame....

