JACOB COIN INTERVIEW

Northern Arizona University Indian Oral History Project

NAU.OH.36.5

Jacob L. Coin, who is a sophomore at Phoenix College in <Phoenix Arizona>. Interviewed by Phyllis Boyes, graduate student at Northern Arizona University, on April 16, 1977. One tape, approximately 50 minutes.

Tape 3, Side 1

    Birthplace - <Keams Canyon Arizona>, December 9, 1954 

    Hometown - New <Oraibi> 

    Parents - <Tuba City> 

    Parents' occupations 

    Member of Hopi Tribe 

    Schools attended 

    Elementary school activities 

    Language - Hopi vs. English 

    Hopi Cultural Education 

    High school education 

    Post high school activity 

    Discussion of decision to continue education 

    Discussion of post graduate plans 

    Occupational experience 

    Elementary class size 

    Description of books and audio visual equipment 

    Assimilation (strengths and drawbacks) 

    Description of Hopi legends 

    Description of men's and women's roles (hunting, cooking piki) 

    Discussion of termination 

    Reflections upon life on the reservation 

    Possible solutions to inactivity on the reservation

Tape 3, Side 2

    Possibility of going back to the reservation 

    More on Red Power 

    Red Power impact- personally 

    Red Power impact- fellow class mates 

    Description of AIM students takeover and its outcome 

    Discussion of Phoenix College education 

    Conclusion- Indian education today and tomorrow

[BEGIN SIDE A]

Phyllis Boyes: My name is Phyllis Boyes [phonetic]. This taped oral history is being made for deposit in the Northern Arizona University Special Collections Room. It is a part of a research project directed by Dr. Philip R. Rulon, associate professor of history at NAU. The purpose of this study is twofold: first, to obtain historical information on the education of Native Americans in the Southwest; and second, to obtain insight into the effectiveness of bicultural and cross-cultural programs for Indian Americans. The project is funded by the Institute of Southwestern Studies of Northern Arizona University. Today is April 16, [1977], and I am talking with Jacob Coin, sophomore, at Phoenix College in <Phoenix Arizona>. Will you give me some biographical data about yourself: your birth date, your birth place, your parents and their occupations, and education?

Jacob Coin: I was born in <Keams Canyon Arizona>, December 9, 1954. My hometown’s in New <Oraibi>. My parents are currently staying in <Tuba City>, where they’re both employed. My stepfather is working for the Babbitts Trading Company out there--the trading post. My mother is working for the Bureau of Indian Affairs boarding school at <Tuba City>.

Phyllis Boyes: What does she do at <Tuba City>?

Jacob Coin: She’s a dorm maid. She takes care of the kids out there.

Phyllis Boyes: What tribe are you from?

Jacob Coin: The Hopi Tribe.

Phyllis Boyes: Where did you go to school? Could you list the schools that you have attended?

Jacob Coin: I went to elementary school in New <Oraibi>, the Hopi Day School, up ‘til the fifth grade. And from the fifth grade on, to the middle of my junior year in high school, I went to school in <Utah>, on the Indian Placement Program. The middle of my junior year, I returned to the reservation and continued high school at <Tuba City>.

Phyllis Boyes: Could you remember any particular activities that you would engage in, in your elementary school?

Jacob Coin: Nothing that was significant enough for me to remember. I remember just going to school and writing down a few things during my lesson, and going home. Nothing more, nothing less.

Phyllis Boyes: Was your native tongue taught in school, or was just English taught?

Jacob Coin: They tried very hard to get away from our native language. In fact, if you were ever caught talking your native language, you were punished, sat in the corner, slapped on the hand with a ruler, whatever. Each teacher had their own special method of punishment that they would use for students that were caught talking their native language.

Phyllis Boyes: Were you ever taught anything about your culture in school?

Jacob Coin: Not at all. Not in my elementary school or my high schools. Although they did have an Indian Club, but that was something that wasn’t taught, it was something that we did on our own, tried to find out about our culture. We did various dances and things, got a lot of help from our parents who knew about things like that. But that was about it--nothing else.

Phyllis Boyes: What kinds of courses did you take in high school--did you have a major?

Jacob Coin: Just general studies. Nothing that I was really interested in. In fact, that’s why I didn’t go to college for years after, because I had no real interest or no special field that I wanted to go into. I did try to go to trade school right after high school, but it didn’t work out for me because I found that I didn’t like it, and I quit after two weeks. Found out the building trade wasn’t for me, so I dropped out.

Phyllis Boyes: What made you decide to go on to Phoenix College?

Jacob Coin: Go back and do something with my life. I had a fairly good job, but I wasn’t learning anything from it. I wasn’t going anywhere. I thought if I could get some kind of an education, I would be able to make it better than I was at the time. I don’t regret it so far. It’s broadened my knowledge, anyway. I know about things that I didn’t know about before. I’m getting into national affairs more than I was before. I understand why things work the way they work--[unclear] like, say, foreign affairs, the <United States>’ relationship with <Russia>, why we can’t just go over there and force them to do what we want them to do. Things like that, that I’ve picked up since I’ve been here, have really helped me to look around myself and see things in a different perspective, rather than be isolated or ignorant of everything else around. Because when you don’t know about things, that’s the way you are. You don’t want to get involved in anything. It’s a complete turnaround for me now.

Phyllis Boyes: What would you like to do upon graduation from Phoenix College?

Jacob Coin: I’m planning on going to Arizona State University to obtain my bachelor’s degree. I’m going into philosophy over at Arizona State. My main objective in life is to be able to go to law school. That’s where I’ve set my goal at now, but to get there, you have to go through all this. So I’m going through that. But someday I’m going to make it--I’m determined.

Phyllis Boyes: Do you have any particular law school in mind?

Jacob Coin: Well, I’ve talked to people from Arizona State and University of Arizona, and of course I’m still open to others. If I were going to go now, I would probably, more than likely, go to the University of Arizona, where I’ve got a friend who is a Hopi Indian, completed law school there, and he thinks very highly of it. He thinks it’d be good for me to go. I respect his opinion because of the kind of man he is, and I think I would probably go there. If I was going to go today, I’d go there.

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned earlier that you were in the building trade for a while before you decided to go to college, and you were only in there for a couple of weeks. And then you had another job before you made the ultimate decision to come to <Phoenix>. What job was that?

Jacob Coin: I was working for Hercules Incorporated in <Salt Lake City>. I was driving a truck up there for ‘em. What we did was we made the propeller for the rocket motors for the U.S. Navy. I worked around explosives, I hauled explosives, nitroglycerin, what have you--things like that. It was interesting. It was scary at first, but after you get used to it, it’s all right. The nitroglycerin is pretty stable now. You can drop it almost, and not set it off. But when I tell people about that job, they really freak out. Pretty funny.

Phyllis Boyes: To get back to your early education for a minute, do you remember how big the classes were, how many students were in your classes?

Jacob Coin: In elementary school? Where I’m from, the village wasn’t too big, and the surrounding villages weren’t all that big. There weren’t that many kids around. My first three years of elementary school--kindergarten, first, and second grade--were all in the same room, with the three grades combined in the same room. I think we had probably three students in the kindergarten, maybe five in the first grade, maybe four in the second year. Because almost every village did have an elementary school from, say, kindergarten to the fourth grade. Then after that, the Hopi Day School is the one that carried the higher grades, say, from fifth to eighth grades. So the classes were small. Like, they did have fourth and fifth grades together in another room--third, fourth, and fifth grades. So they had three classes in each room--saved a lot of space.

Phyllis Boyes: Do you remember what kinds of books or audio visual equipment that you might have had?

Jacob Coin: No audio-visual at all--just the standard books at the time, the Think and Do, the Dick and Jane, things like that.

Phyllis Boyes: What do you think are the strengths and drawbacks of assimilation?

Jacob Coin: Well, the strengths are that it’s great to be able to live in your own culture and in the American culture at the same time. That’s the ideal person, I think, to be able to--well, you call it marginality, I guess--to be able to partake of both at the same time. Although marginality, I guess, is a bad word to use, because in marginality, neither side wants you. Whereas I think the old culture wants you, and so does the American culture, and you have to choose between the two a lot of times. Like in my case, I’d like to believe that I am a marginal person, that I am participating in both the American and my native culture, although my knowledge of my native culture is not that great, and not that extensive. But to a great extent, I still like to consider myself a Hopi, even though I get a lot of feedback from people out on the reservation because of the kind of person I am. They think I’m an "Uncle Cochise" or something--I’d rather do for the whites than my own people. But that’s not true. I’d rather do for myself, first, before I do for anybody else. Maybe that’s wrong, maybe that’s something else, but that’s my personal feelings. I think you have to answer that kind of question from your own point of view, for yourself only.

But as far as the weakness, it tends to push on you the dominant culture. I think it doesn’t give you a chance to learn about your own culture. It’s hard to find somebody to teach you about it, other than your own parents. But still within the Hopi culture, you have so many different variations of the stories, the legends, the folklore. Each clan has their own different story, their own version, and it’s hard to, say, just learn about your own clan and then forget the others, because when you get together with the other clans, you say, "This is the right way," then they say, "No, it’s not--this is the right way." We don’t have no central concept of what’s right--each has their own little thing, own little distinctions with the finer points. They all agree that we’re here for a certain purpose, but nobody seems to agree on what you go about doing, or finishing up what we’re supposed to do.

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned hearing some different legends or whatever from your parents and your grandparents. Could you give me some examples of the things that they have told you?

Jacob Coin: Well, the main thing that sticks in my mind is just recently I was home talking to my stepfather, and he was telling me--my stepfather, by the way, I’m really close to him. I’m closer to him than I was to my own father. He’s raised me, and I consider him my father, so I shouldn’t be referring to him as my stepfather. He’s a great person, and he’s taught me a lot, and I respect him. We got to talking one time about two months ago, and he was telling me about how this generation was going to start to forget our native culture. We’re not going to know anything about it. And it’s true, he starts talking to me in Hopi, and it’s Greek to me--I don’t understand it at all--especially when he really gets into it. Things like that, the girls are going to forget their roles. They aren’t going to know how to do certain things that a girl is supposed to do. Or the boys aren’t going to be able to do what they’re supposed to do, in the way they’re supposed to do it. Things like that. My mother’s parents used to tell her that someday there were going to be roads in the sky, and now you see airplanes and quicker means of travel. We’re able to reach from one ocean to the other ocean in less than a day. Things like that. But they’re interesting, and I think they’re worth listening to.

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned your stepfather saying something about the women’s roles and the men’s roles. Could you give me some examples of what some of the roles of each might be?

Jacob Coin: For instance, the boys, in the younger days of my father, they would go out and hunt every day, whereas now you go to the grocery store and you get your rabbit, get your chicken, or get your meat. But things like that, that are slowly dying out. They don’t even have a hunting party anymore, I don’t think. They used to do it maybe once a week or once a month. All the men would get together on their horses and they’d take their clubs and go out and chase rabbits--chase ‘em until they--they’d throw the stick at the rabbits and hopefully break their legs so they wouldn’t run anymore. That’s the way they did their hunting. They especially stress, too, the Hopis especially put a lot of emphasis on farming, because that’s what they are. There’s another legend that that’s the way they were supposed to make their living--called the people of the short blue corn. Farming is supposed to be their means of self-support for them. Nowadays, you go to the store and get your corn, frozen corn.. It’s not so hard. Even myself, my dad goes out and farms every year--no rain, no nothin’. He gets maybe five or six ears of corn out of three or four acres. But he still farms, he still keeps right at it.

As far as the women, the women used to have a certain hairdo that they would wear. You don’t see it anymore. They completely forgot their roles. They don’t know how to cook the old Hopi food. It’s a lot easier to put a TV dinner in the oven, than it is to, say, make piki or whatever. So things like that, that are showing that the prophesies are coming true now. There must be some validity.

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned making piki. What is piki?

Jacob Coin: Piki is--the white man calls it "paper bread." I don’t know really what it is. All I know is they make the dough or batter about the texture of your pancake batter. It’s made out of blue corn and something else. They spread it on a hot stone--the black stone. They work it so that it’s got a real smooth surface. They use some sort of animal fat or something to grease the stone so that the batter don’t stick. And they spread it out thin. It’s just like paper. That’s why they call it paper bread. Then they roll it up into rolls that are maybe ten inches long. It’s good. That’s what they use for their bread. They used to use that. They’d eat that all the time--a lot of ‘em still do, but not too many.

Phyllis Boyes: Where and when did you first encounter the idea or the term "termination"?

Jacob Coin: When I started high school, when you’re supposed to learn all these hard words--termination. It sounded like a hard word to me. I have a good way of explaining my apprehension for learning hard things, because I’m an Indian--that’s my excuse. If I’m apprehensive about learning hard words, I rationalize and say, "It’s too hard for me, I’m not going to be able to do this." And I fooled all the teachers into believing things like that. But I became familiar with that term, I think, in high school. To me, it means cutting something off, discontinuing.

Phyllis Boyes: What does it mean to you as far as the Hopi Tribe is concerned?

Jacob Coin: The tribe, or my culture?

Phyllis Boyes: Either one.

Jacob Coin: Termination of the Hopi Tribe? The tribe itself is hopefully not going to terminate for a while--at least not in my lifetime.

Phyllis Boyes: Why do you say that?

Jacob Coin: Well, because that’s another thing that’s in our legends, in our myths that the Hopi will be the--they’re a chosen people. They’re going to be able to survive the world hunger when it comes, the world war when it comes--things like that. And I have a strong belief in that, because of the things that have already happened, as prophecies. But as far as the culture goes, it might be a different story there. You can always be a Hopi and not know about your Hopi culture. The culture is dying out, there’s no doubt about it. It’s had a lot of modification, it’s been dressed up, it’s been torn apart, put back together. In that sense, termination is coming for the culture. But the basic concept is still there, and I hope it stays. But it is dying out. Termination has kind of a--it’s like this (snaps fingers), it’s gonna go just like that. To me, that’s the kind of impression the word leaves to me. It’s gonna just be cut off without notice. One morning you’re gonna wake up and it’s gonna be gone--that type of thing.

Phyllis Boyes: As far as the eventual withdrawal of the BIA and other agencies from the administration of Indian affairs--in that sense of the word termination, what do you think about that?

Jacob Coin: That they should be pulled out?

Phyllis Boyes: Whether they are or whether they aren’t--either way.

Jacob Coin: Oh, that’s always... I’m afraid they’re always gonna be there, as long as the government’s gonna put up their schools, fund their schools, build their schools, you’re always gonna have that. That’s where this interweaving of the two cultures would probably come in handy, if we could get enough people to learn enough about the white man’s ways to where they could police their own affairs, take care of their own. Then maybe we could get rid of BIA. When you get enough people to learn about the things needed to run a school, say--and teachers, especially--it’d be just great if we could do that. But as of now, the BIA’s there and it’s staying. It’s going to be there for a long time to come.

Phyllis Boyes: Do you think, in other words, it’s necessary for people to go out and become lawyers, doctors (

Jacob Coin: Right.)

Phyllis Boyes: so that they will have some kind of leadership?

Jacob Coin: Right. We need people, we need teachers. We need those people: lawyers, doctors. Be less dependent on the white man. You know, take care of our own. That’d be the--if I was one of the old wise men, I think I’d prophesy that, and hope that it’d come to pass, and ask the gods for me to stay around long enough to see it come to pass. But that’s what’s gonna have to be done.

Phyllis Boyes: What did you feel about living on the Indian reservation when you were growing up?

Jacob Coin: I didn’t like it. I look back... Well, at the time, I guess I liked it, because life was so serene out there. We don’t have any worries. But as you grow older, you feel like you need something to do. You need some responsibilities put on you so that it’ll make you feel wanted, make you feel useful--things like that. I don’t know, it’s hard to grow up on the reservation, because there’s not that many responsibilities that are placed on you--especially now that farming is dying out. Nobody farms anymore. What are you going to do? A lot of people turn to drinking and things like that. When the white man goes through the reservation, that’s where he sees all these lazy Indians. They think everybody else is like that. It’s a bad place to be. I’m glad I got out of there when I did, because I did go back there for a while. I got caught up in the easy life. It’s easy to get caught up in something like that: nothing to do, no worries, your food’s always gonna be there when you want it.

Phyllis Boyes: What would you say would be a solution to this kind of inactivity on the reservation?

Jacob Coin: Well, it’s all up to the person. They need some kind of a motivation factor out there. Possibly, if the BIA’s gonna be around, maybe they can create jobs, do something to help some of these people out there, to give them something to do, make them feel useful. You’ve got to eliminate 90 percent of the inactivity out there. But still, who knows? It wouldn’t work unless the people wanted it to work. Like I said, it’s hard to get away from that easy life, and get to work. It’s hard to get back into it, if you’ve been away for a while. But I think more people should go to school, maybe learn something else besides how to push a broom or dig a ditch or whatever.

Phyllis Boyes: When and how did you first learn of the Red Power concept?

Jacob Coin: When I returned to the reservation to finish my last year and a half...

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Jacob Coin: .. myself to help my people. Eventually I’d like to do that, when I’m ready.

Phyllis Boyes: You’d like to go back to the reservation and help out there? Or get set up in practice somewhere else?

Jacob Coin: My primary goal, like I say, is to become a lawyer. I don’t know, I like money, because it’s a sign of how successful you are, to me. I like money not because of what it can buy, but because of what it shows other people. I think before I go back to the reservation, I’d like to set up a practice somewhere, possibly make some money, and then go back. But eventually I’d like to go back and help somebody out. I’m not money hungry or anything. I’m just hungry for money because of the success that it shows--it shows how successful you are.

Phyllis Boyes: To get back to the Red Power concept a little bit more, was this an idea that developed inside or outside the reservation?

Jacob Coin: Outside the reservation, definitely. I’d say life is too easy-going on the reservation. It’s too serene, it’s too secure for people to become that radical. I just can’t picture some of my close friends who are inactive out there, making up something like this, because they just haven’t got the brain to do something like that. It had to have come from outside, because the concept of Red Power is rebellion against the white culture, it’s against the whites. So it had to be made up by somebody that was familiar with what the whites were doing, and if he was that familiar, he had to have been one of the people that were possibly being forced to the white culture or whatever. It would have had to have been created outside the reservation.

Phyllis Boyes: What kind of impact did this have on you and your fellow classmates?

Jacob Coin: It didn’t have any impact on me, but I’ll tell you, a lot of my classmates and friends really got hooked on the idea. I lost a lot of friends because of that. But as far as me, personally, it didn’t have anything to offer me. I can’t support anything I’m not into. I might have acted like I did at times, but really, there’s nothing in it for me.

Phyllis Boyes: What about your fellow classmates?

Jacob Coin: Well, a lot of them that got hooked on the idea, that thought it had something for ‘em, sure don’t have anything to show for it. I go back, and they’re still there, the same old people, still haven’t learned anything new. I don’t know, it kind of gets me mad, because it has helped to sway people away from their education. Nobody wants to learn anything anymore, because of Red Power. They think they’re doin’ their people a favor by goin’ out, takin’ over buildings, shootin’ people--but they’re not, not to me anyway.

I recall an incident out there at <Tuba City> that did some good, when some of these AIM [American Indian Movement] students over at the high school took over the administration building, and they did get the community’s attention, and the parents started to show concern about the children’s education and things. Before that, the parents would just send their kids to school for six, seven hours, and came back, put in their lunch, forgot about it--or fed them their dinner and forgot about them. But after that, we got a lot of parents attending PTA meetings. Before that, nobody was going. A lot of people wanting to join the local board of education to possibly find some studies for their own cultures, and I think they have it out there now. They just recently built that new BIA school out there. It’s run by both the state and the federal government. They do have some problems out there, because the BIA wants something the state don’t; the state wants something the BIA don’t. That type of thing. But it did help to bring about the public awareness of their students, of their students’ needs, what they want as far as their classes go, and what they need to take and what they don’t need. Consequently, they do have some cultural studies out there, and the Indian Club has grown to a greater extent than it was before. Parents support it a lot more. The school district appropriates more money for the Indian Club than they used to. Things like that, which is a sign that maybe Red Power isn’t so bad for getting things done. Other times it takes--what do they say?--a thunderstorm to clear the air--that type of thing.

Phyllis Boyes As far as your education is right now, how do you view the community college--Phoenix College--as far as helping you out, and the kind of courses you’re taking and teachers? Do you have the extracurricular activities available to you?

Jacob Coin: Phoenix College is a great place. In fact, I’m trying to get my sister and my cousins to come here, because I really think it’s a great place. I like the teachers that I’ve had. I assert myself more if I like ‘em. It shows, because I’ve got a pretty good grade point average--I’ve got a 3.4 right now. That’s compared to high school, where I had maybe a 2.0. I like it. We do need some cultural studies, though, for the Indians, because a lot of the Indians come here and want others to learn about ‘em. We have an Indian Club, but we have low participation. The same people do the work all the time. We’ve got 300 Indian students here on campus, and I think about ten or fifteen of ‘em are in the club, that are regular comers. Things like that, I don’t know, maybe we could maybe get a couple of classes--not just for Indians, but for other minorities like the Chicanos and blacks. We need to learn about each other, and I think the white students here would accept something, I think they’d really get into it, because of the things that are taught, or that will be taught, about their neighbors--neighbors here in <Arizona>, especially.

Phyllis Boyes: In conclusion, would you try to summarize where you think Indian education is at present, and where it may be projected to go in the future?

Jacob Coin: Presently it’s about as good as you can expect from teachers trying to teach Native American cultures. Those that are trying to teach it now are mostly whites. But we need some Indian teachers, Indian educators, to teach other Indians--because that’s... Students would learn more, I think, from people of their own kind. It’s gonna get better, but we need people in educational fields to spread it around, be less dependent on the whites. If we can learn all this stuff, we could take it back home to the reservation and start it there. Start it at the elementary level and continue on up through high school. That way, when the students come to college, it wouldn’t be so hard for them to adjust to the new life. But it’s gonna get better. I have a good feeling about it. It’s not so good now, but it’s gonna get better.

Phyllis Boyes: Thank you very much.



