George Billingsley

October 26, 2007

2:23:16 (143:17 minutes).

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



Steiger:  This is Lew Steiger, and it’s October 26, 2007, and I’m here at the Grand Canyon River Guides office in <Flagstaff>, talking to George Billingsley.  This is an interview for the River Runners Oral History Project.  (Minute 00:39-04:30, describes project)  Kind of the standard way that I do this, just for keeping track of everything, I usually just try to go through somebody’s story chronologically, because it’s easier to keep your thoughts organized and stuff.  I like to ask people for just kind of a thumbnail biography, kind of where you were born, and just a little bit about your family circumstances before you got to the river, just because it kind of puts your perceptions in context.  So with that said, what were your early circumstances?

Billingsley:  I was born in Barrow, England, came over here to <Arizona> when I was two, and been here ever since.  Lived on a ranch on <Date Creek>, southwest of <Arizona>.  Went to the grade school in <Congress Junction>, and as soon as I graduated, there was hardly any kids in all eight grades.  It was only eighteen to twenty.  And finally most of them left, they closed the school down, and I went on to high school at <Wickenburg>, and struggled through high school, got through.  Then one day while feeding cattle....  My job had a lot of chores.  You were taught responsibilities back then.  My dad was pretty insistent about that, and it was part of the job.  In order for the family to survive, everybody had to do their part.  That was the way it was.  So my job was feeding a lot of animals, and I didn’t mind that; and taking care of the fields and what not.  But his main rule, an I never forget it, is you feed everything and make sure it’s all taken care of, all the livestock, everything, before you even think about feeding yourself.  And he was very strict about that.  And one time I didn’t, I was goofin’ off.  He would always check to make sure, and he come home and said, "You didn’t feed the chickens," or something like that--I’ve forgotten what it was.  He said, "No supper."  So I didn’t.  And that was a lesson you learned.  But it made sense.  I mean, the animals were dependent upon you, no matter what they were.  And we were taught that very young, and that was important.  Responsibility was very important.

Steiger:  So you grew up on a ranch....

Billingsley:  It was a ranch and farm combination.

Steiger:  Yeah, like feeding cows.  Were they dairy cows?

Billingsley:  No, just regular cattle.  We’d have up to maybe 600 head in the wintertime, to feed.  Summertime, we’d turn ’em loose on the desert, and they’d scrounge around the cactus and try to survive.

Steiger:  Would you put up hay to feed ’em?

Billingsley:  Yeah, my job was mostly farming, and so I worked the fields, I learned to drive tractors way back.  When I was six, seven years old, I was driving tractors and all kinds of machinery.

Steiger:  I’m trying to think of where <Date Creek> is.  That’s not in the Bradshaws, it’s down like <Skull Valley>, <Kirkland>?

Billingsley:  It’s southwest of <Skull Valley>, <Kirkland>, yeah.  <Date Creek> is near <Congress Junction>, directly west of <Yarnell>, but down in the desert.

Steiger:  Down off the hill.

Billingsley:  Yeah, down off the hill.  Yarnell Mountain was part of our ranchland in the desert and all that.  We had water there at <Date Creek>, and that was the reason the ranch was there.  It was one of the earliest known ranches in the area.  I don’t know all the history--my brother knows it.  But a stagecoach used to run from <Prescott> to <La Paz> through there, because it had water.  So it has a big history.  The O-X Ranch is what it was called.  That’s the brand.  But I was so busy workin’, that it didn’t matter.  But that was the thing, we were so busy we didn’t have time to do much of anything else.  And going to school was kind of a break, but it was also boring.

Steiger:  Were the grades combined when you went to school?  You were saying how many kids there were.  I missed that.

Billingsley:  In the grade school, yeah.  It was two rooms, and all eight grades were in those two rooms.  And we did have a third room for the younger kids.  There just got to be less and less kids, and basically Congress was an old mining town, and it was just becoming a ghost town.  Gold mining had long ago played out.  But yeah, those four of us graduated from eighth grade, and shortly after that, the school closed.

Steiger:  And off you went to <Wickenburg>.

Billingsley:  Off to <Wickenburg>, and that was a big school, 240-some kids.  I felt lost there.  Forty-two of us ended up graduating from there.  Then one day while I was feeding cattle my dad asked, "What do you want to do?"  And I said, "I don’t know."  He said, "Well, why don’t you think about college."  I said, "Well, I don’t know dad, I barely got out of high school."  He said, "Well, consider it a done deal, you’re goin’ to college.  I’ve been savin’ my money up, and that’s what you’re gonna do.  I don’t have much, but you’re gonna make it."  "Okay."  Teacher said, "Don’t bother."  (laughs)  Don’t bother going, because I was not college material.  That was fine.  Well, that kind of ticked me off a little bit, so I said, "Well, I’ll go anyway!  My dad said to, and I’m goin’!"  And that was the best thing, because I didn’t know there were opportunities other than farming and ranching, to do.

Steiger:  It’s unusual....  I’ve known a lot of ranching families where I think the patriarch would have just as soon the kids stayed around and kept workin’ on the ranch.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  My dad wanted to go to school, he never got that opportunity, because they really needed him on the ranch at that time, when he was young.  He decided he wanted me to have the opportunity to learn that there’s other things in this world besides farming and ranching, feeding cows, and shoveling stuff, and digging holes, and all this stuff.  At the time, I didn’t give it much thought.  I was kind of tired of school.  I was reluctant to go to college.  But once I got there and found out it was an entirely different scenario--this was Arizona State College at <Flagstaff> back then, ’63.

Steiger:  They didn’t call it NAU?

Billingsley:  No, it was Arizona State College.  It was the largest school in <Arizona>.  It’s been here a while.  So I started in ’63, and then I opted for taking a class in different things to find out what they’re all about.  I thought meteorology would be fun to take, learn about the weather, because I was always interested in it.  Archaeology sounded kind of fun.  And geology.  So I soon realized that meteorology was not my ticket, because there was so much math, and I could barely add or subtract.  So I just forgot that.  Archaeology was fun, but kind of boring in a way, but fun.  Dr. Euler [phonetic] was really good, I took classes from him.  But geology was more interesting, because I could relate to what I was seeing every day.  I always wondered about the mountains and rocks, and that’s how I got started, and it was fun, and not that many people in the classes--three or four people sometimes.

Steiger:  That would be the class?

Billingsley:  That would be the class, yeah.  And so you learned a lot, and you really had a relaxed thing, and basically the more you learned, everybody could learn together, we all helped each other.  That’s the way it was.  Nobody failed.  And that was kind of nice, because it was a matter of learning--failure wasn’t an option.

Steiger:  Now, Arizona State College, did it then become NAU?

Billingsley:  It became NAU in 1966.  The student body voted on the name.  It was either going to be Northern Arizona University, or University of Northern Arizona.  Well, you know which one won out.  And it’s been that way ever since.  And then, at that time, when I started Arizona State College, it was just over 3,000 students, and everything was on the north end of campus, the stone buildings.  When it became a university, it suddenly started to grow, bit time.

Steiger:  I guess the whole town, too.

Billingsley:  Yeah, the town was 18,000 when I came here.  Had two stoplights.  And to get into Arizona State College, it was a five-way stoplight, right there.  Now they’re building this convention center where we used to drive in, straight into the administration.  I stayed in Old Main dormitory.  It was a men’s dorm then.  And I learned later on that it was Dr. Butchart’s old office--he used to teach from there.

Steiger:  The dorm?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  That was the offices for faculty then, but it became a men’s dorm when they moved to the new building, the Science Building.  I learned from Dr. Butchart that it was his old office, so I lived in there.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  So how did you first encounter the <Grand Canyon>?  How’d that all come up?

Billingsley:  In ’64, I decided with a couple of friends to go down there, and we went and looked at it, and we thought, "Well, let’s just take a hike down there.  There’s a trail."  I didn’t know much about the <Grand Canyon>.  The Kaibab Trail was there, of course, where everybody sees it.  So we took off and went down there shortly after.  That was my first hike.  Just wanted to go down and see what the river looked like.

Steiger:  So you went to the river, down the Kaibab, not the B.A.?

Billingsley:  We went down the Bright Angel, I think.  I’d have to look at my notes.  I’ve got it all written down, I kept a journal of all these.  But I just threw everything in a gunny sack that I found at a local feed store here, and threw a blanket in there, some canned food, and some water, and took off, and that was basically....  We didn’t have any money for anything, so that’s how we did it.  But I soon learned after about four or five miles down, that was not the way to go.

Steiger:  You just threw this gunny sack over your shoulder?

Billingsley:  Yeah, I just hung onto it, over my shoulder, and hung onto it.  My arms got really tired, but most of all my back was getting sore from the canned food banging on my back with every step down the hill.  And I had arranged the blanket around.  That was my sleeping thing.  It still didn’t work, so I was pretty sore and stiff.  But the smells and the sights and the wonder of the rocks and everything was absolutely fascinating to me.  So we climbed back out of there, and decided "we’re gonna do this some more!"  So I got started on hiking then in ’64.

Steiger:  So you had a blanket and some cans and a little....

Billingsley:  Yeah, it was canned food.  We didn’t know what else to take.  Used the ol’ beans and soup and that kind of thing.

Steiger:  Did you have a pad or anything like that?

Billingsley:  No, just a blanket.

Steiger:  Just layin’ on the ground, cover yourself up, roll up in it.

Billingsley:  Yeah, there was an irrigation ditch down at <Phantom Ranch> at the time--no water in it, but it had a lot of grass and leaves from the local cottonwoods.  That made a nice mattress, so I just threw a blanket around me and went to sleep.  Found a nice flat rock for a pillow, and kept my hat on.  I was used to campin’ out like that, but it was cold, it was in the winter.

Steiger:  Oh, it was?  Where there a lot of other people around?

Billingsley:  Didn’t see anybody.  There were a couple of people at the ranch and a few deer--that was about all.  Well, there was the usual mule barn.  There were a couple of wranglers there, so people were making trips by mule back then, and it was very popular, I guess.  But we didn’t see anybody else on the trail.  It was pretty empty.

Steiger:  Boy.

Billingsley:  We did a second trip.  I’ve got it all.  I kept....  I brought my records of the hikes and everything.  But I went to <Clear Creek>.  Next time, "Let’s go see what that looks like."  So the next time we hike, we went to <Clear Creek>.  There was an old trail that left <Phantom Ranch>, according to a fifteen-minute topographic quadrangle we had, and we found that, and you could barely follow it.  But we got to the top of <Tapeats>, and then there was no trail at all.  There were some burro trails on the Tonto Platform there.  So we just made our way across, toward <Clear Creek>, got there, climbed down some cliffs and ledges--don’t know where the trail was--but we made it down there.  It was a nice running stream of water, so that was pretty neat.

Steiger:  When you say burro trails, wild burros?

Billingsley:  Yeah, there were wild burros all over the place.

Steiger:  They were all over up there?

Billingsley:  Oh yeah, on both sides of the river, because you could hear ’em all night long, braying.  And we liked that sound, because it meant there was something else alive in the canyon besides us, because you just didn’t see life at all--an occasional raven.  Wild burros were the thing to see--or hear.

Steiger:  I remember seeing the burros when I first started working down there below Lava and stuff.  And then there were some there at 122, but I wasn’t aware that they were right around, up on the Tonto.  Do you know, did they round them guys up, did they eradicate ’em?

Billingsley:  I guess they did, because after a few years later, we didn’t see them anymore.  Early seventies, there might have been an eradication program to get rid of them, but I thought they were unique to <Grand Canyon>.  But I learned later they were introduced from prospectors many years ago.  Some people felt that they were competing with the bighorn sheep for food and what not.  And they would always foul the water, wherever there was water.  But to me, they were <Grand Canyon>--because I didn’t know any better.  And they were alive.  It was just really nice to see them and hear them.  Most of the time you just heard ’em.  So that was kind of fun.  Anyway, that’s how we got started hiking in ’64.  I didn’t do very much hiking, but it grew on me.  In ’67, it really got going good.  And that’s when I met Susan down there at <Hance Rapid>.  She was on a hike.  And really a neat gal.

Steiger:  You guys didn’t meet in school?

Billingsley:  No, we met on the hike.  She joined the hiking club we had formed at that time.  It was actually going before I got there.  But I thought, "Well, let’s go see who wants to hike."  So she decided, "Well, why not?"  So a bunch of us went down there.

Steiger:  You say <Hance Rapid>.  Was that when you first talked to her or something?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  We went down the Grandview Trail, and basically there was no trail to follow once you got below the Redwall limestone.  It was just vague.  But we could see where it had to go, and we just made our own way.  Once in a while you would find a little path.  It was mostly a burro path that we followed, and got to <Hance Rapid>s.  And then we went up the Hance Trail, and that was almost impossible to find.  We didn’t know where it was, and I’m sure we weren’t on the trail more than three-quarters of the time.

Steiger:  Is it <Red Canyon>?

Billingsley:  It went up <Red Canyon>.  But the map showed it goin’ up there, and so we tried to figure out where it would be most of the time.  Some other girl on the trip was really sick, so I ended up carrying her out piggyback style, and that was a real challenge.  She got claustrophobia down there, and she felt the walls were closing in.  It scared her to death, and she was really in bad shape, just wouldn’t eat, kept throwing up, dry heaves and all that.  And she had no energy.  So Susan ended up carrying part of her pack and stuff, which wasn’t much.  I ended up carrying her piggyback, because there was no way else to get her out.  We couldn’t leave her.  And she fainted several times trying to walk.  The only way to get her out was just carry her out.  And it was way after dark before I finally got up, and some of the guys came back down with flashlights, wondering where we were.  And then they helped carry her the rest of the way out.

Steiger:  So you and Susan kind of stayed back with her?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  But it was a tough go for her--and a couple of the other girls too.  There was a bunch of girls on that trip.  But it was tough for everybody, because it was sort of a learning experience for all of us, and we learned a lot--basically how to get around.

Steiger:  Sounds like maybe she got dehydrated or something, you think?

Billingsley:  It could have been.  She couldn’t hold water down.  She’d throw it up as soon as she took a drink, and that kind of thing.  She was in bad shape.  I think she was absolutely scared to death.  She just didn’t realize how big the canyon was.  And we assumed that she knew what she was doing, but most of us were all new on that sort of thing.  It was a learning thing.  But other than that, we had a good time.  It was a really fascinating part of the canyon to see.  But hike by hike, we learned.

Steiger:  Just that specific place, how did it first register with you?

Billingsley:  How do you mean?

Steiger:  Oh, I don’t know, I usually just try to get people’s first impressions of it.  But it seems like that <Date Creek> country, it’s not all that....  You know, there’s so many people who come--in the river business and stuff--who kind of came from a more urban background.  I guess that <Date Creek> country down there, that’s pretty wild and rugged and not all that different.

Billingsley:  Yeah, I’m used to being outdoors.  I mean, I could find my way around, and I learned how to maneuver in the desert.  But the <Grand Canyon> is a desert, really.  It was just a tougher place to get around, because you had restrictions where you really could go.  So that didn’t bother me too much.  It had a different feeling:  different smells and sights and all that stuff.

Steiger:  Now you and geology, how did that go?  When did it occur to you that that was going to be your profession?

Billingsley:  The first semester, when I took the course.  It suddenly answered a lot of my questions I always wondered about in high school and before then, about the mountains and the rocks.  And here was this stuff that they were teaching, and it made sense, and it was so obvious, and a lot of it I already kind of figured out, but it made more sense to read what it’s all about, and understand why things are the way they are.  Once I got in the <Grand Canyon>, I began to realize there’s really a unique rock history here that I can figure out.  And it wasn’t that hard, but there was so much to learn.  I didn’t know it all.  So it was a fun thing to learn.  So the hikes were--I was off in some other world, looking at the rocks, as well as struggling along.  You know, having a good time with everybody else.  That was important.  That was the nice thing about the school group that we were with at NAU--the hiking club.  We were all different as far as our studies, our educational studies, and we’d always share information from what everybody was learning about different things.  So that made it more interesting.  Somebody knew something about the bugs or the plants or something, and I knew something about the rocks.  It just really made for a better trip, because we were constantly in a learning mode, as well as having a good time down there.

Steiger:  The way that Susan talked about it, which I did an earlier interview with Susan, she said you guys got addicted to it, and people in the hiking club were going every single weekend, it seemed like.

Billingsley:  Yeah, but it wasn’t always <Grand Canyon>.  I mean, there were other places:  the <Superstition Mountains>, <Rainbow Bridge>, Death Valley, Lake Mead.  Whenever we could afford to drive and get enough money saved up and go somewhere, we’d do that, but typically Verde Valley was a common destination, because it was close by and cheap.  And <Grand Canyon> wasn’t that far, but not everybody wanted to go in the <Grand Canyon>.  But there was a hard core bunch of us that really did, and so we stuck together:  Susan and I, and then Jim Sears [phonetic], Jan Jensen, Ellen Tibbetts.  There was a whole bunch of people.  I don’t have the names right on the tip of my tongue right now, but I’ve got them all written down in my journal.

Steiger:  I guess the gal who had that trouble, did she come back?

Billingsley:  No, she did not go in the canyon anymore.  She had learned, and that was it.  But she was a nice lady, she just didn’t comprehend what she was getting into.  And I doubt whether she’d ever even seen the <Grand Canyon>--I don’t know--before.  But since we were all there and going down, she decided to go.  But it became obvious to her that it was not....  The further down she got, the more scared she got.

Steiger:  Did you interact with Dr. Butchart much?  Was he....

Billingsley:  Yeah, we got to know Dr. Butchart through the hiking club, and also I took math classes from him.

Steiger:  You said math wasn’t your forte?

Billingsley:  No, but it was required, even for geology and archaeology.  And there was just no way of getting around it.  That was my stumbling block, was math.  So I took general math, anything, just to learn how to add and subtract, and had to work up through algebra and all these other courses they had listed, and I thought, "Oh, man, there’s no way."  But I got to know Dr. Butchart in those classes.  After failing them a couple of times, I would retake ’em, and we got to know each other.  He knew we were hiking the canyon, and got to be good friends.  But he’d say, "You’ve got to try."  And so he would try desperately to teach me, but I really had a mental block against math.  But after about two or three times, he would draw a line under my name and say, "Okay, I’ll let you go by with the lowest grade."  And that was passing.  That’s all I needed.  If it wasn’t for Dr. Butchart, I would have never gotten a degree in college, because there was no way I was going to get through those math classes, all the way through calculus.  I can’t even spell the name.  You know?  I haven’t a clue what it’s all about, but I took it three times anyway, just to get the lowest grade possible after the third time.  I think he lowered the--he graded on a curve--he lowered the line just so that I would be passing, because he knew it was required for me to get the degree in geology.

Steiger:  That’s pretty good.

Billingsley:  Yeah, so I owe an awful lot of gratitude to Dr. Butchart.  But we hiked a few times, but not very much.  He was interested in going from "A" to "B" as fast as he could, and climbing buttes primarily.  I was interested in seeing what was in the canyon as far as geology was going, and I wanted to take my time.  So we’d start off together lots of times, but he would end up taking off, and we’d meet a day or two later somewhere, because I didn’t want to keep up the pace.  He had a murderous pace that was just....  Forget it!

Steiger:  Yeah, I’ve heard he would just get up and....

Billingsley:  I mean, you know, you’d be struggling along, panting for breath, and you’d say, "Dr. Butchart, wouldn’t this be a great place for a picture?"  He’d say, "Yeah," so he’d snap a picture and keep going.  In the meantime, sitting there (sigh), "Well, okay, I guess I’d better get going.  To heck with the picture."  (laughs)  That kind of thing.  And so that didn’t appeal to me.  His style of hiking was just not mine.

Steiger:  What were the questions, like the geologic questions--do you remember?--that you found yourself asking early on, just as that place started to unfold to you.  I don’t know if you remember or not.

Billingsley:  Well, there was a lot of different geology courses we had to take, and stratigraphy is one of them, learning the rock layers, how they formed, what’s the environmental past, how to study them in detail under a microscope to find out what makes a rock a rock, how it could come together in certain environments.  And so that was fascinating.  And then I began to see the real historical past of the earth at the <Grand Canyon>.  And after a couple of years or so, I thought I knew it all, because Dr. Eddie McKee was one of the people I also met, and he was the Grand Canyon geologist.  So he helped me learn quite a bit, and I got to help him measure sections.  He would show me how to do it.  We spent a lot of time working on the Supai Formation he was working on then, so I measured sections all over the canyon with him, to get his big Supai paper out.

Steiger:  Now, was he teaching, too?

Billingsley:  Not at the time.  He was working for the Geological Survey, but he was teaching at the U. of A. before he joined the survey.

Steiger:  And wasn’t he like the park naturalist or something?

Billingsley:  He was a park naturalist for <Grand Canyon> for many, many years.

Steiger:  What’s a naturalist, as opposed to a geologist?

Billingsley:  I think as a naturalist you don’t only know geology, you also know biology, the plants, everything about the canyon, any natural science.  He can name off all kinds of different plants and lizards, and his wife Barbara was a biologist, and so she knew all these things, and they were trying to teach me all the names.  And so I got to know a lot of the plants and animals and lizards and what not from both of them.  And they were always writing notes and observing, writing down information they saw all the time.  So I got to kind of doing that--just like Dr. Butchart got me to writing notes on all my hikes of where I went and what I saw.

Steiger:  He talked you into doing it?

Billingsley:  Yeah, because he was doing it.  He told me, "You know, one day you’re not going to remember what you did."  And he’s right.

Billingsley:  Oh, he’s so right!  You know, I wish somebody had told me.  In my life, I mean, my God, I used to think....  There was all this stuff that streamed by me, and I thought, "Yeah, someday I’ll write this up."

Billingsley:  You’ve got to write it down.  And I didn’t write everything.

Steiger:  Write it right now.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  So as soon as we got done with a hike, I would sit down with my old manual typewriter and type it up.  I didn’t write everything, but the things that impressed me:  where I was, who I was with, and what not.  I’d always measure the temperature of the air and water whatever it was--curiosity, kind of a weather thing--and what rocks I saw, what new discoveries I saw.  And that was the thrill of it all--what was in the next canyon.  That’s why we went, we just wanted to see what was there.  And that was fun, but you had to write it down.  And I’m glad I did, because I can’t tell you now exactly what-all I did back on these hikes we just talked about.  But I have it written down, and I’ve got about 1,500 typewritten pages, single-spaced.

Steiger:  Susan showed me your journals when I talked to her.  Pretty impressive.  Single-spaced, typewritten pages.  There’s about, what....

Billingsley:  Maybe 1,200-1,300 pages, something like that.

Steiger:  Yeah, it looks like it’s about a foot or more.

Billingsley:  Yeah, you stack ’em all up, it’s over a foot thick, yeah.

Steiger:  Or more than that.

Billingsley:  It’s more.  But at any rate, I need to, someday....  The original version of that is at the Museum of Northern Arizona vault--it’s locked up there.

Steiger:  That’s good.

Billingsley:  Because I typed it on onionskin paper back then--that was popular--so you can barely read it.  And I just have a Xeroxed copy, which you can barely read.  But somehow I need, just for my grandkids and what not, and my two kids--just so they have a record of what we did, and how crazy we were, just like everybody.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  I wonder if....  You know, nowadays, they’ve got this character recognition software that’s not bad, as far as making copies, where you can scan something in.  I wonder if that wouldn’t work.

Billingsley:  I don’t know, I haven’t tried it.  I just haven’t had the time yet.  But someday that’s one of my goals, when I retire, is to get some help, put those notes back in order, so at least the kids can read over what Susan and I both did.  It was a lot of fun.  (someone enters, greetings exchanged)  But anyway, I just wanted to say the hiking was the number one enjoyment of the <Grand Canyon> for me.  River running came in, and it was fun, but hiking was always the most enjoyable thing I’ve done.

Steiger:  And you’ve done a ton of it, huh?

Billingsley:  Yeah.

Steiger:  You mapped all that country out there, Perishant....

Billingsley:  Yeah, geology was always in the....  I’m really glad that I had the education.  There I owe a great debt of thanks to both my parents for at least starting me in school and saying, "That’s what you’re going to do," and from there on I took it and made my own way.  But if it wasn’t for them insisting I do that, rather than stay on the ranch, I don’t know.  But it was a super-good thing for them to do that.  I’ve always been very, very appreciative of what they did.

Steiger:  For your dad to make you do that.

Billingsley:  My dad and mom both, yeah.  They felt that it was important--and it was.  But at any rate, yeah, that was a big turning point in my life.  But yeah, you’re right, getting all over the [canyon]--I didn’t really hike that many places, because there are people who were hiking at the time, but we never saw anybody.  But now I know that other people were hiking, and some of them are still hiking.  And so many people have many more miles than I do, by far; many more years hiking.  I just happen to have hiked when it was getting started, more or less, becoming popular.  We had a lot of learning to do.

Steiger:  It sounds like that core group of the club was a bunch of very strong hikers.

Billingsley:  Right, and we are still good friends today.  Al Doty [phonetic], I might mentioned him and El; and Chuck Johnson and Lucinda.  It was a lot of people.  I wish I could name them all, but right off the top of my head, I can’t do that right now.  But we experienced the canyon today and helped each other whenever we had a difficult time--falling or getting sick or whatever.  Just being there.  So it was an experience.  We didn’t realize how dangerous it was, because we would just take off and go.  We never got a permit for anything, but now I realize the value of a permit, because if you never show up, then at least....  We didn’t care whether they found us or not--if you’re dead, you’re dead.  But people may want to know where to look.  And if you don’t have any clue--it’s an awful big canyon--you’re not gonna find ’em.  There’s just no way.  We tried to rendezvous with other people down there, and you know the story from Susan and I, on that long trip, meeting at the river--never did.

Steiger:  Yeah, the cairns and stuff.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  We passed each other on the Bright Angel Trail and never even knew it!

Steiger:  Really?!

Billingsley:  Oh yeah!  When I was mapping the eastern <Grand Canyon>, she decided to come down and meet me somewhere at <Phantom Ranch>, and I decided to meet her on the trail, but we never saw each other, and we assumed one or the other just didn’t make it.  Turns out either I or her was off in the bushes somewhere at that particular time.

Steiger:  And just passed by.

Billingsley:  Just passed by.  But there was a lot of things like that happening.  Rendezvous in the <Grand Canyon> are almost impossible, unless you are going to stay in one spot for a while.

Steiger:  And say, "meet you right there," and that’s where it is.

Billingsley:  "This is where we’re gonna camp, and we’re gonna be there for a day or so, and we’ll meet you there."

Steiger:  Well, how’d the river enter into it?

Billingsley:  Well, I got interested in that in 1968.  I was coming back to school and decided "I’ll just pop over at <Lee's Ferry>," since I was coming out of <Colorado> at the time, working up there.  And the stop at <Lee's Ferry>, there was a river trip getting together to go, and I asked around and said--I had nothing better to do--talking to a couple of the guys, and they said, "Yeah, why don’t you come along with us.  Talk to Ted Hatch.  He’s over there.  Ask him if you can go."  So I went over and talked to Ted Hatch, and he said, "You got $315?  That’s what it costs."  And I said, "Yeah, I’ve got that."  I just got done working, I had all my money saved up.  So I wrote a check for $315.  He says, "Okay, get whatever you’ve got and throw it on that boat right there, and you’re gonna leave."  I said, "Okay."  I just had my small backpack, and didn’t have anything waterproof.  But I had my clothes on, my hat, and that was it.  I got to know some of the guys who were young fellows, and helped them load up and everything, and then passengers came and they all hopped on three boats--there were four boats.  But they all hopped on three, except for one boat was only five young guys, and not much of anything else.  So I thought, "Well, gee, can I ride with you guys?"  And Ted came over and said, "This is the training boat.  These guys have never been down here, they don’t know what they’re doing, they’re learning.  If you want to go with them, you have to tell me for sure, and everybody here witnessing, that it’s at your own risk."  I said, "Sure.  Fine."  Because the other boats seemed crowded to me, and they had piles of duffel and everything all piled up.  So I hopped on and got to know these guys.  Yeah, it was an experience.  I was up for the adventure.

Steiger:  Do you remember who those guys were?

Billingsley:  No, I’d have to check my field notes.  There were five of them.  Somebody named Jim had been down once before, so he was kind of trying to instruct.  It was the first time with engines, and they were trying to figure out how to make ’em work.  We couldn’t get the thing started, and finally Hatch just shoved us off, and we had oars--front oars and back oars.

Steiger:  These were outside rigs, no side tubes, right?

Billingsley:  No side tubes.

Steiger:  Floors in ’em, motors hangin’ off the back.

Billingsley:  Yeah, and it was orange.  We started floating down the river, so we grabbed the oars, and he said, "Get the thing going!"  And I said, "We don’t know how to get it started!"  Kept fiddling with it.  "It won’t start."  There was something wrong.  He said, "Well, fix it on the way.  You’re on your way now."  So we took off.

Steiger:  He pushed you off?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  And the other three boats were ahead of us.

Steiger:  Not waitin’ for you either.

Billingsley:  No, because their job was, if we came along, they would rescue us if we had problems--and we did.  (chuckles)  But we finally got the engine going, and it was an experience.  When we got to the rapids, it would drown out, and we’d grab the oars and start rowing.

Steiger:  So you were involved in that too?

Billingsley:  Well, I didn’t actually get involved, because these other guys were really the training people--they were being trained--but I was learning from watching them, and if I had to, I could lend a hand.  That was no problem.  I offered, and did, on occasion, but not as much as they.  It was really their job.  And at House Rock we lost the engine at the top and went sideways into the hole.

Steiger:  It was a big hole then, too.

Billingsley:  It was a big hole, very low water, and it was a pour-over, and we just about flipped, and I was almost drowned in that one.  That’s when I realized that this is not something you want to take lightly.  This river’s powerful.  For a while, it was fun, but that woke me up when I had only two fingers hangin’ on.  I was floating in the water, and then slammed back in the boat.  Then the others came out and rescued us and pulled us in.  I was drowned rat, and it scared me.

Steiger:  Was that your first night’s camp there or something?

Billingsley:  Yeah, at House Rock.

Steiger:  I remember there used to be a big ol’ beach there, didn’t there?

Billingsley:  Oh, it was a giant beach, and practically all sand.  There were a few rocks here and there, but it was mostly sand.  Then I really got a little bit worried about going on down.  But I thought, "What the heck, it can’t be any worse than that, can it?"  (laughter)  But I was afraid of it, because I don’t know how to swim, and I did not want to get in the water, if I didn’t have to.  But I stuck with the boat.  They said, "If you want to go back and ride with the others...."  "Nah."  I was getting’ to know these guys a little bit, it was a lot of fun.  We were all about the same age, early twenties.

Steiger:  And nobody on that boat had been there before.

Billingsley:  One guy.  His name was Jim, and I can’t remember his last name.

Steiger:  Not Jim Ernst?

Billingsley:  I don’t know, it could be.  I never wrote down....  Mostly I wrote down for my notes just first names.  And we made it down.  There were a few more mishaps here and there.  And it was a lot of fun, I enjoyed it, because I got to see the <Grand Canyon>, parts I always wanted to see.  The geology was fascinating, and it just kept goin’ from there.  Dennis Massey was the head boatman at the time.

Steiger:  How’d he boat?  What was your impression of him?

Billingsley:  He was a big fellow, but very quiet.  But all he had to do--he told, he or people around, you know, the other guys, how to do things, who’s doin’ what and where--nobody argued with him.  He basically was control.  And that was fine, everybody was fine with that.  He seemed like a pretty nice guy, enjoyable to talk with, but he was very quiet.

Steiger:  (greets Fran, who has entered, recording paused)

Billingsley:  Second trip was in ’69, and that’s when Susan and a bunch of us from the hiking club hiked down to <Phantom> and got on there.  Steve Bledsoe was running that trip.  And I got to meet Patrick Connolly and, oh gosh....  You know, I’d have to look at the names to give you that information a little later, if I may.

Steiger:  It’d be interesting to see.  Did you make that document that you’re holding up, special, or....

Billingsley:  No, this is just a record of what trips, so I can tell you when I went....

Steiger:  River trips and hiking trips?

Billingsley:  Yeah, it’s just a list of hikes and river trips.

Steiger:  Well, that first trip in ’68, <Crystal> was bad and all that?

Billingsley:  <Crystal> had formed in ’67, yeah.

Steiger:  So what else sticks out in your mind about those first couple of trips, just the most memorable events of those?  I guess House Rock you already said.

Billingsley:  House Rock was the real eye-opener.

Steiger:  Yeah, I had that experience myself.

Billingsley:  That gave me a sense of fear for the rest of the trip--for the river.

Steiger:  Did you see anybody else, any other trips?

Billingsley:  I think we saw Georgie White, but I’m not sure.  No, it was pretty much just us, just the four boats.  And as I recall, they were just single....  You know, there were no outriggers, they were 33-footers, I remember that.  And all the duffel was tied up under canvas and chained down or roped down or whatever--had chains everywhere.  But some of the rapids they made us walk around, which I was happy to do.  I was a little apprehensive.  <Crystal> was not--it was a big rapid, but we didn’t walk around it.  We looked at it.  But it’d changed a lot since anybody been down there, even Dennis.  It was changing on a monthly basis.  It was developing a giant hole.  By the time I got to running the river regularly in ’70-’71, then it was really getting to be a giant, giant hole.  But basically it was just a rock garden back then.  You had to hit rocks, there was just no way through without hittin’ rocks.  That’s about all.  Most of the guys would end up rowing anyway, because the engine would just never keep running, because it was constantly....  It would go underwater and it’d just drown it out.  There was no way to lift it out or move it.  So that was the problem we had to figure out what to do:  what do you do about that?

Steiger:  So you’d start out motorin’, and then when the motor died, everybody would....

Billingsley:  Yeah.  There were two guys with the oars ready.  They’d yell out, "No engine!"  And then the other guys would start rowing, and we would just wing it through there.  But we hit every hole there was, because nobody knew.  You just headed down the rapid, not knowing where you’re going.  We didn’t know where to go.  Even the one guy who’d been down once or twice, trying to train these other two, he couldn’t remember where you went.  Some rapids, he remembered, "Well, you stay over to this side no matter what."  Mostly you just bungled through.

Steiger:  Art Thevenin got these old videotapes from his dad, and he asked me to copy ’em and make DVDs for him--Paul Thevenin.  And he’s got these movies:  There’s a whitewater movie that Henry Follett [phonetic] made, and a western movie Jack Curry made.  I guess most people were runnin’ 33’s, like you’re talkin’ about--a 33 with a couple of rowin’ stations, the motor hangin’ off the back, rubber floor in there.  I’ve just been lookin’ at these movies, and it just cracks me up, because you see the guys rowin’.  I mean, I don’t know how you’d move a boat like that anyway, but....

Billingsley:  You couldn’t.

Steiger:  But guys were just kind of flailing, just rowin’ upstream.  (laughs)  You know, an upstream ferry, but not really doin’ much.

Billingsley:  But it made you feel good that you were doing something.  (laughter)  The river was probably laughing at us the whole damned time, "We’re gonna show you guys where to go."

Steiger:  Well, you know, I mean, I’m just watchin’ these big ol’ boats, and if you’ve got an upstream ferry, you’ve got the water goin’ this way on your hull, so the boat’s not even ... not really in control or anything like that.  But these guys are rowin’ away.

Billingsley:  Well, like I said, it just made you feel good to be doing something, whether you did it right or not.  That’s what it was all about.  I didn’t get to row, but that’s okay.  I helped ’em bail.  Those things would fill up with tons of water, even if you had an inch.

Steiger:  Yeah, you said your second trip was with Bledsoe and Pat Connolly.

Billingsley:  Yeah, and there were a lot more people on that trip.  There were about fifty people on that one.

Steiger:  Did you get to know those guys very good on that?

Billingsley:  Steve was a pretty neat guy to know.  Yeah.  And Pat Connolly, Kenton Grua.  Oh, what other names come to mind?  Rick Petrello [phonetic].  Brick Wells.

Steiger:  They were the boatmen?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  What’s the fellow’s name that has been on the river so many years?  Rick?  Not Rick.  Boy!

Steiger:  Well, Bledsoe.

Billingsley:  I know Steve has been on the river a lot too, but there was somebody else.

Steiger:  A Hatch boatman?

Billingsley:  Yeah, he still runs the river.  Jim Hall was a boatman on that trip too.  Like I say, there were about seven or eight boats on that trip, because it was fifty-some people.  Maybe it was more.  I’d have to look at my notes, how many boats we had, but it was quite a few.  But it was a real flotilla of people.  It was fun.  I carried a five-gallon grease bucket full of food and supplies down the trail, by hand, and that about ripped my arms off by the time I got down to <Phantom>.  But I was gonna leave that at <Tuckup>, because that’s where I was going to do my master’s thesis work for geology.  So they agreed I could take it along.

Steiger:  Now, a grease bucket, is that like a paint bucket or somethin’?

Billingsley:  Yeah, only it was metal.

Steiger:  Metal, with a lid on it?

Billingsley:  Yeah, with a lid on it, so you could clamp it down.

Steiger:  And you hiked that down the trail?

Billingsley:  I carried it down the trail by hand, and it was each hand.  I tell ya’, I think my arms grew three or four inches by the time I got to the bottom.  But there was no other way to carry it, plus carry a pack.

Steiger:  Okay, so you did this trip in....

Billingsley:  ’69, on that one.

Steiger:  But the first one was ’68.

Billingsley:  That was just a river trip, and I paid for it.

Steiger:  But you just happened along....

Billingsley:  And got on, yeah.

Steiger:  Just because you happened to go to <Lee's Ferry>.

Billingsley:  Yeah, there was nobody else there, and they were getting’ ready to go and riggin’ up.  Well, they were already rigged up, they were gettin’ organized.  I met Ted Hatch and told him I’d like to really go, and he said, "Well, if you’ve got $315, I’ll have you on."  So I took off.  They had an extra lifejacket, so....

Steiger:  Did you see Ted at the end?  Did he come get you?

Billingsley:  I don’t recall.  We went all the way down to Diamond Bar.

Steiger:  And so then the next trip you did, you brought Susan along and some other....

Billingsley:  Yeah, the hiking club group.

Steiger:  And you guys hiked in at <Phantom>.

Billingsley:  We hiked in, and started from there, so it wasn’t a full trip.  But we went all the way down to Diamond Bar on that one too.

Steiger:  Is it Temple Bar?

Billingsley:  Temple Bar, you’re right.

Steiger:  What else sticks out about those--the clients?

Billingsley:  The people were great.  It was an adventure.  You didn’t complain about storms, getting wet, freezing or melting or whatever it was.  Nobody complained.  You were just excited.  Couldn’t wait to see what was around the next bend, and the rougher the better.  It was fun.  It was a real congenial bunch of people.  After a while you get to know each other, and it’s just a lot of fun.

Steiger:  I remember I talked to Bledsoe, and he would talk about when they’d make people walk around the rapids and stuff, and those boats, he laughed, about how full they’d get with water.  I couldn’t believe it, he said they’d run the boats and then having made the people walk around, then everybody would get back in the boat, and they’d say, "Okay, now bail this thing out."  (laughs)  I can’t believe they got away with that.

Billingsley:  That was a constant job, bailing those boats.  Ah, yeah.  It was a constant job, but that was basically my job--what else are you gonna do?  And it was something to do.  If you made it through the rapid, your adrenalin was going, and you had the energy to just flail that water out.

Steiger:  Might as well get warmed up.  But the water, was it cold?

Billingsley:  The water was warm anyway.  It was always muddy and warm.

Steiger:  Lake wasn’t that deep yet.

Billingsley:  There was lots of mud and sand.  There wasn’t much vegetation along the river--very little.

Steiger:  A lot more sand.

Billingsley:  Oh, sand everywhere.  It was constant.  Not big beaches.  Where there were big beaches, they were big.  Like Nevills was a beach for about a quarter mile there, just solid sand and that kind of thing.

	So anyway, I started running....  Let’s see, when did I start running?  That first trip I was really just a paid passenger.  I was just one of the passengers.  The second trip, same thing, I paid to go.

Steiger:  First trip, what was the date of the first one?

Billingsley:  September 1968.  The second one was--let’s see here, lookin’ at my notes--was also September in ’69.  By then I’d already....  I was still into hiking still pretty much by then.  River trips were just something if you got a chance to do it, fine--didn’t really happen.  But I got to know a lot of people through that, as well as hiking.  Then I got to....  Let’s see, where did I really get into....  The third river trip was in ’70.  Then the fourth one was with Ron Smith’s group.  I got to know him and some of the people there.  I got to run with him in 1971.  That’s number 4.  From there on, I ran with them for that season.  That’s where I really got started, just training.

Steiger:  How did you end up meetin’ him?  How did that transpire?

Billingsley:  You know, I don’t remember.  I think I went to his office with somebody I knew in <Kanab>--Art Gallinson [phonetic] maybe--he was a geologist, kind of, at that time, and still is.  He introduced me, and he wanted me to go down the river.

Steiger:  Wanted to hire you?

Billingsley:  Not hire us.  We got paid, but you were just a helper, basically.  So the first few trips you just went along.  But it didn’t cost anything either, so big deal.  But I began to learn, train, and stuff like that.  And then I got hired part-way through the season.

Steiger:  Who did you train with, do you remember?

Billingsley:  John Sore Whitey [phonetic] mainly.  Art Gallinson, Dean Waterman, O’Connor Dale was gettin’ into it pretty well by then.  Scott Dunn.  You know, I’d like to mention everybody that I used to run with.  I’m havin’ a hard time remembering them all.

Steiger:  It’s a pretty strong little cast of characters right there.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  George Gerhard [phonetic], who was Bagel, and Ote were getting into it.  Tim Means was pretty much into it, his wife Judy.  Scott and LeAnn.  There was quite a bunch.  Dan Merrill [phonetic] got into running it later on.  So we just had....  Theo McAllister.  A lot of these people were helpers, and then like me, gradually worked up into the boatman position.  By the end of the ’71 season, I was running the boat pretty well.  Ron hired me on as a boatman for the ’72 season--not just a helper.  But I was paid as a helper for quite a bit of that time.  So ’72 was a very busy year, and I was a boatman then.  Bob Dyne [phonetic] on a couple of trips, and Ellen, and Susan.  Got them interested in the river and they took it from there and got involved one way or another.  Bob’s still on the river.  That just kept going.  So ’73 was a big year--roughly ten trips a year, nine-day trips.  These were all motorized trips, so we didn’t do any rowing.  ’74, ’75, and ’76 is when I began to slow it down and opt out of it.

Steiger:  What was your take on bein’ a boatman and all that stuff?  How did that evolve, how did that transpire?  Like when was it that you thought you might want to do it?

Billingsley:  Well, it was a fun thing to do in the summer.  And it was too hot to hike.  We didn’t hike in the summer.  I did a few hikes in the summer, and I learned my lesson well, and that from danged near havin’ heat stroke and everything else.  But bein’ on the river, at least you were by water, you could get to water.  It was fun, and I enjoyed talking to people about the geology.  So every trip was basically a geology learning experience for passengers.  So I spent a lot of my time instructing people about the canyon.  A river trip’s fun, but it’s more fun if you understand what you’re looking at.  So John S_______ was good at the history part of it, he could tell stories about that.  I’d do the geology.  And Susan would come along, and she knew a lot about plants, having a degree in forestry and everything, so she was....  It was an instruction type of thing.  We really enjoyed telling people about the canyon, and trying to make them feel comfortable, because everybody was apprehensive, basically, not knowing what they’re getting into.  After a couple of days I began to relax and really enjoy the trip.  And the more we talked with them and spent the time with them, they really became a group.  And then they would tell us their experiences, whatever their backgrounds were.  And so it became a really fun trip every trip.  You had to get to know the people, but it was your job to break the ice.  And we did, right off the start--make everybody feel comfortable, and not to worry so much.  There were rules they had to go by, but they understood that.

Steiger:  Yeah, that seems like quite a unique and....  Just quite a chapter there, just in the history of the river, just that generation of Grand Canyon Expeditions.

Billingsley:  Yeah.

Steiger:  Amazingly strong crew.  Ron Smith is another guy that I....

Billingsley:  Oh, he’s absolutely amazing.  I have nothing but deep respect for Ron Smith because sure, he was in for a business making money, but he put all of his money right back into the company.  We’d have the best equipment on the river.  Everything was new, and the best, and constantly updating, making it better.  That’s what he did.  That made all of us work doubly harder because he thought more of the crew than he did anything else, or himself.  And as a result, we wanted to make it the best, and so we worked hard to make it so.  And that worked really well, that’s what made it....  We had the nice, shiny boats on the river and all that stuff.  And we had the training wheels, which made me feel a lot safer.

Steiger:  So you did like three Hatch trips without ’em, huh?

Billingsley:  Two Hatch trips.

Steiger:  And then everybody started doin’ it.

Billingsley:  Right, everybody went to it, because it started becoming....  Well, why not?  I mean, it made it safe.  You get sideways in those 33-footers with no side tubes, man, I mean you’re over.

Steiger:  Well, had Shorty Burton gone over when you....

Billingsley:  He died in ’67.

Steiger:  So that had already happened.

Billingsley:  Yeah.

	But it was a fun experience, and a great experience outdoors, but it was more fun if you could educate the people what they were seeing, and they really wanted to know.  And then we let them help with whatever it was we did:  cooking, cleaning, setting up camp.  Some of them absolutely insisted.  And we let ’em, and they were happy.  And as long as they were happy, we were happy.  So that really helped us quite a bit, and most of the trips were that way.  I enjoyed havin’ the kids.  There were kids startin’ to go down the river then--you know, families.  The kids were fun.  Made you feel like a kid again, just to experience their discoveries.  Nothing like water and mud and sand to get a kid going.  So those were important things.  And the older people--we had people in their eighties come down.  They were very scared, but they felt they didn’t have anything else to lose, and they’d always dreamed of doin’ it.  They were very interesting.

Steiger:  Yeah, I find that.  Seems when you get people who area really old, but still doin’ these kinds of things, those are usually really interesting people.

Steiger:  And they were just enjoying life on a daily basis, just glad to be there, no matter how rough it got or anything else.  And everybody always tried to help them.  And they had great stories to tell, they were fun people.  Had a blind lady who was eighty-two, from England, come on a trip.  She was just great!  Couldn’t see, but she could smell and hear, and do very well with that.

Steiger:  That must have been interesting, to show up.  So you were a guide, you were a boatman, and this lady comes up and you find out she’s blind, and she’s one of your customers.  That must have been a little nerve wracking.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  Well, we knew about it.  We’d get the list of passengers, and Ron and Sheila would always tell us some of the ... what do you call it?

Steiger:  Special needs or whatever?

Billingsley:  Special needs, yeah, and that kind of thing.  Everybody was generally nervous and apprehensive at the beginning, and I’d try to joke with them, get them to laugh a little bit, and loosen ’em up, and enjoy it, starting off.  You had to do that.  It was an effort, but that’s what you did.

Steiger:  Well, now, for you, you never were doing this ever with the idea that this going to be anything but just a fun summer job.  I get the sense from talking to Susan that you were sort of always on the way to working for the USGS, is that right?

Billingsley:  Well, geology was my thing.

Steiger:  And that was gonna be it.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  It was apparent that, yeah, Ron paid us, and we didn’t spend much money, because you saved all your money for the summer, so that would get you through the winter.  But basically that was a seasonal job.  Well, it was fun, and it was fine for the time, because I didn’t have any other plans.  But in the long run, yeah, you’d have to get serious.  When Susan and I ran as a team, when [unclear] let Susan have her own boat, we ran as a team, and that was very much fun.  We had a great time, the people got to know us, and really enjoyed knowing us, and they felt comfortable.  It was nice to have women along as part of the crew, no matter what, because there were women passengers, and they could deal with those kind of things, and made them feel more comfortable, just to have someone tell them what to do and stuff.  So I digress from what you said now.

Steiger:  I can’t even remember what I said, so it can’t have been too important.

Steiger:  Yeah.  But Ron and Sheila were absolutely the best people to work with at the time.  Well, finally when Susan became pregnant about ’77, she did a few more trips, and we ended the season, and then it was obvious she’d have to get off the river.  Well, I decided I’m goin’ too; there’s no way I can do this river trip, this stuff, without her.  And I didn’t want to be with anyone else down there, running, no matter what.  And that’s when I decided, "Okay, I’m gonna get serious here.  I’ve gotta start looking for--I’ve got a family going--we’ve got to start getting serious about where we’re gonna live.  You can’t just live out of a pickup and an ammo can and a sleeping bag.  Those days were becoming towards the end.

Steiger:  I guess what I had said was, I was asking had you had it in your mind....  Because you’re working now for the USGS.

Billingsley:  I work for USGS now.

Steiger:  And that was what you went to right after....

Billingsley:  No, I worked for the Museum of Northern Arizona as a geologist there.  And that was in the wintertime.  So while I’d run the river in the summer, I’d work at the museum in the winter, and I was mapping Canyonlands and Capitol Reef National Parks and <Grand Canyon>.

Steiger:  And that was for the museum?

Billingsley:  Museum, yeah, as a consultant.

Steiger:  And who was using those maps?

Billingsley:  Associations, like the Grand Canyon Association, the Association of Canyonlands and Capitol Reef.  They were the ones that had the money to fund, to get these maps done, and that’s what kept us going as a consultant.

Steiger:  When you’re actually doin’ the maps, how in the heck did that work, in that day and age, with that technology?

Billingsley:  Well, I had an office at the museum, and I drafted everything by hand.

Steiger:  Did you do it from aerial photos, or how would you....

Billingsley:  Oh yeah.  Well, we hiked.  That was one of the reasons we did a lot of the hikes.

Steiger:  To make sure.

Billingsley:  You had to field check.  You can’t make a geologic map without field checkin’.  You just have to go see it.  Otherwise, you’re gonna have errors.  Now, John Maxson made the first Grand Canyon geological maps, for instance, and they were very good.  But John was not able to get everywhere, but he did use aerial photography, and he did a remarkably good job in getting those maps done that he did, in the eastern part of the <Grand Canyon> in the early days in the sixties.  But when I went in there, using his maps, I found a lot of material that was missing or not right--minor things, basically.  And so we decided to improve his maps a little bit, because he really did the best job, but we just wanted to improve.  So Peter Antune [phonetic] and I got involved with that, and we got funding through the Grand Canyon Association to do that job.  So that eastern Grand Canyon map, we put a bigger map together.  That’s the big dragon map everybody’s seen.  So that was our first big map.

Steiger:  That’s the multicolored one?

Billingsley:  Right.  It’s a great big wall decoration.

Steiger:  That’s the one you guys did.

Billingsley:  Right, that’s what we did.  That was strictly, I drafted it by hand, and we sent it off to a map company in <Washington DC>, who did the professional drafting to make it printable, and what you see today.  And so that map has been around for a long time, and is still used.  It’s still good.

Steiger:  You see it on river trips, people carry ’em in tubes and roll ’em out, just to show everybody what’s goin’ on, where we are.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  So that was good.  That was also part of the learning experience, my continuous learning experience in geology.  Also Canyonlands was a learning experience up there--Capitol Reef--beautiful places.  The more geology I saw, the more I got into it, and realized, "This is what it’s gonna be."  River was fun, but it was only an interim summer, kind of like a seasonal job with the Park Service, for instance, in some parks that you like to see.  Well, this was a seasonal job with the river, and that’s it.  And I had an option to go out.  Some of the people I know have been down there forever and didn’t have the option to go on to something else, or didn’t want to, didn’t matter.  It was their decision one way or the other.  But I decided when the family was started, that was it, time to move on.

Steiger:  Get serious about all those other things.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  So I worked for the museum through all the seventies, and got in with the U.S. Geological Survey finally in 1980, and I’ve been with the survey ever since.

Steiger:  Pretty good drain.  When you were working with Edwin McKee--were you saying you did maps with him as well?  Or you were helping him?  Or that was an inventory kind of deal?

Billingsley:  No, he was doing strategraphic studies.  He’s written a lot about what we know today about each formation in the <Grand Canyon>.  At the time, he was doing major work on the Supai Formation, it was called then.  And now it’s got several names because of his work.  I helped him measure sections.  He showed me how to do it, what to record and why, and how you correlate from one area of the canyon to another.  And I began to realize how you can fit the whole picture not only in a two-dimensional sense, but the third dimension, laterally through time, how rocks change from one end of the <Grand Canyon> to the other--and they really do.  As you know just from looking in the <Grand Canyon>, eastern <Grand Canyon> is much more colorful than the western <Grand Canyon>.  There’s a big difference in rocks.  But now I know why.

Steiger:  Why is that?

Billingsley:  Well, because of faces.  If you have a sea, it doesn’t mean it’s always here all the time.  Or if you have a desert sand dune, it does not mean it covers the entire <Grand Canyon> all the time at the same time.  If you go down to Rocky Point today, you have a sea, you have beaches, you have sand dunes, and you also have mountains and alluvial flood plains and rivers.  So all of these are happening at the same time, at different times, in a smaller area like that, like the <Grand Canyon>, but they migrate back and forth through time, so you have different rocks.

Steiger:  How you say eastern <Grand Canyon> is much more--the rocks are so much more distinct, so much more well preserved or something.

Billingsley:  You mean they’re not the drab gray of the western <Grand Canyon>?

Steiger:  Well, just western <Grand Canyon>, it’s so jumbled up.  I don’t know if it’s because there’s more faulting down there, or because the big lava dam lake preserved all that stuff upstream better, or what the heck, or I don’t know.  Now we’re really digressing.

Billingsley:  I know.  I don’t know how to answer your question there--it’s just different.

Steiger:  Or western was just apt to be more coastline over that way?

Billingsley:  Western was more in the ocean regime than the eastern.  The eastern was on the deltaic part, or island area, mountains, small island area.  But it did get covered by ocean several times.  But in the west, the sea seemed to always be in the western section, or north in <Utah>.  <California>-<Nevada> was all the seaways.  And now, those seas would invade the Grand Canyon platform, kind of like the continental shelf, back and forth.  Either the sea level rose up and down, or the land rose up and down.  That would create the movement back and forth.  And when it happened, it’d alternate between limestone with the sea deposits;, mud, silt stones of the river deposits; sand of either sand dunes or coastal dunes or river deposits.  All these things migrated back and forth.

Steiger:  And the sea level rising would be climate change?

Billingsley:  Not necessarily.

Steiger:  Or tectonic shifts?

Billingsley:  It’s tectonic and climate too, but over a good considerable length of time.  You’re talking about something that would take a course....

Steiger:  ... to get into, yeah.  Oh well, I gotta stay at kindergarten for me.  That’s all I’ve ever been able to assimilate.

Billingsley:  Well, I’m in a constant learning mode.  In fact, what I thought I knew twenty, thirty years ago--and I thought I knew it all then--not even close.

Steiger:  Well, and it’s changing too, isn’t it?

Billingsley:  It’s not changing--we’re learning.

Steiger:  More, yeah.

Billingsley:  Yeah, I’ve been mapping <Grand Canyon>, but it’s not just me.  It’s just the effort of a lot of people, a lot of geologists before my time.

Steiger:  So what you’re saying, there weren’t really good maps until the 1960s.

Billingsley:  Well, no, there were 15-minute quadrangles, and they don’t make those anymore.

Steiger:  What is that?  You mentioned that earlier, that you were hiking with those.

Billingsley:  Those are topographic maps.  And a topogram shows the landscape, contours.  The 15-minute was the only ones available at that time for use for hiking.  And so today’s maps, you have 7½-minute quadrangles, okay?  And it takes four 7½ minutes to make one 15, but a 7½-minute quad is pretty big.  But a 15 was smaller, so everything was much more....

Steiger:  Less detailed.

Billingsley:  Less detailed, that’s what I want to say.  But you could still tell where you were, so we were never really lost.  But you couldn’t tell for sure where you could go, just by looking at the contours--they were very vague.

Steiger:  Like if you were Dr. Butchart lookin’ for breaks in the Redwall, the maps might not be....

Billingsley:  No.  But when I mapped all the faults, I knew those were avenues for breaks in the rock for a possible climb.  So Butchart would go for those fault line areas.  That’s how he found a lot of his routes through the Redwall and on down and all around the canyon.  So we named one of those faults after him in the <Fossil Canyon> area--the Butchart Fault, because he’s on the way down that fault to the river.  Turns out the Indians found it long before him, but....  (laughs)

Steiger:  You knew that anyway.

Billingsley:  We knew that.  I mean, those guys were everywhere.  And prospectors had found it too, so they’ve been everywhere.

Steiger:  Got any good river stories?  And this is for your progeny or whatever--memorable adventures that occurred, that stick out.

Billingsley:  There’s a lot of ’em.  I don’t recall anything right offhand.

Steiger:  Did you write all those things down?

Billingsley:  I’ve written them all down, but there are instances every day, like rocks falling in the river around the boats and stuff, and flash floods and waterfalls, this kind of thing.  Storms is what makes the canyon exciting to me.  The canyon is unique and beautiful and all that, and the animals and smells.  But it’s the storms that make it live.  And I love those things, so the stormier the better.

Steiger:  Did you see the You-Tube clip of the latest <Deer Creek> flood?

Billingsley:  No, I did not.

Steiger:  You know what You-Tube is?

Billingsley:  I’ve heard of it, I don’t know anything about it.

Steiger:  It’s this Internet site and people can just post videos on it.  This summer, it was like late August, there was just this unbelievable <Deer Creek> flood--biggest one that’s been in there in a long time.  There was a little tree that hung out over....  You know, there’s that little waterfall up above there, when you hike up from the river and you get to the [place] people call "the patio," and there’s that one little waterfall that was always so much fun to go stand under.  There was a tree right there.  And this flood blew that whole thing outta there, and pretty much changed the waterfall, changed that whole area.  And about a week after that happened, this river trip got off, there were these guys on a private trip who happened to be there, that camped across at the camp across, and this guy got a video of this flood comin’ outta there.  You could go to--it’s Y-O-U, T-U-B-E, dot com and do a search for "Deer Creek Flash Flood," and see this thing--modern technology.  But I mean, it is....  I’m sure you’ve got high-speed Internet over there at the USGS.

Billingsley:  Yeah.

Steiger:  You ought to do yourself a favor and check this thing out.

Billingsley:  Sounds like it’d be fun, yeah.

Steiger:  It is the most spectacular....  It’s probably the most spectacular flood that I’ve ever seen.  I’ve seen a couple of big ones, but this thing was just obviously a monster.

Billingsley:  When did it happen--last year?

Steiger:  This?  Last August, late August.  And then I did a trip in September and went up there and saw it, and you could see where....  Boy, it was just a torrent!  Right up there in Upper <Deer Creek>.  I don’t think the flood came from all that far.  I think there was just this horrendous....

Billingsley:  Dumpage right out there.

Steiger:  Yeah, right there in the head of the canyon.  And I mean, it ran so much water--phenomenal.

Billingsley:  Yeah, we saw one of those at <Thunder River>, and it was more than twenty feet deep, goin’ through that canyon there.

Steiger:  Was that on the river?

Billingsley:  We’d just got there after, yeah, and there was mud and sand way up there.  That’s why I know it was twenty feet.  The trees and cactus and everything, just....

Steiger:  Susan was talked about a lot, because her boatin’ with you back then--was it ’75-’76?

Billingsley:  ’75, yeah.  ’74, ’75, ’76.

Steiger:  That was kind of seen as being pretty unique, and she has been seen as bein’ one of the pioneers, one of the women pioneers, as far as people who actually got to work down there.  And I wonder what your sense of all that was.  I mean, pretty much back then, I don’t remember....  There was Georgie, as far as women.

Billingsley:  Georgie was the only one running an engine at the time.

Steiger:  Yeah.  And then there were a bunch of gals workin’ for AZRA.

Billingsley:  Right.

Steiger:  But right then, there was Louise Teal [phonetic]....

Billingsley:  Louise Teal, and she wrote a book about the women that were rowing then, and stuff.  But I think Susan was the only one drivin’ the engine.  Now, that doesn’t mean that others, like Ote....  She could do it.  And the wives of some boatmen like Scott and Leann, and Tim Means’ Judy--they could run it, but they didn’t want to do the rapids, a lot of ’em.  But Susan learned it and wanted to do it.  And so that’s how she got to be one of the boatmen for Ron, because she could do the rapids, and wasn’t intimidated by ’em so much, that she could do it.

Steiger:  She said she thought that the reason Ron gave her a job was because you wanted her to do it.

Billingsley:  Sure, I wanted her to do it, yes.  But no, it was the fact that she could.  She was doing just as well as anybody on the river, period.  And why not?  And she wanted to.  Because she wanted to, Ron said okay, after an okay from all the other people that’d been down the river with her.  They all said, "Yeah, she can run the river like anybody.  No problem."  So that’s why he decided she’s good to go.  And that was fine with us!

Steiger:  Yeah.  It’s interesting, Ellen Tibbetts was in your guys’ group.  I guess she’s the first woman who ever got to row a dory down there.  I got to do a few trips with her, and man, she is so good.

Steiger:  She is.  I took her on her first motor trip, because that’s when we got started, and she got hooked on the river then.  But she was more into the rowing thing, because she saw the dories, and thought that would be really cool, and got to know people there.

Steiger:  On the first trip that you took her.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  And so Ellen’s a likeable person anyway.  Somehow she got involved with them, and went from there, and that was just fine.  I was glad to see her get involved with....  She likes the canyon.  She hiked everywhere with us.

Steiger:  Yeah, really good boatman.

Billingsley:  And she was a very, surprisingly strong, hiker, for as tiny a person as she was.

Steiger:  Strong boatman, too.

Billingsley:  Strong boatman.

Steiger:  And very strong-willed, but very meticulous.  She would always go and scout very carefully, on her own, not all that interested in what anybody else had to say.  She’d figure it out for herself.

Billingsley:  Exactly.  Ellen was a remarkable boat person.  There were quite a few women on the river then, but not engines, except occasionally.  But Susan was more into it.  I’m sure there were other women, that I don’t even know, with other companies, that actually did a lot of running, but they just didn’t want to do it for a job, because....

Steiger:  I think now it’s pretty commonplace, but there was a resistance early on.

Billingsley:  There was, in some companies.  But Ron was okay with it, he didn’t care.  He said, "If you can do the job, do it."

Steiger:  Pretty amazing.  I know there’s this river history chat group that Pat Connolly’s on, and he just sent a thing in--Brad Dimock got me signed up for it--and he sent a thing a couple of days ago, about Dean Waterman.  I guess he just crossed the mouth of the Rogue River.  I guess Pat’s been talkin’ to him, and he’s been on this big aluminum boat that he built, sailin’ around the world.  He’s been on that boat for seven years out there.

Billingsley:  That was his dream, to sail around the world.

Steiger:  Pat was saying he’s just now....  He’s been talkin’ to him, and Dean’s thinkin’ he hates to give it up, but he can see where he’s not gonna be able to stay on the thing forever.  But it’s funny, just thinkin’ back to how good the GCE boats....  Because I remember....  Now, I think a lot of....  Most companies have incorporated facets of that design into their rigs.

Billingsley:  Yes.

Steiger:  It’s pretty much the basis for almost....  I can think of a couple of exceptions, but practically all the motorboats that are down there are usin’ some kind of variation on that.

Billingsley:  Arizona River Runners were pretty much following us.  Fred Burke was pretty good at also inventing ways of....

Steiger:  Figuring stuff out.

Billingsley:  Everybody on the river did that.  No matter what company you worked for, you found out ways to improve your own systems:  Sanderson had pretty heavy boats, but they figured out how to make it better.  Western....

Steiger:  Everybody that I knew, and in my mind I always had it that Dean Waterman had designed those frames and welded ’em up and stuff.

Billingsley:  He did.

Steiger:  I was tryin’ to get Ron to do one of these--he won’t do it.

Billingsley:  He won’t.

Steiger:  Maybe he will.  He won’t say he won’t, but he’s just not ready to.

Billingsley:  He really should, because Ron is one of the pioneers.

Steiger:  I was trying to get him to talk to me, and he wouldn’t do it, but he said I could come up and visit with him and he wouldn’t put it on tape.  But I went up there to his house in <Kanab>, and after a long hike where we’d walked around, he took me home and showed me this, where he had this fiberglass frame that was the prototype for the motor frame.  And he basically showed me that, and said he had built that.  And he said the way that he met Dean was Dean was delivering the resin, was drivin’ a truck deliverin’ the resin to Ron.  Ron got to talkin’ to him, and they struck up a friendship.  He was making this frame out of fiberglass, but he wanted to weld ’em out of aluminum.  And he said that he sent Dean to school to learn to weld, and it was sort of so they could build these frames.  But he was gonna do it with fiberglass first, and fine tune it until he got the kinks all out, because it would be too expensive to mess around with aluminum, until you had just what you wanted--which was really a revelation to me.  Did that ring a bell with you?  Did you know anything about that?

Billingsley:  Vaguely.  I knew Dean had an awful lot to do with it.

Steiger:  Yeah.  But I mean it was more that--the upshot that I get is that it was more Ron than anybody really gives him credit for.

Billingsley:  Right.  Ron was always lookin’ for ways to improve something.  And Dean was always willing to help.  Dan Merrill was always willing to help--Joe Collander [phonetic], those guys.

Steiger:  Obviously those guys got [soaked?].

Billingsley:  Those guys, when you’d get them together, there was nothing they couldn’t do, really, because they’d figure out something.

Steiger:  And they got so good at welding.

Billingsley:  They were very good at welding.  Scott Dunn got into welding and took over Dean’s business, I guess.  I guess he’s still in <Kanab>.  And then every trip we would figure out some way of improving, or saying, "We’ve got to fix this thing, or do something different," because it was a hazard to the people.  And the main concern was safety for the people.  If people got hurt on a boat--which was rare, but they did once in a while--then we’d figure out "how can we prevent that?"  And that’s where the little donut thing came in the clamshell area there--you know, that little tube--padding, and all this stuff.  But it was an effort of everybody, but Ron was willing to change it, if it worked.  And he would put the money into it to do it.  That was really nice, because he would listen to us.

Steiger:  Yeah, really impressive.

Billingsley:  And it made a big difference, because we felt comfortable and safe on the river that way.

Steiger:  Yeah, very safe, those boats.

Billingsley:  And I did not want to get in that river for anything.  Forget it!  I wouldn’t even hardly get on the boat without a lifejacket.  And yet we did stupid things in hiking.  We floated across the river on air mattresses.  My God! I can’t believe the stuff we did! and still survived to talk about it! total ignorance about the danger.  We were just lucky.  Our first <San Juan River> trip was on an air mattress.

Steiger:  The whole trip?

Billingsley:  Yeah, all of us.  We all decided to go down the <San Juan River> instead of hike it.

Steiger:  So you just took your backpacks and an air mattress?

Billingsley:  Well, no, we decided, "Okay, how are we gonna take our packs down there?  We can’t wear ’em on an air mattress.  First of all, we knew it was pretty tipsy.  So we thought, "Well, let’s get inner tubes."  So we got some inner tubes from gas stations here in town, and everybody had an inner tube, and we tied our packs in that, tied a rope onto that, and then onto our arm or leg, and down the river we went!

Steiger:  So you’re on your air mattress, draggin’ your pack along on an inner tube.

Billingsley:  Well, it was draggin’ us along.

Steiger:  Because they would go faster?

Billingsley:  Yeah!

Steiger:  Lower in the water.

Billingsley:  We had no idea what we were doing, but we did know the river went from <Bluff> to <Mexican Hat>, and how far can that be?  We didn’t have any maps, so we figured we could do it in a day.  It turned out we couldn’t.  We had gear with us just in case.  We’d go down, maybe, as far as we thought....  We didn’t think there were any rapids.  We just about bought it all in Eight-Foot Rapid.  Come around the corner, and there it is.  What are you gonna do?  You know, you gotta go through.  Everybody was all flipped around and hangin’ onto whatever they could hang onto that was floatable.  And we basically helped each other out, but we had a lot to talk about after that.  We thought, "Well, if there’s any more of these....  Why don’t we pay a little more attention."

Steiger:  Maybe even get a boat!  (laughter)

Billingsley:  So that was our first river trip on the San Juan, was on air mattresses.  A couple of ’em went flat, but we had patch gear and stuff, so we fixed ’em up.  You know how it is, a bunch of kids just goofin’ around, basically.

Steiger:  Pretty good time, it sounds like, just in terms of....  Kind of a golden age to be goin’ to school up here, and runnin’ around in that country.  Seems like it must have been a lot bigger then, than it is now--or just a lot less people.

Billingsley:  There was hardly anybody around.  And there were no rules or regulations, basically.  On the river, of course, we had to develop these rules and regulations--not just from our company, Ron Smith’s company, but all the other companies that were on the river.  You got to know everybody, basically, at one time or another.  And it became obvious, if we’re gonna live and work down there, we need to take care of the river.  You can’t dump crap on the beaches, you can’t throw cans and stuff in the river.  You can’t do this, that, and the other, because it was becoming obvious there was a health hazard as well as an unpleasant....  Some of the camps became uncampable.  Fire pits--huge--like across from <Deer Creek>.  That thing was impossible after a while.  Somebody got the idea, "Well, let’s clean it up."  And pretty soon the clean up idea came along, and also, "let’s don’t make a mess anymore."  Fires finally gradually died out.  We used to have fires all the time, [bookin’ on it (?)].  And that was actually a pretty good change, because I got so tired of cooking steaks over 110 degrees on a fire--that kind of thing.  Stoves were a much, much more better way to go.

Steiger:  Yeah.  We whined about it, but it took all of five minutes....

Billingsley:  It was a change.

Steiger:  Yeah, about the first five minutes it was like, "Well, this isn’t so bad."

Billingsley:  "Hey, this is okay!"  (laughter)  But a lot of things like that changed, because we had to.  Otherwise we were destroying our own house, basically.  We all felt we lived down there, and you don’t throw cigarette butts on your carpet--that kind of thing.  And so it got to be a major issue of how do we improve and maintain the canyon, to keep it as pristine as we can?  And it was obvious the population of people going down was going to grow, and it did.  And that was the real eye-opener.  It was fine for when it was only a few hundred people a year goin’ down or somethin’, but (whew!)....

Steiger:  Yeah, it seems like it’s never really stopped growin’.  I don’t imagine we’re ever gonna see it....  I mean, just in terms of ever since I’ve been there, it’s been increasing, the use.

Billingsley:  Is it?

Steiger:  Oh yeah.  They just, this new plan, they just came up with a new management plan last year or whatever, and basically added 30 percent more use.

Billingsley:  No kidding!  Where are they gonna camp?!

Steiger:  The theory is, they’re spreadin’ everybody out throughout the course of the year.  The big thing was that they had to address the private demand, and the waiting list, how long it took.  So they basically added....  I don’t know if they doubled the private use.  I guess that was about what they did, was doubled the private allocation.  But they say they’re gonna make it work because they’re gonna make everybody go all year long.  We’ll see how that works for the canyon, as far as--I mean, there’s a lot of people who think that it was good to have it slack off in the winter, just to give it a chance to rest.

Billingsley:  It’s cold down there, because of the low sun angle.  That can’t be much fun, freezing your butt, going down the river.

Steiger:  The flaw in the whole thing, in my mind, is that you can only take twenty-four days.  I feel like, okay, if I was going privately, I’d be fine with going in the dead of winter, but I’d want to take thirty or forty days, just so you can pull up when it’s snowin’ on your or whatever, so you don’t have to go.  But if it’s getting’ light at 7:30, 8:00 a.m., then getting’ dark at 5:00 p.m., it doesn’t leave you much time.

Billingsley:  Yeah, well, it’s even less down there.  Sometimes many places you don’t even see the sun.

Steiger:  But I’m talkin’ too much here.  What am I forgettin’ to ask you?  What are we forgettin’ to add to this?

Billingsley:  I don’t know.  Like I said, most of my adventures were hiking--and still is.

Steiger:  Do you have a most memorable hike that you tell people about?

Billingsley:  We’ve got lots of ’em, several of them.  Every hike was an adventure, basically.  Once you got off into the back country, you were on your own.  And it seemed like every time we got to the river, Georgie White would be goin’ by.  (laughter)

Steiger:  Whoopin’ it up?

Billingsley:  And she would look in awe, "What in the world are they doin’ here?!" you know.  And we’d be in some wild canyon somewhere.  And we would wonder, "How can she be on the river all the time?!"  But it was typically around Easter, we would always be hiking in the canyon and always see her.

Steiger:  Spring break.

Billingsley:  Yeah, spring break, that was what it was.

Steiger:  And she’d be goin’ too.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  Boy.

Steiger:  Did you ever get to visit with her?

Billingsley:  A couple of times.  I don’t think she was very impressed with me, because I didn’t....  The first thing, I jumped on her boat to go see her with my hiking boots.  She yelled, "Get off this boat with them boots!"  And I think she thought they were cleats or something.  It was a misunderstanding.  I didn’t know what the hell she was talking about.  But finally she came over and said, "Okay, you’re okay.  I apologize.  I thought you had some nails or something.  Looked like it was rough.  I don’t want to punch holes in this boat."  (chuckles)  No, she was fine, we got along.  We talked, and she was fun to talk to.  She always wore the tiger-skin swimsuit.  And Easter, she always had this hat full of flowers.

Steiger:  Her hard hat?

Billingsley:  Some hat, or a hard hat or something--it was always just flowers on top of her head.  She was pretty wild.

Steiger:  Yeah, pretty unique.  Well, I’m trying to think....  I feel like we’re kind of windin’ down here, and I don’t want to impose on your whole morning.

Billingsley:  No, that’s okay.  If we’re gonna do this, let’s do it.

Steiger:  Well, if we are gonna do it, what do we need to talk about here?--just in the historical sense, or even in the personal sense.  I wonder what needs to be touched on.

Billingsley:  Well, I would recommend if people are going to do the river, that’s fine, but they ought to have a backup plan.  Don’t be trapped on the river.  It’s a fun place, but sooner or later you need to get off.  That’s my recommendation, because you’re confined to that lifestyle, and it can get boring after a while.  I actually got a little bored running the river, to the point I was almost careless.

Steiger:  Really?

Billingsley:  Yeah!  You know, I get to <Lava Falls> and it didn’t excite me as much as it used to, and I just plowed through there, knowing full well you’ve got to be careful.  The last time I ran it, I remember I had this rubber football with me, and I saw O.C. standin’ up on a rock, and I threw it up at him, as I was goin’ into the tongue.  And I didn’t really control the boat at all.  So that was kind of....  And I realized, "What a stupid thing!  You don’t mess around."  And then I began to realize, "Maybe it’s time to give this up, before I hurt somebody."  And I did not want to do that.  So another trip or two, and I noticed that I was not paying attention that well, in some of the rapids.  I didn’t have any accidents or anything, but I could see the point in time where you would just not care, and I didn’t want to do that.  I could not stand the thought of having somebody get hurt because of my inattention or whatever.  So that was another reason to give it up.

Steiger:  When’s the last trip you did?

Billingsley:  In ’96.  That was just a rowing trip with my daughter.  She became a boatman too--Moryka [phonetic].  So she was rowing with Canyon X, I think it was, or somebody--I can’t remember who it was.  But anyway, I went down with her, from just <Lee's Ferry> to <Phantom Ranch>.

Steiger:  Is she still doin’ it?

Billingsley:  No.  She worked for the park service as a river ranger on the Green and <Yampa> in <Dinosaur>.  And she’ll still do the river, but not like she used to.  She gave it up, too, for the same reason:  she just got bored with it, and it wasn’t as much fun as it used to be, and so it was time to move on.  But you’ve got to have something to move on to, so I recommend that people enjoy the river for a few years.  It’s like park service--seasonal is fine, then you can get on with your life.

Steiger:  Yeah, you gotta be careful.  Do you think you’ll go again?

Billingsley:  I don’t really care to go again, no.  It’s different.  It’s not like it used to be.  The adventure days were when it was fun and exciting and new to me, was the best times.  When you go down again, after all that, it’s not the same, and it’s not the same feelings.  I enjoy the canyon--don’t get me wrong--just the adventure’s not there.  But on a hike in a new canyon, the old feeling comes back.  It’s the thrill of discovery that keeps you going. 

Steiger:  Well, there’s a lot down there to see.  I guess it’s pretty much mostly been covered by now.

Billingsley:  I don’t know.  I’ve spent thirty-six years in the <Grand Canyon>, hiking around and what not.  And I have not seen it all.  I’m just finishing up the last maps of <Marble Canyon>, and then I’ll have the whole thing mapped.

Steiger:  All the way from the lake, up?

Billingsley:  From the lake all the way up to <Lee's Ferry>.  Well, actually, Glen Canyon Dam too.

Steiger:  Pretty unique, to actually physically draw all the lines.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  I can do the geology and put the data down, but it takes a lot of people’s effort to help get these maps published, and what they should be.  I just start them, and then everybody else works on them.  There’s a lot of people, and I put their names on the maps.  I can’t even [unclear] all the names--a good number of people that really make the effort to make these maps what they are.  And that’s going to be my small contribution to the geological sciences, basically.

Steiger:  Having mapped the <Grand Canyon>.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  But it’s based on a lot of other geologists’ work--during and before my time.  I mean, there’s a lot of really neat geologists working in the <Grand Canyon>--not a lot, but some--and even less nowadays than used to be, I think, because students are beginning to realize, "Well, we see all these publications about the <Grand Canyon> geology."  When they get all these maps out, they’re going to say, "Well, there’s nothing left to do."  That couldn’t be [further] from the truth.  There is a lot to be done in the <Grand Canyon> geology.  There are rocks we don’t know anything about, and all we can do right now is lump them into various formations or units.  Nobody’s looked at ’em, nobody’s studied ’em.  I mean, there’s a lot of work to be done in geology.

Steiger:  Give me an example.

Billingsley:  Well, the upper part of the Moav in western <Grand Canyon> and central <Grand Canyon>.  There’s about 400 feet of limestone and dolomites we don’t know what to do with it.  It’s lumped into the Moav limestone right now, or unclassified dolomites.

Steiger:  Those two little brown cliffs that go along in there?

Billingsley:  No, they’re bigger than that.  But we don’t know what it is for sure.  I mean, what time frame does it fit into?  What fossils are in there?  Even McKee’s work on the Supai Formation, dividing it into all these different formations, nobody’s done anything with it since, and there’s a lot of work to be done with that.  The Hermit shale is not a shale:  it’s a silt-stone, sandstone unit.  Nobody’s messed with that since 1929.  And it’s very thick and it changes faces.  In eastern <Grand Canyon> it’s only 50 feet thick.  In western <Grand Canyon> and <Marble Canyon>, it’s over 700.  It’s got limestones in it, it’s got other things.  Nobody’s looked at it.  It needs to be studied.  Those are just examples.

The Kaibab Formation:  everybody walks on it, stands on it, looks over in the canyon, but they ignore what it is.  There’s more to the Kaibab Formation.  It’s 600 feet thick in western <Grand Canyon>--with a whole lot of rock units in there with fossils that nobody has bothered to study yet.  What do they mean?  It’s a big story.  So that’s just examples.

When I found and named the Surprise Canyon Formation, that was just one of those examples.  I saw this unique rock, had lots of fossils in it, and it’s very....  It doesn’t even go through all the <Grand Canyon>, it’s only here and there.  But it’s now one of the <Grand Canyon> formations, the Surprise Canyon Formation.

Steiger:  Now is that up there....  I’m sorry to say that I don’t even....

Billingsley:  You probably don’t even know [unclear, laughing].

Steiger:  I’m sorry, I don’t know the particulars of it.  Are you talking about <Surprise Valley> up in there, that slump kind of deal?

Billingsley:  Nope.  It has nothing to do with <Surprise Valley>.  When you name a rock formation, it has to be named from a geographic location of study.  Well, I first discovered it in western <Grand Canyon>, in the Bat [phonetic] Tower areas.  And it’s a river system, channel deposit, and it goes all the way, clear to <Marble Canyon>.  And I’ve mapped seven different rivers at that time, filled with these rocks--the most [fostative?] rocks you ever saw in the <Grand Canyon>.  It’s got everything from petrified trees, coal beds even, starfish, lots of fossils that have never been found before in <Grand Canyon>.  So that makes it a unique formation.  But, when I first studied it, it was over there where I first saw it, at the Bat Tower areas, near the Grand Wash Cliffs.

Steiger:  And Surprise Canyon is a little canyon....

Billingsley:  Surprise Canyon is the nearest name of a name that has not been used before.

Steiger:  And the Surprise Canyon Run is somewhere, a little tributary over there, by the bat caves or something?

Billingsley:  Surprise Canyon is a 40-mile-long canyon on the north side of the river.  It’s a huge canyon.

Steiger:  Oh! I know! it’s the one that comes in at an angle.  And there’s a pretty nice creek up there, and all that stuff.  Yeah.

Billingsley:  Right, it flows a lot of water.

Steiger:  Very nice.

Billingsley:  It’s a beautiful canyon.

Steiger:  Just a little ways down from Separation.

Billingsley:  Exactly.  And Surprise Canyon is a big canyon.  So that was the only name I could find on the topographic maps that I could use, that no one else had used before.  So that’s why it’s called Surprise Canyon Formation.  Not only that, there’s a big river system of that formation in there.  See, a lot of that work I had to use helicopters, so I got well over 200 hours of helicopter time to get to all these.

Steiger:  But you see elements of that formation all the way up?

Billingsley:  All the way to <Marble Canyon>.  The first place you see it is 23 Mile Rapid.  It’s on river right there.  It’s the red slope right above the Redwall limestone, right at the base of the rapid.  That’s where I measured a section there.  But it’s very small, it’s only 30 or 40 feet thick.  It’s right red, maroon-red.  The next nice beautiful channels with petrified logs in it is just above President Harding Rapid, Point Hansborough [phonetic].  Spent a few days up there.

Steiger:  Still on the right?  Or on the left there?

Billingsley:  It’d be on the right side, but it’s also on river left, across.  It’s a river channel that crossed the canyon there three times.  And it goes up <Saddle Canyon> to the west.  The river was flowing from east to west--all the rivers were at that time.

Steiger:  But these are rivers that are totally unconnected--obviously totally unconnected.

Billingsley:  Oh yeah, we’re talkin’ Mississippi-[sized] rivers.  They’re 320 million years ago.

Steiger:  We’re talkin’ there wasn’t even any hint of that current.

Billingsley:  And by the time you get to the western <Grand Canyon>, there were huge rivers 400 feet deep, carved into the Redwall limestone.  So that’s a significant formation.  But, like I said, it’s only in the river systems that you see the formation, so it’s not everywhere in <Grand Canyon>.  And there is a big publication I put out--the Museum of Northern Arizona has it--but it’s not very widely distributed, so that’s why people don’t know much about it.  That’s okay, sooner or later I’ll get it out.

Steiger:  I’m the world’s worst on [geology].  I’m one of these guys, I mean, I can talk your ear off about human history, but literally....

Billingsley:  Well, see, I’m getting into the geology now.  That was exciting stuff to me.

Steiger:  Well, and it’s nice that there are some frontiers out there still.

Billingsley:  Every time I go in the canyon, I find new stuff, and it’s the thrill of discovery that keeps you going.  And if you really want to learn an area, map it.  And that’s why it’s taken me thirty-six years to map the canyon.  But that does not mean I’ve seen it all.  And like I said, if I hadn’t had helicopter time to be taken in, dropped off, and come back and picked up a few days later somewhere, I could have spent a lot of time hiking around.  I didn’t record all those hikes, because I felt that was cheating.

Steiger:  The helicopter hikes.

Billingsley:  Yeah, because, you know, if you’re gonna hike in the canyon, you start from the rim and go down, or from the river and go up.  This was being dropped off in some remote spot somewhere, that had no name, and then hike around for miles and come back, and then hopefully the helicopter picks you up--which it did.

Steiger:  So you’re hikin’ around and you’re taking the aerial photos and the sketches that you have, with you, and just kind of cross-checkin’.

Billingsley:  Uh-huh, and notebooks and all the stuff I need.

Steiger:  Makin’ sure it all lines up.

Billingsley:  Sample bags, collect fossils if they’re unique--and some of ’em were.  They’re preserved at the Museum of Northern Arizona now, or the Smithsonian.  You’ve got to record and document all these things.  But that was fun, to me.

Steiger:  Oh, man.  A lot of time on your own, out there in the middle of nowhere, it sounds like.

Billingsley:  Well, not always on my own.  I always had somebody, generally, with me.  Dr. Stan Buce [phonetic], and students in geology from NAU, helped them get their master’s degrees as well.  They helped out.  I mean, you tackle one of these things by yourself.  I rarely went on a hike by myself in the <Grand Canyon>.  It was much more enjoyable to have somebody with you, just to share the experience, because oftentimes they would see things you would miss.  And like our hiking club group, we saw a lot....  None of us would see it by ourself--we just wouldn’t see it.  But with more eyes and more curiosity, that’s when you really got into the thrill of discovery of what’s really there.  Made it fun.  The driving force.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Yeah, the thrill of discovery.

Billingsley:  We went down on a river trip, down the Little Colorado once--again with a lifejacket and inner tube.

Steiger:  And you’re the guy that says he doesn’t like to go swimming.

Billingsley:  Yeah, but see, these things floated.  As long as I had ahold of ’em--as long as I had ’em on or had ahold of ’em, I felt okay.

Steiger:  You guys ran the Little Colorado?

Billingsley:  Yeah, we went down the Horse Trail.  I think it’s Mile 20, below Cameron, or something like that.  Anyway, we went down and did and did a scientific trip for thirteen days, to sample the springs.  So we floated in the muddy river, in the middle of summer, August.

Steiger:  So it was runnin’.

Billingsley:  It was flowing.  We had 60-pound packs to carry all the equipment for doing geochemical studies of the springs.  This was back in ’67, Fern Taylor [phonetic].  And so five of us, five guys, went down there, and we did that.  So we floated on the floods:  put out packs in an inner tube, and we had our lifejackets on, and we just hung on.  But that was just pure mud.

Steiger:  Would you walk around the rapids?

Billingsley:  Yes, because you could hear them, for one thing--a lot of them.

Steiger:  And wasn’t it almost constant rapids anyway?

Billingsley:  It was.  We bashed into rocks so much that it was not worth it, in some cases, where it got really rocky, like Hell Hole Bend was just....  It really was that--just a mass of boulders.  We got down to <Blue Spring>s, and we had some clean water to drink, for a change, besides letting it settle out overnight and drink thin mud.  That was an experience.  The floods would hit you anytime.  Unbelievable amount of debris--trees, weeds, dead sheep, whatever--would come floating along.

Steiger:  The river would just rise, here’d be a flood?

Billingsley:  Yeah, it would just rise, real fast, and we’d get out when we noticed all this crap starting to float around us.  We’d get out and wait and see how big it was....  It’d usually come up three or four feet.  By the time we got down towards Beaver Cabin or the park boundary area, three or four miles upstream, this huge flood came along.  It was mesquite trees--everything was floating down the river.  It was so scary we didn’t even think about it, because it was very fast, very fast water, and constant rapid.  I was not gonna float it, so I walked.  I didn’t mind carrying my heavy pack in the heat.  It was a hundred and some odd degrees, but it didn’t matter.  It was better than drowning in that mud.  We got to the river, and the river itself was flooding--the <Colorado>.  The island was almost covered.  I mean, it was an amazing amount of water.  This was in ’67.  Pure mud.  We floated from there on down to <Tanner Trail>, in the river, because it was bigger.  But the driftwood was so thick that you couldn’t do anything.  We didn’t have any control, we were fighting driftwood all the time.  The five of us became separated.  I had no idea where the others went.  We were all going to meet at <Tanner Trail>, because that’s where we were going to hike out.  So the idea, if we did get separated, that was the plan, meet there.  Well, I never saw anybody.

Steiger:  From the Little Colorado to the Tanner?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  I got past the salt mines somewhere there, and my God there was this huge, giant whirlpool I got into with this ton of driftwood.  I couldn’t get out of it.  I went around and around in that thing for probably an hour.  And in the middle, wood was spinning on end, going down in some giant hole/whirlpool.  But I kept getting closer and closer, and I was trying to get out of that, because it scared me.  I had visions of the whirlpool taking me down and drowning me.  That’s what scared me.  So I fought and fought, and I got out, finally, to the edge, and actually managed to touch a sandbar or something.  That was the best-feeling sandbar I ever touched!  But I got out, and from there on I said, "That’s it, boy, there’s no way I’m going down here on this stupid lifejacket and inner tube!"  And so I just carried it all on down the river.  And I finally found one of the other guys, laying on the beach, totally wiped out, same experience further down.  Never saw Vern or anybody.  When we finally got down to <Tanner Trail>, there we all got together, and miraculously we were all alive, but we had some really hairy tales to tell.

Steiger:  Oh my God.  It sounds like it must have been....

Billingsley:  It was huge!

Steiger:  Must have been really high, like 40,000-50,000 [cfs], something like that.

Billingsley:  At least that.  It was at least that.  When we got back to the museum, where we based our operations out of that summer, we checked the gauging stations at Cameron.  It was 18,000 cfs on that day that we were caught in that flood, just coming down the Little Colorado.

Steiger:  The Little Colorado was 18,000?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  I mean, those trees had to have been ripped right out of the banks right there somewhere.  There were a lot of mesquite trees.

Steiger:  So this was before you ever went down the river in a big boat.

Billingsley:  Oh yeah.

Steiger:  The year before.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  And I didn’t know what the river was like, but according to Vern, he said, "There’s only one rapid we gotta make sure we miss."  It was <Lava Canyon Rapid>, he called it.  And I said, "Fine.  Give us five miles’ notice, I’m gonna walk it."  But I saw it, and I walked around anyway.  It was a big rapid.  It was huge waves in that thing.  I was so glad to be walkin’! even though I was dying of heat.

Steiger:  Did you carry your inner tube and your air mattress out?

Billingsley:  No.  We got to Tanner Beach and we burned the inner tubes.  We had a prearranged signal with the park service, because Vern let them know what we were doing, and how long we were going to be gone.

Steiger:  So the smoke was going to be the sign that you were okay.

Billingsley:  The smoke was going to be the signal we were that far, and we were coming out.  Nobody ever saw the smoke--big, black smoke, but nobody ever saw it.  But we didn’t have to carry those stupid inner tubes out.

Steiger:  (sarcastically)  They were worried sick about you.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  We got out and reported that we’re here, and he said, "Oh, let’s see, what’s your name now, where’d you go?"  (laughter)

Steiger:  Those were the days!

Billingsley:  That was a thirteen-day trip, and it was pretty exciting.

Steiger:  That sounds really exciting.

Billingsley:  Vern said it was the first science expedition of the Little Colorado he could think of.  We sampled all the springs we found, and what the pH and all--chemical composition and stuff.  But he never published any of that--I don’t know why.  It was too bad, because it was a lot of information.

Steiger:  That’s funny.  Now, did he go on and teach at Prescott College?

Billingsley:  Yeah, he went to Prescott College.  And at the time we did that, he was teaching at USC in California--University of Southern California--he was a geochemist.

Steiger:  That’s funny, because Brad Dimock was talking about Vern Taylor had kind of introduced him to the river, and a bunch of those guys that came through Prescott College.  But Brad’s impression of Vern was that he was super-conservative, because he told a story about them.  He came out and they did this Prescott College trip in ’69 or ’70, somewhere, ’71, somewhere in there.  They had a motorboat, and Vern made ’em all wear helmets on the motorboat, which Brad found endlessly amusing, looking back on it, because that seemed like overkill.  But I can tell ya’, it sounds like that trip you guys did registered on everybody.

Billingsley:  Yeah, he almost drowned on there in some unknown rapid.  His inner tube with the pack went one side of this big giant rock, and he was floating along and went the other side, and the rope caught on the rock.

Steiger:  And sucked him down?

Billingsley:  No, he had it tied on so he wouldn’t lose his inner tube or anything.  So the inner tube was on the other side in the rapid, and he was on this side, and the rock was in the middle, and they were both strangling each other.  They couldn’t get loose.  He was able to breathe, because he was just hanging on, but he couldn’t get loose.  And the rest of us, the four of us were sitting there looking at him, couldn’t get to him.  We didn’t know what to do.  We thought, "Well, maybe we can float down there and with a knife cut the rope."  We tried to hell at him.  It was impossible to yell--we couldn’t hear anything.  But the river was coming up--just mud, just pure mud.  You couldn’t get it off--it would just cover you, no matter what you did.  You couldn’t get it off.

	Anyway, finally after about an hour, the river had come up, started covering the rock.  And then somehow the rope came off, and he went on down, and they recovered him downstream.  But he was so wipe out he could hardly move.

Steiger:  Did you guys spend the night there at Tanner, and then hike out the next day?

Billingsley:  Yeah, we did, we hiked out in one day.  That was an exciting trip.

Steiger:  My goodness.  Shades of Dr. Butchart.  I know he told me that story, where he had that companion of his, and they tried to swim across, and that guy got lost right down there in that same....

Billingsley:  About the same area, yeah.

Steiger:  Between Crash Canyon, and from there down, somewhere.

Billingsley:  See, I didn’t know anything about Butchart’s experience at that time, doing that.

Steiger:  Yeah, you guys were lucky.  But you had lifejackets.

Billingsley:  We had lifejackets.  And I tell you, that’s why, when I ran the river, I kept a lifejacket on all the time, no matter what.  I was insistent about people putting a lifejacket on, no matter what.  I said, "Do not get on this boat without that lifejacket."  That was a rule, number one.

Steiger:  I think Arizona River Runners, we always had that rule too.

Billingsley:  Right, I think everybody did.

Steiger:  Most everybody did.  There’s a few people around that didn’t take it that seriously, but not that many.

Billingsley:  Well, I did, because basically I was afraid of the water.

Steiger:  (laughs)  And yet you would do....  Well, I guess that’s ignorance for ya’.

Billingsley:  Yeah, but the [unclear] of the whole thing was you ignored that.

Steiger:  That sounds incredibly exciting.  I mean, I know, like Brad and Tim Cooper claimed the first ascent of that river, the Little Colorado, kayakin’ it.  But here you guys had done that.

Billingsley:  Yeah, but we didn’t do the whole....  I mean, we started at the Horse Trail, which I’ve forgotten how many miles.  I think it’s five miles or six miles above <Blue Spring>.  So we really only did twenty miles of the Little Colorado, or something like that.  And then on down to Tanner.  And we don’t claim to be the first one to run the river--it was just one of those expeditions.  Other people have run the river, basically.

Steiger:  Yeah, but still.

Billingsley:  And those travertine waterfalls down there, I tell you what, you would not want to go through.  I don’t know, unless you were good at kayaking I wouldn’t do it.  That travertine’s too sharp, it just shreds you.

Steiger:  Yeah, it sounds like a brutal kind of trip, the few people I’ve talked to who have done it.  It didn’t sound like all that much fun to me.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  Well later on, I think ’69--see, that was in ’67--’69, I think Sue and I and Ellen and Bob Dye, and the usual group, we hiked from Cameron all the way down and out the Tanner.  That took five days.  But we did it in the wintertime.

Steiger:  Five days, and this other one was how many days?

Billingsley:  That was thirteen days.  But see, we were stopping constantly.

Steiger:  You were working.

Billingsley:  Working, right.  So we’d spend like two days at <Blue Spring>.

Steiger:  And then you guys did it in the winter and just hiked through there in five days?

Billingsley:  We hiked.  There was no water, until you got to <Blue Spring>.  And then we swam a lot, because the water was 70 degrees, and the air temperature was constantly in the 30s, because of the inversion layer.  It hardly ever got above freezing--it was just barely above.

Steiger:  So it was warmer in the water than out.

Billingsley:  So we floated a lot in the water again.  But we didn’t have anything to float with, but we did have a couple of air mattresses, but basically we just swam--we didn’t even float down the river.  But hiking was....  Oh gosh.  (consulting log)  Oh, okay, that was in 1970.  We walked 76 miles that trip, in five days.

Steiger:  Had it down to the mile!  You would keep track of the miles?

Billingsley:  Oh yeah.

Steiger:  Now how were you measuring a mile?

Billingsley:  Most of it’s--you have a scale on the map.  You use that scale, and you move it around on a line.  And then there’s a little gadget with a wheel on it you can actually trace your line on the map and it’ll measure the mile.

Steiger:  Pretty accurately?

Billingsley:  Yeah, well, pretty close.

Steiger:  It’d be fun, if we could, to scan this document that you have here, and attach it.  I don’t know if that’d be okay with you, and attach it to this.

Billingsley:  Yeah, but it’ll tell you that I didn’t do that much hiking.  I’ve only got three thousand miles logged, and there’s people that hike ten thousands of miles.  This back when hiking was getting going good and everything.  Yeah, I don’t care if you want to scan this.  That’s fine.

Steiger:  Maybe not today, but at some point.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  But at any rate, that’s how....  But see, I can read back through those.  I’m just telling you some of the highlights I remember, but I know if I read back through there, there’s a lot more.  And that’s why it’s hard for me to tell you what was the best time on the river.  There was lots of ’em.

Steiger:  Memorable, like you were sayin’.  First you say nothin’ comes to mind, but that story that you just told me....

Billingsley:  And that’s why I’m glad I wrote it down.  See, you really should.

Steiger:  Too late now for me!

Billingsley:  Not too late, you can still remember a lot.  Write it down.  Give it ten more years, and then see what you remember!

Steiger:  (laughs)  No, no, not at the rate I’m goin’!

Billingsley:  Yeah.

Steiger:  I feel lucky to remember my own name sometimes, gettin’ up in the mornin’.

Billingsley:  Yeah, those were exciting times.

Steiger:  That sounds really exciting.

Billingsley:  Freezing on the river.  We floated from <Hermit> down to <Crystal> (sheesh!) we froze our butts!

Steiger:  You and Susan?

Billingsley:  Yeah, and Jim Sears.  But we knew what the river was like by that time.  But still, I wouldn’t recommend floating on the river to anybody on an air mattress, or anything.  That’s just....  We did it out of ignorance.  Looking back, I would not recommend that.  In fact, I wouldn’t have done it back then, if I had [known then what I know now].  That’s really a message I’d like to pass on to people--don’t do that.  You’re really asking for it.

Steiger:  Yeah.  Well, the proof is in the pudding.  You’ve got to look no further than Harvey.

Billingsley:  And the river’s colder now.  You know, we hiked from <Phantom> once, all the way up, clear to <Unkar>, and rather than hike all the way back, we decided to swim the river and go out Tanner.  We did, but there was snow along the bank, and the river was 38 degrees--really cold water.  No, the air temperature was 38 degrees--the river was 40-something.  We almost did not make it across the river--just to get across!

Steiger:  You were swimmin’ at <Unkar>, across?

Billingsley:  Yeah, above <Unkar>.  You know, it was a calm-looking stretch, but that’s deceiving.  We had an air mattress then.  We wore our packs on our backs, and we damned-near drowned.  We almost didn’t make it out.  We got out just above <Unkar>, scared to death, because we knew <Unkar> was there, because we’d just hiked by it that day, on the north side.  But we got across, but it was touch and go.  We were so cold.  I don’t know if you’ve ever been so cold that you could not stop yourself shaking.  It was that cold.  You couldn’t even hardly think, it was so cold.  And now I know what hypothermia will do to you now, if you’re trapped in that river today.

Steiger:  Yeah, that’s what kills you.

Billingsley:  That kills you.  And we just didn’t realize that.  And finding enough wood to burn to get a fire going....  We couldn’t even strike a match.  It was a real effort, between all three of us, trying to figure out how to get a match to strike.  And we’re standing in the snow.  I mean, c’mon, that was serious.

Steiger:  Yeah.  Oh my God.

Billingsley:  And then once we got warmed up and okay, we hiked out, but there was three feet of snow we had to battle along the <Tanner Trail> that we never could find the trail.  I mean, it was just covered.  We just went up the ravine, and we knew we could get out there.  What a pain in the neck that was--freezing all the time.

	Anyway, those are just experiences among many that I’ve had.

Steiger:  Well, like you say, it’s a big ol’ place.  You get out there, and you can.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  Western <Grand Canyon> was more scarier, because that’s very remote, and you run into trouble.  You’re on your own, boy.  I mean, that’s it.  And a lot of times we didn’t know where the heck we were--generally, yes, but no idea whether you could get up or down any canyon at all.

Steiger:  That’s in the hiking club?

Billingsley:  Yeah.  And then we would get down there, realize we couldn’t get through the Redwall and had to [contour?] around some other canyon and try that--finally just give up and hike out.  And then finding we couldn’t get out that canyon, had to go back the way we got in.  So those are experiences that you learn.  <Granite Park> is probably the deepest part of the <Grand Canyon>, over 6,000 feet.  But what the illusion is, you climb through the Redwall four times and the Supai twice.  It’s not that you’re climbing vertically that much--you’re going through those formations that much because of the faulting.  And those are tough units to get through.

Steiger:  Now, that’s going out on the south side?

Billingsley:  Yeah, <Granite Park>.

Steiger:  Yeah, on that side, on the left side.

Billingsley:  Right, Walapai side.

Steiger:  I don’t know exactly how it lines up right there.

Billingsley:  Yeah, it’s east-west.  That’d be the east side.  So these are the things you learn.  Anyway, I’ve talked probably more than enough.

Steiger:  Okay.  Well, I’m glad that we meandered around and got you goin’ on that.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  If you need more information, let me know.

Steiger:  I’ll get this transcript to you, later rather than sooner, no doubt, but we’ll get it done at some point.

Billingsley:  I’m in no rush.

Steiger:  And get you to review it, and see what you think.  Nothing came up on my radar here that would have hurt anybody’s feelings or anything.

Billingsley:  Well, I don’t want to offend anybody.

Steiger:  That’s me too, in doing this.

Billingsley:  I don’t want to do that.

Steiger:  Me either.  And it seems like I do.

Billingsley:  Well, we all do, inadvertently.

Steiger:  Every time we run a BQR [Boatman’s Quarterly Review] thing it seems like somebody’ll be mad at me for something that somebody said that wasn’t right, that involved them.

Billingsley:  Yeah.

Steiger:  And that’s not my goal either.

Billingsley:  Yeah, that is important to me.  I want to be accurate as best I can.  And also, like you said, I don’t want to offend anybody.  And I’d like to get people’s names in there that I can’t remember now, but I have written down--some of ’em, not everybody, but most everybody.

Steiger:  Yeah, maybe we could put in....

Billingsley:  Kind of like for historic content, I guess.

Steiger:  Like who those guys were on that training boat.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  See, I only knew ’em on a first-name basis.

Steiger:  Well, it’s neat for me to hear, because I remember.... You know, I’ve heard these things from Bledsoe and Kenton, talking about those early days.

Billingsley:  So you might know ’em.

Steiger:  Well, naming those same guys that you....  You know, probably some of those same trips that you mentioned.  Because I remember Kenton talking about doing trips with Bledsoe and Pat Connolly and Dennis Massey.  I mean, those are guys that people definitely....

Billingsley:  Yeah, and I did trips with Kenton too, you know.  See, I may have left some of these names out.  I’d kind of like to at least mention them, because it was a unique group of people back then.

Steiger:  Yeah, a heck of a chapter--the good ol’ days.

Billingsley:  That’s exactly it.

Steiger:  It was, too.

Billingsley:  It was an adventure.  I’m glad to have survived it.

Steiger:  Yeah, me too.  Glad we didn’t kill anybody--or hardly anybody.

Billingsley:  Well, Lew, thank you very much, and I hope it’s of some help and use.  Like I said, I didn’t do anything unusual that anybody else hasn’t already done really.  I was part of the game, that’s all.

Steiger:  Well, your work of mapping, very unique.  And you sure ran into some top-notch characters.

Billingsley:  Oh, there’s some places down there that I’ve seen you wouldn’t believe, that are so beautiful.  I’m not going to tell you where they are, because I feel very protective of them--you know, kind of like it’s mine.  (chuckles)

Steiger:  Susan said you guys made a pact that you wouldn’t give up the good secrets.

Billingsley:  Right.

Steiger:  Which is pretty admirable.

Billingsley:  Because we’ve seen it happen.

Steiger:  Time and again.

Billingsley:  Yes.  You remember in the early days of the river, you would hike up <Saddle Canyon>, discover those springs up there, how beautiful that was back then?  Then it became known, and now look at it.

Steiger:  I remember goin’ up <Saddle Canyon>.  We went right up the drainage, because we had heard it was....  We were on a training trip, Arizona River Runner training trip, 1973, and we had heard, "Hey, it’s neat up there."  You know?  But we didn’t know to climb up and around even, we just went right up.  And we got up in there, and we all had our big vibram-soled hiking boots on, and we took ’em off, because we didn’t want to leave--when we got way up in there, it was so delicate we decided we don’t want to leave these big footprints here.  And we swore we won’t be takin’ anybody up here.  (laughs)

Billingsley:  There’s a lot of places like that.

Steiger:  Yeah, that didn’t last long.

Billingsley:  Yeah.  There’s places I’m not even gonna tell ya’, because....  I know they’re going to be discovered someday, but to me there’s just some things that need to be kept quiet and secret--absolutely beautiful spots that they’re just so, that made such an impression that I just cannot stand the thought of a lot of people going there.

Steiger:  But you gotta work to get there--or not some of ’em.

Billingsley:  You do have to work to get there.  They’re very remote, and likely not going to be discovered for a long time.  But then again, what do I know?  There’s more people hiking today than ever before, I think.  And yes, they will be discovered, and I just hope I don’t hear about it, because it would be crushing to me.

Steiger:  Well, at least they’ll be there.  That’s the good thing.

Billingsley:  Yeah, some things need to be left alone.

Steiger:  That’s the good thing about preserving all of this stuff.  Honestly, there again, I talked to several of these guys.  I went and did the Bio-Bio just once, but talked to Brad a lot about it, and a bunch of those Sobeck [phonetic] guys that were doing it--you know, who really fell in love with that place, and then watched it as they dammed it, and covered it up.  And Brad was talking about this little side canyon up there that was just the most beautiful place in the world.  And he left when the dam started, but he said Bruce Keller was in there, or camped a little ways away from it, and they were in there doing construction and blew the whole thing up, getting ready, because they were going to make this dam, and here comes progress.  So I’m happy that here, at least in this neck of the woods, that we did, thanks to those farsighted predecessors of ours, that we did get some of that stuff set aside.

	Well, thanks so much, and we’ll get you this transcript, and we can do another session if you want to.  We can add or subtract or whatever’s appropriate.

Billingsley:  Well, I may just add to whatever you send me.

Steiger:  Okay.  All right, I’m gonna shut this thing off.



