DONALD COFFLAND INTERVIEW

Northern Arizona University Indian Oral History Project

NAU.OH.36.4 

Mr. Donald Coffland, who is Vocational Education Director at Tuba City High School. Interviewed by Phyllis Boyes, graduate student Northern Arizona University, on April 27, 1977. One tape, aproximately 45 minutes.

Subjects covered in interview

Tape 5, Side 1 

Early education 

Father's occupation in <North Carolina> 

Lived with Lumbi Indians in <North Carolina> 

<Arkansas> move - completed one year of college 

Completed BS degree, Masters, and requirement for administrative certificate at NAU 

1970 began teaching at <Tuba City> 

List of tribes associated with 

Comparison of education of Northern <Arizona> Indians with Lumbi Indians of <North Carolina> 

Description of Tuba City High School 

Discussion of teacher qualifications - Indians given first preference 

Acquisition of audio-visual equipment 

Expansion of vocational programs 

Discussion of development of cooperative vocational program - establishing learning stations 

Payment of students working for school 

Community's acceptance of the coop program 

Student evaluation 

Description of advisory commitee - six Native Americans and two Anglos representing various occupational areas 

Duties of advisory committee 

Parental involvement with and acceptance of the program 

Description of time schedules for coop students 

Student pay rate 

Employer supervision of student learner 

Public relations used to promote program 

Problems between student learner and employer 

Student evaluation of work stations 

Graduate successes in their chosen occupatonal field and in college 

Discussion of how students view reservation life 

Discussion of students coming back to reservation to improve things 

Assimilation - strengths 

Development of industries: Gas Purification Plant, Mine - Black Mesa, Marina - <Lake Powell>

Tape 5, Side 2 

Assimilation - Drawbacks 

Termination 

Discussion of Indians managing their own affairs 

Discussion of Red Power Concept 

Satisfaction with career choice 

Former students seeking counseling 

Duties of full-time vocational director 

Description of topics of future meetings with tribal council 

Relatinship with Bureau of Indian Affairs 

Discussion of pending legislation 

Conclusion - Indian Education as it is today and what it is projected to be in the future

[BEGIN SIDE A] 

Phyllis Boyes: My name is Phyllis Boyes [phonetic] This taped oral history is being made for deposit in the Northern Arizona University Special Collections Room. It is a part of a research project directed by Dr. Philip R. Rulon, associate professor of history at NAU. The purpose of this study is twofold: first, to obtain historical information on the education of Native Americans in the Southwest; and second, to obtain insight into the effectiveness of bicultural and cross-cultural programs for Indian Americans. The project is funded by the Institute of Southwestern Studies of Northern Arizona University. Today is April 27, 1977, and I am talking with Mr. Donald Coffland, director of vocational education at Tuba City High School. 

Would you give me some biographical data about yourself: your birth date, your birth place, your parents and their occupations, and your educational background? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, Phyllis. I was born in <California>. My parents moved to northern <Arizona> when I was in the third grade. I went to school on the <Navajo Reservation> until I was in the seventh grade. At that time, we did some traveling. We went back to <California>, where my dad went back to school and finished his master’s degree. We then moved to <North Carolina>, where he taught in a college for two years. At that time, I was still in high school. While we were in <North Carolina>, we lived also with Native Americans, the Lumbi [phonetic] Indians. And the college he taught in was an Indian/Native American college with the Lumbi Indians. 

Then we moved to <Arkansas>, where he was the county superintendent for three years. After that, I went to college one year in <Arkansas>, and then back to NAU, where I completed a B.S. degree. I started teaching here at <Tuba City> in 1970, and also continued my education at NAU. I completed a master’s degree and the requirements for an administrative certificate. That kind of brings you up to where we are now. 

Phyllis Boyes: What tribes have you worked with? Could you give me a listing of the tribes? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, I think so. I’ve been associated with--maybe not directly worked with some I’ll mention. As I mentioned, living with the Lumbi Indians in <North Carolina>. I went to school with them. I don’t know if you’d exactly call that working with them. Here in <Arizona>, I taught for half a year in <Patagonia>, where there were, oh, some tribes…. I believe some of the school students were related to some tribes out of <Mexico>, since we’re so close to the border. I don’t know the specific tribes, though. Here in northern <Arizona>, with the Navajo and Hopi Tribes. 

Phyllis Boyes: Could you give me a comparison to the education of the Indians in <North Carolina> versus the education of the Indians here in northern <Arizona>? 

Donald Coffland: Yeah, I think they’re very comparable. After going to school back there and teaching out here, I can’t see any real notable difference, as far as the basic reading, writing, and arithmetic. That age group seems--as far as learning ability--seems to learn about the same. Each tribe had some social forces of some sort that seems to relate to some of their study habits, etc. 

Phyllis Boyes: Could you tell me something about this school, when it was built, how many teachers are here, what your colleagues are like, the facilities? 

Donald Coffland: Okay, this school that we’re in today is four years old. The high school here at <Tuba City> started, I believe, in ’59 or ’60, in a one-room building where they had about thirteen, fourteen students. It has expanded to, today, 1,400. The current school we’re in is a joint-use school. Between 40 and 45 percent of the school is BIA, and expanding probably up to 50 percent. And at the current time, between 55 and 60 percent of the students and faculty are public school, which is run by the public school district, State of <Arizona>. And expanding from the real small school to the large one, we’re double-A now, as far as athletics go. We can offer many more courses than just the basic. We have enough enrollment to have at least one or two sections of some of these more, ah, courses of that type. 

Phyllis Boyes: Now, as far as your colleagues are concerned, could you give me some information: their overall background, as far as education, and whether they’re predominantly Anglo or Indian? 

Donald Coffland: There’s been a move to have some sort of a balance. Any new jobs that open, to give the first preference to a Native American, even if they only have a quarter, and it can be of any tribe. The main tribes in <Oklahoma>, <North Carolina>, or anywhere, they have a preference on a job either with the BIA or the public school, either one. There are becoming more and more people qualified here. I’d say ten years ago they were having a hard time getting Native Americans into the educational system. In our particular field of industrial education, there are so many jobs available where a person can make much more money than a school teacher does, that a lot of them choose that profession. But we probably now have over 50 percent Native Americans in industrial education as far as teachers go. As far as the whole school goes, I don’t know what the percentage would be. Every year we get one or two more. 

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned that Native Americans who would have only a quarter of the experience--is that what you’re saying? 

Donald Coffland: No, a quarter blood, tribe. So if they were a fourth Navajo or a fourth Apache, or any tribe, they would qualify for that preference. 

Phyllis Boyes:: I see. As far as audio-visual equipment--books, materials, and things like that--are you pretty well set for that? 

Donald Coffland: We’ve been, oh, I guess, quite successful in our department in getting what we’ve needed. The school board that I work for--I’m employed by the public school--has seen a need to expand the vocational areas, since they did see a need for it, and more students wanted to go into those type of occupations. In our program here, we have [unclear] mechanics, welding, the co-op program. We’re starting a health occupations program next year. They have given us all the support, and when we get that, we pretty well get the books and all the visual equipment that you need. 

Phyllis Boyes: How big is the town of <Tuba City>? 

Donald Coffland: In the outlying area, probably around 6,000. 

Phyllis Boyes: When the co-op program was being developed, were any problems encountered, as far as getting learning stations for these students? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, the learning stations, as this town basically doesn’t have any major industry, it’s mainly schools, and we have the hospital. Most of the places where a student would work are either operated by the government or the tribe or the state, and it’s harder placing students in those type of stations, because they have to budget their money, and if they don’t have it budgeted for a student worker, then we have to locate some funds somewhere else for those type of [unclear]. We do have four filling stations in town where we have placed some, as our co-op programs, D.O., diversified occupations, where they can work in any area of their interest. We’ve been quite successful placing them at the hospital. They, over the past few years, have budgeted money into their account for the students. The public schools have been cooperative, especially in the maintenance department, in allowing students to receive training there--some of those places. 

Phyllis Boyes: If the students are working through the public schools, is there any problem there with paying the students through the public school? 

Donald Coffland: No, they’ve arranged the money under [unclear]. We usually have between two and four work stations with the maintenance department. And we work out any possibility we can. We’ve come up some years with tribal money that they’ve said can be used to benefit the student on a training station. And if it’s a nonprofit type of situation, where it’s with the government or something, we will go ahead and pay the student from the department of manpower. We’ve gotten some help that way from the tribe. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do you find the community receptive to this program? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, they seem to be quite receptive to any sort of education of their students in the <Tuba City> area. They are presented with [unclear] gonna help the student and develop him and get him out on the job, they’re receptive. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do you have any particular problems with evaluation of the students between employer, how the employer would evaluate the student, and how you might? 

Donald Coffland: No, we’ve developed forms that work for us. Sometimes we get an employer and a student that maybe have a personality conflict. We may have to do a little changing of job stations. Seems to happen even with teachers, I guess. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do you use basically a form that the employer can go down and check? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, we do. 

Phyllis Boyes: Or something that the employer should write? 

Donald Coffland: He can go down and check it. Seems like when you give them something where it’s going to take them time to write it, and it’s time-consuming, they are less apt to turn it back in to you, or you really have to push ‘em. They don’t really want to stop and have to write something out. We’ve had more success with the form that they could check, "does not apply," [unclear], and so on. 

Phyllis Boyes: Could you give me an example of the type of people that you have on your advisory committee? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, our advisory committee, since we have one advisory committee for the whole vocational department, we have members from each area. We have some from agriculture, home ec., TandI, business, health occupations, and so on. The members are mostly Native Americans. I believe this year we have two Anglos and six Native Americans. We meet approximately every other month, sometimes more often if needed. An example, I’m taking two of the members with me to a workshop in <Flagstaff> on a co-op deal, and the co-op and work experience next Monday, May 2. 

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned TandI. Would you clarify that? 

Donald Coffland: That’s Trade and Industry. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do you find your advisory committee acts mostly as an advisory council, or do they tend to try to make decisions and things like that? 

Donald Coffland: They act as an advisory council, and they do make decisions. We ask them for their decisions. For example, this year we have planned and researched and have done a needs assessment and everything else that’s needed to put a program into operation on the health occupations. We’ve had several special meetings with them to help us determine if this program is the one most needed in our department, or if we could expand. Food services was another one that we were looking at pretty strongly. All the surveying we did of the students, and the community, and the hospital, and all the outlying areas they were involved in. [unclear] decision. Had a unanimous decision to go with the program. 

Phyllis Boyes: Okay. They more or less help you out in everything that you do here? 

Donald Coffland: That’s right. 

Phyllis Boyes: How do the parents of these students who are involved, view this program? 

Donald Coffland: I’m not directly involved with any of the parents, I don’t believe, in the program this year. The instructor would be more so than I am. But from what I have heard, I haven’t really discussed anything with a particular parent, but they’re all very receptive. They’re glad their student has this type of program to participate in. 

Phyllis Boyes: When the students are first being confronted with vocational education or being counseled for this type of program, are the parents brought in and more or less acquainted with the program, and what their child will be doing? 

Donald Coffland: They have an opportunity to. Usually they are contacted by letter and the program is explained to them. The student also takes home a copy of--we have a preregistration--a copy of his schedule, and the parent has to initial that they approve the schedule for the student, or if they would like to change. It’s pointed out, usually at that time, the ones that are at least interested by the student, the programs they’re involved in. 

Phyllis Boyes: How much time does the student spend in school in this co-op program, and how much time is he at his work station? 

Donald Coffland: They’re in class one hour a day, and they spend from two to three hours each day on the job station, so from ten to fifteen hours a week on the job station, and one hour a day in the co-op class. 

Phyllis Boyes: Are these students paid minimum wage? 

Donald Coffland: Most of ‘em are. It’s $2.30 now. There are, I believe, some that--we have three food service areas in <Tuba City>--two restaurants and a Dairy Queen--and of course they have a way of getting around it. If they serve ‘em a meal, they get away with paying ‘em a little less. But other than that, all of the money that we receive from the tribe for the students is minimum wage. 

Phyllis Boyes: Have you ever had any problems whereby the student learner wasn’t really being supervised adequately enough on the job by the employer? 

Donald Coffland: In the past five years, I’m sure we’ve had some stations of that nature. When we’ve done all we can and asked the employer that is supervising them to give us all the effort he can, and it still isn’t working out, usually we’ll try to drop that work station, see if we can place the student elsewhere. 

Phyllis Boyes: What kind of public relations do you engage in to promote your program? 

Donald Coffland: Our co-op man gets out in the field a couple of hours a day and visits all the various places where people are. He’s one of our main P.R. men, I would say. He’ll stop at the restaurants, drink coffee with some of the employers, and get to know them a little better and find out what the type of problems they’re actually having with the student workers. That is another place where he also sometimes locates farther stations or possibilities. 

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned possible problems between the student learner and the employer. Could you give me an example of what one of the problems might be? I’m sure there’s not a typical problem, but…. 

Donald Coffland: Oh, probably if there was a typical problem, it’d be showing up for work on time. Some employers are quite sticky if you’re not there right on the button, and some are kind of lax. So you get some of the students talking, and they say, "Oh, I get to go to work five minutes late," another one has to be there right on time. They kinda get an idea of what it could really be like out in work and stuff. [unclear] find out that they are different. Some of the other problems would be maybe a student, after working for an employer for three or four weeks, for some reason or another, decides that that isn’t really the line of work they want to get into, so they start slackin’ off. Maybe they don’t come right away and tell the instructor that hey, we’re really in the wrong place, and they try and stick it out. Things negative could develop there--kind of slacks off on the job, and then the employer gets upset. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do the students do any kind of evaluation of their work stations? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, they do. They have a form for evaluation of their work station. We do a lot of evaluating. We try to get the results together, at the end of the year, difficulties that we’ve had and how we may correct them for the future. 

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned you’ve been in this for a period of about five years. 

Donald Coffland: In co-op, yes. 

Phyllis Boyes: What kind of successes have the graduates had, who have been in this co-op program? 

Donald Coffland: I believe the graduates have probably succeeded as far as anybody that’s graduated in the high school. As a matter of fact, we’ve even lost some job stations because the employer keeps the students we have placed [unclear]. The program is quite successful, and it seems to kind of depend on the instructor we get, too. If we get one that’s real enthusiastic and pushes it, it’s even more successful. 

Phyllis Boyes: Have any of the graduates from the co-op program gone on to college? 

Donald Coffland: Yes, some of them have seen a need for more education for the particular type of job they’re interested in, especially in the health occupations. And then in some of the government agencies where we placed them, they see the need for more technical education. They’ve either gone on to trade school or to the university. 

Phyllis Boyes: Generally, have they stayed in their chosen occupational fields? 

Donald Coffland: I think they’ve probably made every effort to. Some of them that I know personally have found it difficult, even after getting the training, of possibly securing a job sometimes, if there’s some sort of a waiting line where they could get the job, and they are qualified, but maybe there won’t be a turnover or a job opening for six months. They have a tendency to look for employment elsewhere. And then some of ‘em will come back to their chosen field, and some of ‘em may find something that’s even more exciting to them, and they never knew it. We do give several interest surveys, and they’re gone over with the students. Some of those are truthful, and some of ‘em…. 

Phyllis Boyes: How do your students feel about living on an Indian estate? 

Donald Coffland: Well, most of ‘em--I was going to say they don’t have a choice--actually, they do. There are a lot of off-reservation schools that the Bureau of Indian Affairs sponsors, where a student can attend. There’s one in <Riverside>, one up in <Utah>. I don’t remember the name of the town. There’s one back in <Oklahoma>. But the students, of course, going to the public school don’t have a whole lot of choice as another district. [unclear] care too much about paying for their education. 

Phyllis Boyes: When they can go off the reservation and go into a place like Gallup, or come into <Flagstaff>, when they’re viewing, quote, "how the other half lives," unquote, have you had a chance to talk to the students about that, how they view that lifestyle versus their lifestyle? 

Donald Coffland: I have talked to some that have gone to school in <Winslow> or <Flagstaff>. And they had felt--and our school system was smaller and we didn’t have as much to offer--they did like going to some of those other schools where they had more choices of courses. But now, some of the feedback we’re getting now is that they would rather go to school here. We do have probably as much to offer as these other schools now, which our size has allowed us to. And our facilities here are all brand new, under four years old. This is our first graduating class this year that has been in this complex. We probably have more equipment and so forth, than some other schools. When you open a new school, usually you get a lot of new equipment. We have an olympic swimming pool which is open to the public in the evenings. We have two gymnasiums, all kinds of facilities. 

Phyllis Boyes: In your conversations with the students, have they indicated any desire to go off the reservation to obtain further education, and then come back to the reservation with their knowledge to improve things? 

Donald Coffland: Most of the students here have a tendency to come back to the reservation. I believe it has probably something to do with their culture and social life and everything. And the way they’re raised, it seems like they have a tendency to stay closer to the family. Most of the ones that do go away and work, if they aren’t able to come home once a month or on weekends or something like that--by home, I mean back to where they were raised--they have a tendency to not stay on the job. 

Phyllis Boyes: How do you view the concept of assimilation, the strengths and drawbacks of that concept? 

Donald Coffland: Well, there is limited job opportunity on the reservation, since there is not a whole lot of industry, although there is more being developed. So if they do come back to the reservation, they are less likely, probably, to get a job. Although the ones that have more of the technical education, probably have more of a chance. The Navajo Tribe has planned several projects which may develop in the next ten years, and they are concerned with the job opportunities for the tribe. They’re making every effort to develop more [unclear] somewhere to go. 

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned more industries being developed. Do you know what specific industries would be developed, and where? 

Donald Coffland: There are several coal gasification plants planned. They are opening more mines at <Black Mesa>, where Peabody Coal Company has a large operation. They have planned a marina on <Lake Powell>, which is on the reservation, Padre Bay, and several others. [unclear] They have had several operations on the reservation. There was an electronic plant. They got in a bind over there. Some of the people decided they wanted--I believe they wanted…. 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

Phyllis Boyes: Could you give me some illustrations of the drawbacks of assimilation? 

Donald Coffland: Hm. [inaudible] 

Phyllis Boyes: Do you think there are any? And also, perhaps any illustrations of assimilation, examples of students who have gone to school…. 

Donald Coffland: In the welding program, the unions were operating--the pipe fitters’ union out of<New Mexico> and <Arizona> were operating a welding school on the reservation, and they were assuring the people that went through the program and graduated, placing them on the job. Of course they didn’t really say where they would place them--somewhere close if possible. One particular student that I know, went through the program, completed it, they placed him up in <Wyoming>, and he was coming home at least once a month, or more. As the job started tapering off, he did move back to this location, and fortunately he was one of the lucky ones to get on at <Black Mesa>. And of course the skills that he picked up that the union had taught him was more than what he needed to get on. He’s doing quite well. I have talked to some students about problems that they may encounter going to trade schools such as in <California>, or back to <Ohio> or somewhere else. The students that we have that are staying on campus here in the dormitories will probably have less difficulties, just getting out and being homesick and everything else. Those students, of course, I guess anybody going off to school would have that sort of problem. The particular students I talked to, I told ‘em I thought it would be wise for them, after they completed their training, if the school had a program where they would place them on the job for at least their first job or so on, they would stick that out for maybe as long as a year and get the experience, that they would have less difficulty finding a job elsewhere with that experience. They seemed to assure me at that time that they felt they could do it. It’s possible they could, but we try and get into the sort of things that they will encounter. 

Phyllis Boyes: Where and how did you first learn of the concept of termination, whereby the BIA would eventually be withdrawn from the administration of Indian affairs? 

Donald Coffland: Well, I haven’t learned that. I don’t know if they ever will be. The tribe is expanding its educational staff, and they believe that in, I don’t know how many years--ten years or maybe longer--that they would have their own educational system. Now, whether there would still be public schools on the reservation, or how we’d be affiliated, I don’t have any idea. That’s a long ways off. They are getting more involved. They are primarily concerned with making sure that their people get a good education. There’s been controversy with some of the standards with the different schools. The public school, we have to meet all the state requirements, all the teachers here at this high school are certified bureau and public, with the state of <Arizona>. They’re all highly qualified, so we feel like we are running probably the best high school on the reservation--maybe even the state of <Arizona>. 

Phyllis Boyes: What do you think of the possibility of the Indians eventually making their own decisions that shape and color their lives? 

Donald Coffland: I think they are doing that already. The past twenty years that I’ve been associated with this reservation, they’ve progressed a lot. Twenty years ago, there was probably maybe one or two students going to college, and now we have, I’d say it’s probably thousands of ‘em. Well, I don’t know about thousands. If you count 'em for four years, there’d probably be hundreds, anyway, going to college and getting into different occupations, and the type of training they’d need. Once they’ve completed that, they get a little experience, they’re qualified to make any decisions that are needed. 

Phyllis Boyes: When and how did you first learn of the Red Power concept? 

Donald Coffland: I don’t know much about the Red Power concept. We haven’t had any major movements here at <Tuba City>, although there has been Indian Power, Red Power, whatever you want to call it. Of course I think wherever you get several different types of cultures together, or different people, races, that there is some amount of feeling, whether you feel like you’re better than the next guy, or he feels like he’s better than you. Some people let their feelings show a little more than others. Some of ‘em you can get along with just like they were your brother or sister or anybody. 

Phyllis Boyes: In retrospect, are you happy with the career choice you made? 

Donald Coffland: Yeah, I kinda got into education kinda funny. I wasn’t planning on becoming a teacher. I didn’t really know what I wanted to do. I didn’t have as much guidance as we’re giving students today. But my parents kind of pushed me to go to college, and I’m glad I did. I like what I’m doing. I believe it is probably one of the best things that happened to me, getting into it. I like it. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do your former students still come to you for counseling? 

Donald Coffland: Yeah, I get a lot of students coming by, visiting with me on what they’re doing, what I did, what do you think it’d be like to do this, and so forth. Probably next year I won’t be teaching any classes--I’ll be full-time vocational director. So I’m, in a way, kind of looking forward to that. This year I have probably the best class I’ve had. It’s been a process of developing to that point. The seven years I’ve been here, I started out the first year with the program, we were getting equipment and everything in. Then we further developed the plan the next couple of years. And then by the fourth year I was here, we had our program all outlined the way we wanted it to operate, and this’ll be the first graduating class of that four-year program. They’re sharp. 

Phyllis Boyes: You mentioned you’ll be full-time vocational director next year. Could you give me an example of some of the duties that you will be performing? 

Donald Coffland: I’ll be writing all the programs for federal money, state money, and monitoring it. I’ll be attending meetings as assigned to me by the superintendent: with the tribe, with the state, county, and so on. I’ll also be in charge of--as I am this year--the departments, and I’ll probably have to be evaluating the teachers, which will fit right into the monitoring of the program. So I’ll really know what’s going on if I get in there, kind of work with ‘em. 

Phyllis Boyes:: When you meet with the tribe, what do you do? Do you just basically explain to them the programs and how you’re going to go about getting money, and things like that? 

Donald Coffland: They’re mainly interested in what we’re offering on this side of the reservation. The Navajo Tribe has developed quite a bit around their capital, <Window Rock>. On the western side, it’s been a little slower because it is further away, because we’ve already had quite a bit with the public school and bureau school. They kind of want our input into how we’re getting along, because we are kind of the model school. 

Phyllis Boyes: What kind of relationship have you had with the Bureau of Indian Affairs? 

Donald Coffland: In this school, I’ve worked with them--been very successful working with them. I have on my staff, as we are a combined school, several bureau teachers. Like I said, we’re on a 40-60 split, or 45-55. We haven’t had any major difficulties. My experience with the bureau, my dad worked with ‘em in administration, so I kind of got an idea what it was like before I got out of school. I have a lot of talk with their employees, maybe more so than the state. 

Phyllis Boyes: Do you think there are any pieces of legislation right now that are particularly bad or particularly good, as far as Native Americans are concerned? 

Donald Coffland: I believe they’re fixin’ to change the--if they haven’t already--the way that the funds are allocated. And it won’t help ‘em any if they’re…. They’re going to base it on--especially for the meeting--they’re going to base it on the number of people unemployed. If the people on the reservation that aren’t employed will not go down and sign up at the unemployment office, then they won’t be counted in the percentage. So if they figure out for <Coconino County> there’s 7 percent unemployed, actually there’s a lot more than that, but the people haven’t made an effort to go down and sign up. If we could get them to do that, we would still probably get more money than we’re getting now. But if we can’t, we’ll probably lose a certain amount that we had been getting. 

Phyllis Boyes: In conclusion, would you summarize for me where you think Indian education is at present, and where it may be projected to go in the future? 

Donald Coffland: I could probably say here at <Tuba City>. I know that it is advancing as more of the tribal people are becoming educated. After their experience, they feel like there’s a need for that, more so than advanced education beyond high school, maybe even beyond four years of college. But there is a push for that right now. Probably in the next ten years we’ll see some major changes. They are getting more involved in state government. So we may see someone running for offices and so on. Here at <Tuba City>, the high school has advanced tremendously over the past seven years I’ve been here. It’ll keep advancing probably ‘til we level off at the 2,000-student level, or 1,800. And then after a period of three or four years, it would kind of become stationary, keep up the trend and everything, keep up what we need to. 

Phyllis Boyes: Okay, thank you very much. 

Donald Coffland: You’re welcome. 



