MARY BAILEY INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.41

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. It is Tuesday, July 13, 1999, at 2:00 p.m. and we're in the home of Mary May Bailey for an oral history interview to talk about her life. This will be part of the United Indian Traders Association Project. [Brad Cole and Lew Steiger are also present and make a few comments.] 

Underhill: We thank you for your willingness to speak with us today. 

Bailey: Thank you for the opportunity. 

Underhill: We'd like to start with where and when you were born. 

Bailey: March 15, 1921, in <Magdalena New Mexico>. I guess when I first started to talk I thought it was real smart of me to say, "Betty was born in <Albuquerque> and I was born in March." (laughter) I had an older sister Betty, who was two years older than I; and a younger brother, Roger, who was fifteen months younger than I. So when he appeared on the scene quite unexpectedly, my father said he would take care of me, and Mother could have the other two to take care of, besides the ranch and all the other stuff that went on.

We lived out of <Magdalena> in the <Datil Mountains>, which is just about as cold as you can get anywhere in the world, except the Arctic. And it wasn't fit for mother cows, so they just raised steers and put them right on the market. And at that time, <Magdalena>, during World War I, was the biggest shipping point in the United States for beef for the Army.

While my father was in the Army, his father and his younger brother bought a whole lot of livestock at a humongous price, which were all steers, and after the war stopped, there was no sales, so they went busted and took out bankruptcy. It took them a long time to get it paid off.

So that is when we moved to <Piñon>. Now, do you know where <Piñon> is? (

Underhill: Yes.) 

Bailey: Okay. In 1924, you can imagine what it must have been like. The roads were very poor. Our only contact with any other human being was with Lorenzo Hubbell and he was at <Oraibi>. So we went there and we played and we had a good time. We washed all the pottery and put it out and put it in a hospital--that took care of it. We rode stick horses. And then one day my sister decided she wanted to go on a picnic. So she went to my mother and she said, "Could we go way out in the country and have a picnic?" And Mother thought to herself, "Honey, we couldn't get any further out in the country than we are!" (laughter) But she made us a lunch and put it all in a little red wagon, and we went under the first Piñon tree we came to and had a picnic.

Now, about this same time, there was a double murder at <Piñon>. The bride was from the <Piñon> area, the groom came from over on the Bodaway. Now, that's out of <Tuba>. Before the wedding started, one of the bride's suitors murdered the bridegroom. And in turn, the bride and her sister murdered him. So there was a horrible lot of talk and "what will we do? and how will we do it? and should we send for the police?" They'd have to come from Prescott. So they came to Daddy and they said, "Please tell us what can we do to settle this? It's not getting anywhere among us." So he said, "Since you both have had such a horrible loss, and you can't be away from your homes much longer, I would suggest that you just shake hands and [leave] and went to your homes and never saw each other again." And that's what they did. But, oh my! it was a horrendous time, lots of tension. 

Underhill: Who were your parents? 

Bailey: My father was Jot Barnett Stiles. My mother was Marjorie Bowles. She came from <Guthrie Oklahoma>, to <Winslow> in 1914 to teach kindergarten. And her parents just thought she was going to the end of the world. So they sent her oldest brother with her to make sure that this was a proper place for a young lady to be. She had six older brothers--she was the only girl. So you can imagine their concern. And her father was a lawyer in <Guthrie Oklahoma>. His name was Alfred H. Bowles. So she didn't like it at first, but boy, she sure got used to it in a hurry, and she never wanted to go home again.

Daddy came to <Winslow> in 1903. Barnie Stiles had come in first with the Hashknifes [phonetic spelling]. They had driven the Hashknifes as far as <Albuquerque>, and the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad was finished, and they loaded them on cars and brought them to <Winslow>. So that's the way the Stiles family came to <Winslow>. I guess they had a bad drought here, and they took them to <Montana>. It was owned by a big syndicate in <New York City>. So they went to <Montana> and they all froze to death. So there was remnants left that they hadn't been able to gather. Now, that range was from the <New Mexico> border to <Flagstaff>, to the <Mogollon Rim> and to the reservation line, which is a lot further out than it is now. So they had many, many riders, so there's lots of people who want to know, "Did you know any of the Hashknifes?"

But there is a story about one of 'em, his name was Rimmy Jim [phonetic spelling]. I don't know if you know where Rimmy Jim's is. It's right there by the Meteor Crater. He had a trading post there when [Highway] 66 went by. And he built an outhouse for all the people that stopped to have a little rest. The one he built for the women was a two-seater. So when they first started working with microphones, he bought one and put it underneath there. And he would wait until some rather large woman went out, and then when she finally got seated, he'd say, "Pardon me, madame, would you mind moving to the other hole, I'm painting under here." And she would come flying out! (laughter) And that was his entertainment. Now, his name was Rimmy Jim and he was a rider for the Hashknifes. And I asked my father, "Was he from the rim country? Is that why they called him Rimmy Jim?" And he said, "No, honey, he had a Rimmy rig. His saddle was made by Rimmy in <Texas>. And when you had that many Jims and Johns and all of the common names, you had to differentiate." And how I learned that, I went to school with a girl here who was a Smith. And my father always referred to him as Bill A. Smith. And I thought, "That's a strange way to address a man when you've known him all your life. So I asked him one day, "Why do you call him Bill A.?" "Well," he said, "when he went to the Hashknifes to hire out, there was a whole lot of Bill Smiths, so he was the first one, and he was Bill A., and the next one was Bill B." (laughter) It's just a lot of fun. 

Underhill: How did your parents meet? Here in <Winslow>? 

Bailey: Well, yes. Mother came to teach school, and Daddy used to ride in from out--they had a ranch north of town here--and he was very shy. There's a picture of them in their later years. But I have a lot of pictures of him when he was young. That's it! And in the bedroom there are big pictures, and they're very handsome people. And he used to tell us kids, "I used to peek around the corner and wait 'till she came by, and I'd say, 'Hello, Miss Bowles.'"

Well, when school first started here, there was a huge funeral, and that's when Uncle Barney had died. And that was in 1914. So most of the teachers went to the funeral, and one of Mother's roommates came home and said, "Say! was there ever a knock-out, good- looking man who was one of the mourners!" So Mother inquired what his name was, and she said, "Jot Stiles." So eventually they met. And they had quite a nice courtship.

World War I was just beginning to come into being, and they knew they would have to go. So Daddy told her that he was not going to enlist in the Army, he was going to buy some bulls and go to the Argentine. Well, as things went along, he changed his mind and sold the bulls and enlisted in the Army, and he was sent to Naco as a border patrol. All the men that rode horses were on the border patrol. So he did so well there they sent him to officers training school in <San Diego>. And that's when things were beginning to end, and they needed him at home, so he finally got out ahead of the others, and tried to save what he could in <Magdalena>, but there was no way they could meet their bills. So they spent the rest of a long time paying it off. That's when Daddy went to be an Indian trader. 

Underhill: What do you think made him chose that path? Did he know Lorenzo Hubbell? 

Bailey: I think they had met, but he had been working with the bank in <Holbrook> and the one in <Winslow> by going into the rim.... And he told me in later years, if he had had any sense, he never would have done it, because he was on horseback and all he had was a rifle, and that was dangerous country. It was full of people who had run from the law, all over the country, and hid down on the Tonto Rim. So he said, looking back on it, he didn't know why he had ever chosen such a path, but he did. And then eventually he tied up with Lorenzo Hubbell and went to <Piñon>. 

Underhill: How old were you when you first arrived at <Piñon>? 

Bailey: When I first arrived at <Piñon>, I was about three years old. And then we had a car, which was an old Dodge, and that's my first memory, is being asleep in the front seat between Mother and Daddy, and hearing that car gear down and gear down, like they used to, and then come to a stop, and seeing my dad take off his shoes and socks and his pants, and then we could see him go down to the wash and wade and see if he could find a rock bottom or something we could cross on. And if not, then he came back and he said, "All go to sleep, we're here for the night." And we'd have to wait 'til the wash went down, to cross. And that was either the Polacca Wash, or one of those coming in that area, because we were always around the Hopis. But it was some exciting times.

And of course we didn't get any mail, much; and no fresh groceries. But occasionally they would send them out from <Flagstaff> or <Winslow> or <Holbrook> on the mail route. So we did get some connection. Lorenzo Hubbell brought Daddy a wet battery radio--one of the first ones--but they could never get it to work. So that was out. No telephone.

My father had an abscessed wisdom tooth, and he was suffering the agonies of the damned with that thing. He heard of a doctor, he thought, that was at <Keams Canyon>. So the doctor turned out to be a stockman for the United States government, and all he had was one pair of forceps. So he pulled and yanked and pulled and yanked--now, with that infected--and got it out. And then he bathed it in.... What was it? Oh, shoot! It was some kind of an acid, but it wasn't an antiseptic. And oh, he had the sorest mouth and throat for a long time. Mother fed him egg whites beaten with sugar in it, to keep him goin'. But at least he didn't have a toothache!

Now, my uncle Barney, who this started out with, had a toothache when he was rounding up cattle, getting ready to bring 'em in here to ship from <Winslow>. And it was hurting him very badly, and he knew there was no dentist here and none anywhere around. So he heated a wire, red hot, and found the hole and stuck it in there and cauterized it. Well, when you hurt bad enough to do that, you hurt! But I've often thought how strong a people these had to be. 

Underhill: What were the Hopi customers like at <Piñon>? 

Bailey: We didn't have them at <Piñon>. They're still all Navajos in that area. But the villages weren't far away, and that's where Lorenzo Hubbell was. So there was contact when we would go over there. There was no place.... We were eighty miles from any railhead from anyplace, mainly. And there wasn't much communication among people. They just didn't travel around. We did go to Ganado, finally, and meet the elder Hubbells. And that was the first electric refrigerator I ever saw. And my, how marvelous to make ice! (chuckles) But I just remember the trip barely, and I've gone back since, and it comes back to my mind, what it was like to meet those group of people. We stayed overnight, and then we had to go back to <Piñon>.

Then when Betty got to be six years old, they needed to have her in school. So Daddy and Jess Smith, I think--yeah, that was Jess Smith--that bought a partnership. No, they bought.... I don't know how, but they had a partnership at the <Tuba City> Trading Post before Babbitts took them over. And that's where Betty went to school and I went to school and my brother went to school.

Now, I had diphtheria. They'd just gotten there and gotten settled, and it was wintertime, or late winter, and I was the only case in <Coconino County>. I can remember the men coming from <Flagstaff>, and they looked like giants, and they had a rod like that, that they were gonna stick me in the side with, and they did, one on each side, for the toxin, anti-toxin. And then I was unconscious for a long, long time. Mother had a friend who was one of the nurses at the Indian hospital there, and she would come down and stay with me a lot. And I don't know, I guess it was not meant for me to go. So around Eastertime, I began to come to. And the first time I can remember really being aware, is that I could pull the matter off of my eyes and open them, without my mother bathing them. (phone rings, tape paused) 

Underhill: We're back. 

Bailey: Where was I? 

Underhill: You were talking about diphtheria, and it was the first time you could wipe the matter away from your eyes. 

Bailey: Okay. And Betty and Roger had cranked up the Victrola, and they were playing the "Hallelujah Chorus" from Handel. And that's always been one of my favorites. Oh, my! to wake up and hear that and know that the kids were there, and I could play again! There's pictures of me. Mother finally got my hair combed, and she curled it, and she took a picture of me front and back--cut off my hair--no more of that jazz.

So then I went on to school, and because I was a year late going to school, Roger and I went all through school together. When we moved to <Winslow> to go start our real schooling, I came home from school the first day and I just blabbed on everything Roger did. And he got me aside and straightened me out real well. He said, "I'm going to school tomorrow, and I'm going to tell Mother everything you do." So, boy, that cinched it! We never told anything that went on, unless it had to be told. So I learned to keep my mouth shut at a very young age--which is a good thing. 

Underhill: What was the Tuba City Trading Post like when you arrived? 

Bailey: Well, it was huge. They had to keep the cards and vanilla in the safe--which was a strange thing for me to think about. We had two traders that worked with Daddy all the time: Bill O'Brien, and Sandy Hassell [phonetic spellings]. And that's where Sandy got his start. He's written some books, and I have lots of pictures of him. And we played in the wareroom and jumped in the wool sacks, and we had a great time. And that's where Roger found the dinosaur print. And there's lots of pictures of him with his feet, to give an idea of how big those prints were. And then Daddy always told us that over in that same area there were hoofprints of miniature horses. So somewhere over there in that area, they must still be there. And I can remember when we came to <Flagstaff>, you could see dinosaur eggs everywhere. Some were very large, and some were quite small. And you couldn't find one now if your life depended on it. And I've often thought, "Why would somebody take those?!" I don't know what they could do with them--maybe cut 'em in two to see if there was an embryo in. But it's always amazed me.

Let's see.... We had a one-room school, grades one through eight. The Curley [phonetic spelling] kids went to school with us, and the Richardsons, and then that was Bill and Harriet. And then the other Richardsons lived at <Cameron>, so whenever we went to <Flagstaff>, we'd always stop by and saw them, and they had three children, and they all died very young. I don't know what happened there. Over at Cow Springs there was another little girl I used to play with occasionally. And then there was some on up the way. About this time they were getting ready for putting the bridge across Lee's Ferry. Now, we went up there, and I don't know what for. I rather imagine it had something to do with sheep. But I can remember going down the dugway and I have pictures of Betty and Roger and I sitting on the bank, waiting for Daddy to help the man get off the sandbar. And we went and stayed in <Kanab>, and it rained and rained and rained, and we couldn't get back for a week, so we had to stay in <Kanab> that time.

Then on our way back.... Let's see, what was that girl's name, that lived at <Lee's Ferry>? Anyway, she was a real nice girl, and I enjoyed her. So when they opened up the bridge, Mother and Daddy and I guess everybody else that could make it, went to the dedication of Rainbow Bridge. Now, I have pictures of when they started, and all the way across. But while we were there, they just kept playing, "When It's Moonlight on the River Colorado," and Mother and Daddy danced and danced all night long. Then the next morning we went to the dedication and some guy in an airplane just like that one went underneath that bridge and out. Oh, I just can't imagine anybody having that kind of nerve. But that's when we went across there, and I guess they built another one, now, because that wouldn't handle the trucks.

Now, Johnny O'Farrell--and his picture is in that picture down there--and my father were the fastest of friends all the time they were Indian traders. And after they both retired they still were good friends. Cora, in the meantime, had died. When we used to go over to <Red Lake> to visit with the O'Farrells, Cora always got a bad headache, and then we had to come home, and I always knew we kids had caused the headache. (chuckles) Her mother was a cook at <Tuba>, though, that cooked for all the people that came to stay with us. And there were courier cars that came from <Santa Fe>. I guess they held eight passengers, and there was always a young lady from the University of New Mexico that was dressed in a velveteen top and had a skirt, and she was their courier, and they came and stayed overnight at <Tuba>, and then went on to the <Grand Canyon>, and then caught the train out of <Flagstaff>. Now, there's not too many people know that there was even such a thing, or that people came from all over the world to <Tuba City>. But there's pages in those guest books there with people from England and <Australia>. One of the women from <Australia> came and stayed with us three years. And we had other people that would just come and stay. And then when the motion picture people would come, boy, that was fun!

We had a little dog name Mihi, and he was a rat terrier, and the sorriest dog that God ever put on this Earth. And one of the cameramen just fell in love with Mihi, and he wanted to buy him from us kids for a hundred dollars. Well, we set up such a hue and cry, "No! you can't sell our dog!" So Daddy gave a Navajo a quarter to take him off about six months later, after. Oh, he was really a sorry thing. We had a good dog, too. 

Underhill: What movies were filmed at <Tuba>? 

Bailey: Sunset Pass was the last one. But there were others that came and went. Then one night everybody had gone to bed, but Daddy had left the light on. And somebody banged and banged and banged on the front door, and he went to the door finally, and there were two men standing there, and they said, "Is there any way we could get anything to eat? We've been lost out here since early morning." And it was Gary Cooper and the man that was with him, and they came and Mother got up and fixed them breakfast. Then they stayed the night, and then they went on the next day. His signature is in that book.

We met lots of people. Will Rogers came through on his way to the snake dances, and at that time lots of people could go to the snake dances. It was just really an occasion. So we always all went. Or other dances. The home dance is just as beautiful as anything of the others. The snake dance scared a lot of people, because the priests would let those snakes run clear back to the people, and then they'd pick 'em up--they wouldn't have a chance of getting bitten, but they didn't know that, and it scared the puddin' out of 'em. (chuckles) And you could see 'em just drape 'em over, and drape 'em over, and drape 'em over, and then they'd wrap around there and bite sometimes that way. But it was very interesting.

Now, after I got up from the diphtheria, Mom was real busy getting this guest ranch underway, so she hired Mattie, who was a Hopi woman, just to pack me around all the time. She would go about her work, but I stayed with her, and she took care of me. And then when the dances started, she asked if Roger and Betty and I would come down to the plaza. And I think one of the most frightening things I can ever remember is hearing those "thump, thump, thumps," and the jingles, and seeing these huge men come up to you. And they gave me a little cradle that was woven like a basket, and a little mother kachina in there. Now, she's the one with the black face and the pointed ears. But she's the mother kachina that comes when they do the bean dance in the spring with the whippers. And the whipper kachinas are the ogres, and they come to whip the children that have told, if they knew who these men were. And it's still thus so. But anyway, it's a good thing to know.

Anyway, we thought that was a pretty good idea, to dance. There was a little Navajo boy that lived out in back of the trading post, and his mother was weaving a great, huge rug of a Yé’ii bicheii, one-figured Yé’ii bicheii. Any authentic Yé’ii bicheii never has an even number in the people. So her son was named Homer, and Homer and Roger and I decided we could do the Yé’ii bicheii. And we went into the store and took some little sacks that they used for candy sacks, and put corn in there and pushed a handle, and we would go in and we would dance the Yé’ii bicheii in front of all the guests in the evening. Well, that went over real big, so then we decided, hey, we could pass the hat! So we did that and took up quite a collection, and Mom caught us. (laughter) And that ended our dancing! But it was fun, we made all kinds of fun. 

Underhill: How many rooms did your guest ranch have? 

Bailey: I think there must have been ten. Now, there are pictures of 'em that you can see a long way. There's pictures, too--I don't know whether they're in this group or not--but of the men that came from <Phoenix> with The Arizona Republic. And there was just all kinds of people that came. You'd just be surprised. Of course all the Babbitts came out. And they went into partners with Daddy after Jess Smith left.

Jess Smith was married to Lillian Wilhelm Smith. Have you ever seen any of her paintings? 

Underhill: (inaudible) 

Bailey: All right, she did not like children, and children did not like Lillian. And I think that was some of the problem that parted Jess and my dad's partnership. She would rather paint than have any truck with us kids. (laughs) And that was her choice. But anyway, it was an interesting encounter.

I can remember a woman coming up to me, who was from England, and she said--now, I'm just a little kid-- she's talkin' to me and she says, "My goodness, aren't you afraid of these savages?" And I said, "Where are any savages?" She said, "These people here, they're savages!" And I said, "No, they're my friends." She couldn't figure that out for a long while. But that was just the way it was.

Let's see, one day my brother stole a hat from a store, and Mother caught it right off the bat, and she.... We never were spanked. I never had a spanking in my life. The closest I came was Mom tapped me on the behind as I went screaming through the house when my grandmother was real ill--or singing at the top of my voice, I guess. And that's the only whippin' I ever had. And my sister got a pat with one of the slippers-- you know, your night slippers--and those are the only times we were ever whipped, because Mother never believed in ever.... She said, "As soon as you raise your hand to a child, you've taught them to raise their hand to you." So that didn't go over. Anyway, we were corrected, though, very well. Anyway, he stole this hat and Mother made him take it back to the store. Then she got the camera, and took him as he cried all the way back to the store with this hat. (laughter) But it's a priceless picture.

Let's see, my Uncle Skeet had the trading post then that the Richardsons sold. And he had the trading post at the other end of <Tuba>. There were two then. So Carmen, who was his wife, made beer one summer, and they put it up in their closet on the upstairs. Their living quarters were up above the store. And this hot July day, the revenuers would come by to get a drink of pop or somethin', and here all of this stuff was goin' "pop, pop," off, you know. "What's that strange noise up there?" "We don't know." And they didn't inquire any further. (laughter) But you couldn't have liquor on the reservation, unt-uh! No cards. 

Underhill: What did they do with the beer? 

Bailey: I guess they got rid of it pretty quick. A lot of the Navajo kids would come and go to Sunday school. There was a Presbyterian mission at <Tuba City>, and that's the first church we came to, so we joined. Mother made sure that we were baptized and joined. And so the Navajo children would send three kids to Sunday school for as long as it took to build a deck of cards, because it was illegal to have them, but they could make the Sunday school cards into playing cards, and they liked to gamble. So can you ever think of anything worse happening to a Sunday school card?! (laughter) than endin' up in a deck of cards?! 

Cole: Is that why you kept the cards in the vault? 

Bailey: Uh-huh, that's why. 

Underhill: And you said also, vanilla? 

Bailey: And vanilla, because it was alcohol. Strange bunch of things they had to deal with. 

Underhill: Can you describe the store for us? 

Bailey: The store was a big hexagon, and all the way around was--they had a big opening where the big double doors opened and came in, and that was always called the bullpen, and there was a big stove in the middle, to get warm in the middle, in the wintertime. And they all managed to, there was always a coffee pot going. And on the counters there was always a cigar box with a spoon tied with a string, and made permanent with that box. The box was filled with tobacco, and there was always papers.

And there was always an odor about a Navajo trading post that if I was to go in one today, I would recognize it immediately. There was a mixture of wool, ground coffee, and all of these other wonderful smells-- oh my!--and hides. Some smells not so good, and some smells good. It made it just wonderful. And cheese! They always had a big block of cheese that they could cut cheese off. And then all mainly canned goods. Lots of pawn. Lots of big, heavy safes. I don't ever remember being robbed at <Tuba>, but we were robbed one time at <Castle Butte> and I'll tell you that story later.

Anyway, when it got to be close to the thirties, my father knew it was time to get out. So he sold his interest back to the Babbitts and we moved to <Winslow>. He didn't know exactly what he was going to do, but he thought he wanted to go into the cattle business again. So he found a ranch out of <Holbrook> that was thirty- five miles north of <Holbrook>, that was the Turkey Track Ranch, and he bought it and stocked it. And we moved to Turkey Track. Well, by this time, my sister is in the eighth grade, and Mother knows that she cannot.... For a while, we moved to town and Daddy stayed at the ranch, and then when Betty got to be an eighth-grader, the Depression was pretty bad then, so they boarded her in town, and Mother taught Roger and I at home. So we had a marvelous time. We could do our studies in the morning and go play all day. Once in a while Mother would ride with Daddy, but he said it got too expensive, he couldn't afford all that Absorbine Jr. (laughter) And I can remember one morning Mother saying, "Well, am I going with you today?" And he said, "No, not today. This would be two bottles of Absorbine Jr." (laughs) So it was rough riding. But Roger learned to ride really well. I guess Daddy started from the first, and then I was part of the learning process. He would yell at me, "Mary May, run by me and beller like a bull!" And he'd rope me. (laughter) So I had a lot of rope burns early on. But it was fun, we just had a great time. He was one of my best friends. And he was killed in World War II, <Achen Germany>. He was in the second wave that came into Normandy, and they fought all the way across to the German border. He was a staff sergeant. Anyway, that nearly killed my folks, when they lost him, but we went on.

While we lived at <Castle Butte>, Daddy was employed by the United States government on these loans to ranchers through some kind of conservative outfit for ranchers that were desperate. So he would go and do all of the investigations and fill out all the papers and everything. And he went all over Northern <Arizona>, and sometimes Mother would go with him. But he needed somebody to be in the store, and he wouldn't allow us girls to be in the store. So there was a young man that came from <Kansas>, and his uncle was a policeman here, and he asked Daddy if he had anything that Doc could do. So he hired Doc Blair and taught him everything he knew, and Doc worked for us for many years before he had his own trading post at Indian Wells.

But Roger and I were just little devilments all the time, thinking what we could do to entertain ourselves. And we used to get a big pan of water and tie a string on it and tie it to the front door of the store, and then get out there in the front on the road, and just yell and scream and holler like we were bein' murdered, and Doc would hit that door runnin' and get wet. Then we'd just laugh like fools! But when you live out that far, you learn how to do your own entertainment, 'cause there's not too much to keep you busy.

Then one time Mother threw out a little piece of fur off of a fur collar. So we cut it into strips and took a lot of time, and in the outhouse we made a little (laughs) snake out of it. Then we waited around, goin' around by the garbage dump and lookin' at the garbage all morning, waitin' for Doc to come out. Pretty soon he finally made it up the hill, and then he let out a scream, and he grabbed his pants up and ran all the way to the store, (chuckles) got a hoe and ran all the way back, and he chopped that thing up. And then he knew who did it! (laughter) But he never told on us. Ornery bunch! But kids make their own fun, I guess.

Let's see.... In the summertime then, when Roger was thirteen, Daddy brought him into town and talked to all the law officers and everything, and they said, "Well, if he can pass the test, he can have a driver's license." Because Daddy really needed him to run the truck for produce. So at thirteen, he had a driver's license, and he decided he was going to be the head of this outfit, no matter what. So I was no contest. I didn't have enough strength, I wasn't big enough. Betty was five-feet-seven, I was five-three. So I never got a chance at bein' the head honcho. But she and Roger fought for who was gonna be boss when he was thirteen. And he pinned her, so that was it. So he would come to town to get groceries, and he'd say, "Okay, now you meet me at the Central Drug corner at nine o'clock, 'cause if you're not there, I'm goin' home, and you can get there the best way you know how." So we always met him. It was a long walk.

Then one Christmas, 1936, I got a Shirley Temple doll for Christmas, and a pair of riding britches, and English boots, and oh, I thought I was really somethin'. And Mom got real sick with flu, and Daddy brought her to town, and my grandmother came down with pneumonia, I guess from the same flu. Anyway, Dad Stiles came to us and he said, "Betty, you're going to have to drive to town and get your dad to come out and get his mother and take her to the hospital, because I can't do a thing to help her." So that's what we did. And we got along just fine. But I never did understand--I guess my grandfather's reasoning was that it would be company for Betty to have somebody with her. That's why he sent us. So anyway, that's what happened that Christmas. We had lots of fun.

We used to put our Christmas tree out for the Navajos on Christmas day, and they would strip it of all of the tinsel--everything. Boy, just within the twinkling of an eye it would all be gone. At that time, all of the traders on Thanksgiving and Christmas would kill a beef and make a great huge stew in washtubs and feed all the Navajos in that community. So they would be around, and they always called Thanksgiving "Little Christmas," Késhmish Biyázhí. Okay, so it was Little Christmas, and then Christmas was Christmas. And out of all this wonderful opportunity to learn how to speak Navajo, I was never allowed in the store to learn. So the only thing I can tell you is the price of a wagon. And that's t’áá_á’í béeso dóó bi’aan tádiin dóó bi’aan ‘ashdla’. That's $135. (laughter) 

Underhill: And did you have a nickname, though, in Navajo? 

Bailey: No, not really. My daddy, they called him Jádí, which is "Antelope," in this part of the world. When he was at <Tuba>, he had another name, which was "Cowboy," ‘Aka_ bist_ee’ii. Then when he came here, he was Jádí. During World War II, he had five trading posts: one in <Winslow> and one at <Bidahochi> and one at the coal mine, and one at Canyon Diablo and <Castle Butte>. So he was busy, and he needed Roger to help him. But Roger decided he needed to go. He had been told that he could stay, but he finally decided he needed to go. So he got on a train, and on the train there was five Apaches, and they didn't speak any English. Now, Navajo and Apache are close enough, you can understand. So he took them out to this camp in <California>, and when they got there, this man said, "Do you speak Navajo?" and Roger said, "Yes." He said, "Well, we need you in the world's worst way. We've got a court martial going on here, and we're getting absolutely nowhere. So if you would come and act as an interpreter, we'd appreciate it." So he went over there, and it was a kid from <Castle Butte>, and he spoke English, but he couldn't read any writing. And all the orders that went out by writing, he just ignored. So that was the basis for his court martial. And they got that straightened out, so that was a good thing.

Let's see.... We used to go, while we were still at <Castle Butte> and still growing up, we were all teenagers, and Daddy would allow us to take the truck when there was a squaw dance nearby. And we'd load it up with pop and cigarettes and gum and candy, and just stuff like that, and go and sell it while they did the squaw dance. Well, always if Daddy went with us, he always had to take a little chimayo. A little chimayo rug was made by Pendleton, but it was a small one for a child. So all the little girls wanted to always dance with my dad (chuckles) so they would get a Pendleton shawl. And it was fun to watch. They'd always hook Roger for somethin'. 

Underhill: Why do you think you weren't allowed to learn Navajo, but Roger was? 

Bailey: Why? Because Daddy did not think it was proper for young ladies to be in the store. And then, after my brother was killed, we both had to go back and run a trading post. So it really made it doubly hard. I remember one day I was left at the store with my little girl. She was just a baby, and I was there alone, and this Navajo man came, and all he wanted was tó ‘azis. Now, tó means "water." Azis is "a sack." So it was over an hour that we went through everything in that trading post, and I'd say, "This?" "Dooda," [meaning "no"]. Anyway, what he finally wanted, he found a potato. I took him back to the back of the counter, and he found a potato, and there was an empty pop bottle, and he put 'em together and then I knew he needed kerosene in a bottle with a potato stopper. Now, how you could get from (laughs) tó ‘azis to that, without knowing the kerosene part, was a real battle. Oh, my! (laughter)

But it was real interesting, and we had lots of people that would come, just touring around looking for something unusual, and they would just be enthralled with the whole deal.

Now, at that time, it was still a lot different than it is now. And I think there still is a taboo that a mother-in-law never sees her son-in-law. And the warning signal is "There's an owl outside." And either the squaw would sit with her blanket over her head while he came in and did what he had to do with the trader, or else somebody would tap her on the shoulder and she would leave. But that was one of the taboos I remember--but there were a lot of them.

Oh! we were robbed at <Castle Butte>. There was a bad, bad windstorm one night, and evidently whoever these robbers were came in with the wind, and the dogs never barked or raised any kind of a fuss. They broke in through a window and they stole boots and pants and shirts, and what else? Hats! So the next morning when Daddy found out he'd been robbed, he came back in and sat down with a cup of coffee and he said, "You know, all my life I've heard of these crones among the Navajos who can tell you exactly what happened. I'm going to find out if that's true." So he got in the truck and went off for a while, and in about an hour- and-a-half, he was back with this old squaw, and he asked her what she needed. She said, "I need one of everything that was stolen." She sat down in the middle of our living room with these items all the way around her, and she had a little sack of corn pollen, and she put this one up this way, and this one up this arm, and then she just went off into a trance. And I can see her sittin’ there. And pretty soon she started to talk, and she said, "They came in from the west, and they went to this one window and broke it. What they took...." And she told him who they were, and where they lived. So Daddy took her home, and on his way, he stopped by this place, and he confronted these two young men, and he said, "I want my stuff back." "Well, we've hidden 'em in the rocks." "Well," he said, "go get it." So they did. But isn't that amazing?! You hear of such things happening, but you just never can really believe 'em. But I got to see that, so I know it was true. 

Steiger: We heard people talk about medicine men that could do that. 

Bailey: Oh, yes! 

Steiger: But this woman, was she a medicine woman or something like that? 

Bailey: I don't know what her capacity was. My dad just called her an old crone. Now, "witch" is my interpretation of what he meant, and maybe she was some kind of a spiritualist among them, but he knew who she was and what she did.

There was a lot of Indians that were most interesting. There was one old woman, she must have been in her eighties. Every time she came to the trading post, she stole my potty. So I had to be real-- because we just had an outhouse--so every time she came, I had to keep a real close watch on her (laughs) so I could chase her down the road and get my potty back. Anyway, I asked Daddy about who she was and what she might be, and he said, "Well, we'll find out." So he asked her a lot of questions, and she told him that she was on the Long Walk. She must have been around three or four--she didn't know which--but she couldn't walk all of the way, and she had to be carried part- way. So from that, Daddy and I discerned that it must have been three or four years old. So then I got into playin' with clay and I made a clay model of her once. And I made a clay model of another man, and I showed it to him--that was old Big Ben--and he told me I was ch’__dii. He wasn't real happy about it. So I never showed any others to my good friends, but we sure had a lot of fun.

Let's see.... I was married on December 6, 1941. I was married down at the house in <Winslow>, and we went from here to <Williams> and stayed overnight on our way to <California>. The next morning we got up and war had been declared. And from then on to <California> we were in blackout. They had guards on every bridge that you crossed on Highway 66. You had to wait until a Jeep came and took that guard and took you all across. And then the next guy would come back with the others, and it was a long process. But, boy, talk about being fearsome! It was a real deal. My grandfather was a very witty man, and he said, "Yup, Mary May was married one day, war was declared the next, and there's been a battle ever since." He lived to be ninety-four. He was a great man. I enjoyed him a lot. My other grandfather died at the trading post at Canyon Diablo. That was in 1939. So I had a lot of good relatives growin' up. 

Cole: What was his name? 

Bailey: Out here? 

Cole: Yeah. 

Bailey: His name was Seth Rogers Stiles. They're all in a cemetery. I've got six generations in the cemetery out here.

[END SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Underhill: This is Tape 2 of an interview with Mrs. Mary May Bailey, and it is July 13, a Tuesday, about 3:15 p.m. This is Karen Underhill, conducting the interview, and we'll continue. 

Bailey: All righty! I think it was June 4, 1942 or 1943. I was staying down at Mother and Daddy's house, and I must have been sleeping on my right side, facing east in the bedroom on the east side of the house. My father was sleeping in another room, but he must have been on his right side, too, facing the east. It must have been between four and five o'clock in the morning. We both woke up and jumped out of bed and said, "What in the world was that?!" And there was no noise, there was just this horrible bright light. So Daddy wrote it down in his little ledger that he kept about everything that happened every day. When the war was all over, they finally told us that they'd set off an atomic bomb down in <New Mexico>, and that's what it was. We could see it from here, if you were upstairs. So my, what a mammoth thing that must have been. Now, that's a long distance. But it must be on that strata. I don't think there's anything here you could hurt--don't worry about it. 

Steiger: (inaudible) 

Bailey: Oh, I gotta get those off. Well, I just had to check and see if I knew anything else, to tell you. 

Underhill: You mentioned at one point you were operating a trading post. 

Bailey: Yes. That was the time when--it was after the war. Betty and Charles had to go back and run one too, at some time. I don't know which one they ran, I can't remember that. But we had to go back. Let's see.... I had just lost a little boy. My first husband just couldn't tolerate it. He just went to drinking and never--it took him many years to ever come out of it. But that's the time we went back and stayed at <Castle Butte>. And we had a lot of friends in <Winslow>, and one Thanksgiving we all got together out at <Castle Butte> for a Thanksgiving meal. I'd made a great big turkey, and we had a great huge feast. It was getting along about dusk. The friends I'd invited, like we, he worked on the railroad and he knew he might get called, so Ross drove him back to <Winslow>. And the fires had all died down, but we were very comfortable, but there was no window in the truck that Ross was driving. So when he came back, he was cold as he could be. So we built up all the fires again. Well, I'd left some plum pudding in the oven. And that fire got to roaring real good, and it shot off (laughs) all over the kitchen! Here it is nine o'clock at night, and you just have gasoline lights to deal with. So we got up and scrubbed down the walls and got everything back together. And then something else happened--well, I guess it was that--flipped all the lids on the top of the stove. Oh, my! what a mess! There was soot everywhere. (laughter) We really celebrated that Thanksgiving! But it was fun, we had a lot of good times. 

Underhill: What were your customers like, then? 

Bailey: Well, it was just a real lot of, you really had to think. I'll tell you a story about Navajos and how some of them work. Daddy had this one man, and he said he was just like a coyote--he could see out of the back of his head. Now, whether that meant that he just had a lot of mental telepathy, or whatever, he used to sit out in his hogan by the month, figuring out how to cheat my father. So this one time we were buying wool, and some of the people that had big herds would bring the wool already entramped and put into a big--they're 350-pound sacks. So this guy brought it in, Daddy checked it for being wet--no wet, no sand. He didn't open it all the way up, but there was a lot of wool. So he bought it, 350 pounds of wool, put his number on it, and it went. They always brought it into <Winslow> to ship it out to <San Francisco> or <Los Angeles>. They went from there through the Panama Canal and around to <Boston>. That was the cheapest route to send that heavy a load. And also, it picked up moisture on its trip going back to <Boston>, so that was another profit. So then when they bought it in <Boston>, there always came with a bill of lading, what each sack brought and what it weighed and everything. So Daddy looked up on this chart to see what Joe Benally's [phonetic spelling] sack had in it. (chuckles) And there was an old mattress wrapped up real, real tight, and then padded with wool everywhere. (laughs) So Daddy could hardly wait to do something for him some day. (laughter) It was really funny, what happens. 

Steiger: Did he ever get him back? 

Bailey: I think he did. I'm sure he did, in some way. He had grown up on the Navajo Reservation, so he knew Navajos forth and back, and they knew him. 

Underhill: How would you describe the typical trade transaction that took place? 

Bailey: Well, they either brought in a rug or hides. Now, when we first moved to <Castle Butte>, my father took string and measured out thirty-six inches, and tied a knot in both ends. And he gave it to every woman that wove, and he said, "I want a saddle blanket." You don't have to make a design in it, all you have to do is weave it so it's thick, and if you can use angora, use the goat hair," 'cause it was better for a horse's back than anything else. Then he would give them a double one, double the thirty-six inches, for a double saddle blanket. Okay. And he started this himself. When we first moved to <Castle Butte>, all they wove were flowers and stuff, and they looked horrible, and it was not a good, saleable item. So he started that, and then he had orders from J. C. Penney's and Montgomery Wards and Porter's in <Phoenix>. Oh, we just bought saddle blankets by the great gross. And they either brought in a saddle blanket to sell, or a blanket. They wove lots of better blankets then. And hides, we bought hides.

We'd buy mutton sometimes, or a lamb or a goat was the best thing in the world they could bring in. And we would have fresh meat. And then we finally got an Electrolux refrigerator so we could keep it without havin' to hang it up every night. Oh, those were the most delicious things to eat! Mother would do 'em outside with the ribs. Oh, my! they were good. But that's what they would trade, or they would pawn something.

Now, I was down at the store in town one day when Daddy had a New York banker sittin' there by his desk, and he was watching all of this, and he thought it was the most amazing thing he had ever seen, because one of Daddy's best customers, or some of 'em--there were a lot of good customers and he knew 'em well--had come in, and they wanted to borrow their pawn. So Daddy went back to the pawn room, and he had shown the guy the pawn room before. And he picked out their pieces that they wanted, and he sent them on their way. Now, this is stuff taken in as collateral. That banker nearly died! "How in God's world can you ever make a profit?!" So Daddy told him, "You have to know your customers." And he said, "They're honest as the day is long, and they'll be back, and they'll bring it back in." And so they did. But oh, there was a huge amount of pawn. And that was one of your big items.

Just working in a trading post--you see, both Betty and I did have to go back and run a trading post. Then my sister and I both worked in the store down here. So we had lots and lots of contact. But we had a good instructor with us all the time.

One day, I don't know whatever stirred up these Indians. There were some people that lived out around <Leupp>, and I can't recall their name real quickly, but they were--oh! Fewson [phonetic spelling] was their last name--and Daddy always called 'em "the feudin' Fewsons." And they fought! Over the drop of a hat, they'd fight. Well, there were two of their family squaws in the trading post, and I don't ever know what precipitated it, but this one girl walked up to the other squaw and she knocked her clear over the stacked- up flour in the middle of the store. You stacked 'em, you know, so that they were real high. And she knocked her clear across there, and then all the rest of the Navajos just sat back there and laughed. And it was all over within a twinkling of an eye, and nobody knew what had started it, or how or why.

Then one day.... Usually the squaws did all the trading and buying, because they're head of the household. All she has to do at that time, to get a divorce, was throw his stuff outside the door with his saddle, and that did it. That was the end of the marriage.

One day this woman had bought all kinds of groceries, and the tailgate to the truck was still up, so she had to climb over that, and then climb up with all these groceries. As she was taking one of the last big sacks up, it broke and spilled, and everybody just sat down and hee-hawed! They all just laughed and laughed and laughed, and so did she. And she climbed out and picked it all up and got another sack. They are the best natured people you can ever think of. But they'll sure.... It was funny.

Daddy went down, when we were at <Castle Butte>--he always bought sheep every year--and then he bought sheep from all the other traders, so he would have a huge big herd. So they were getting them all gathered. They brought 'em in by truck, and we're ready to cross from <Castle Butte> to <Holbrook>, which wasn't a very long way. So Daddy had gone down and counted out the sheep this morning, and he was four short. So he waited until the herders came in, and he said, "Well, I'm short four sheep. Do you know anything about it?" "No, don't know a thing." He always stamped a "T" with red paint on their forehead. So he came back and sat down and had a cup of coffee and thought a while, and then he says, "I know where those sheep are." So he went to these herders' hogan, and sure enough, here's these four head of sheep with mud on their head. (chuckles) So he dusted it off, and there's the "T" and he brought 'em back. He said, "Now, you are going to take these sheep to <Holbrook> tomorrow, and there won't be one missing, will there? Or if you say no, I'm going to go get the police right now. So you can make up your mind. Either you can make sure that every one of these sheep gets to <Holbrook>, or you're gonna go to jail." So they thought about that a while, and they decided that's what they'd do. So he met 'em in <Holbrook>, and there was not one sheep missin'. They must have had to carry some of 'em, there were little lambs.

(side conversation about storm warning) 

Underhill: You may have house guests! (laughter) 

Bailey: That'd be perfect! That would be fine. I could show you all these pictures. We could stay up all night lookin' at pictures. 

Underhill: What do you think separated a good trader from a bad trader? Your dad obviously was successful at it. 

Bailey: Well, I think you had to be a very astute businessman. You had to be extremely honest. And, of course, he had the advantage of growing up on the Navajo Reservation and speaking Navajo when he was very young, and he played with Navajo boys, so he knew their nature.

Now, at that time, there was no high school in <Winslow>. When he graduated from the eighth grade, I think he stayed out of school another two years, and then he was sent to <Fort Worth Texas>, to a business school, and he was there for two years. So he learned all about business, all about how to type, how to do everything. So he was a pretty shrewd trader before he ever went into the business. He knew a lot about everything, business-wise. So that's why he always had all of these enterprises, like starting the Navajo rugs for saddle blankets.

Mr. Bush lived at <Dilkon>, and I guess he's the guy that started.... They thought they should put flowers into rugs so that they'd look more like carpet. So Daddy had to get them all over that. (laughs) And by this time, Mr. Bush was gone. But it was just being enterprising, I think. And he was a shrewd businessman, and Mother got to be just as shrewd as Daddy, so they always talked things over. They were a great team, they always pulled just like a team of anything.

Speaking of teams, we had a bunch of--when we lived at Turkey Track Ranch, Daddy had sent these two young men out with a wagon and a team, to mend fence, and they worked hard all day, and when they came back in one of the horses was stifled. Now, that's pulling the shoulder out of joint. So Daddy fired 'em then and there, and said, "Marge, go and find me a quarter and sterilize it." So he went down to the corral and threw that horse down, and he cut a slit in the shoulder. By then, the quarter had been sterilized and he slipped that quarter in that slit, and he said, "No one is to ride this horse or have him as a team. No one is to do anything but let this horse rest for a year, and then he'll be all right." There was a team, and the one was named Kettle Belly, and the other was Leche--it was a grey and a white--and it was the white one that had been stifled. So that's what he did, and we watched, and I often wondered. Now, the only thing I can reason, it acted as a counter-irritant and brought more blood to that area, so that it would heal faster. But I've never been able to find a veterinarian that could tell me why that would work. Maybe just the rest. But as a little kid I used to think, "Boy, I'm gonna look that horse up as soon as he dies. I want that quarter back!" (laughter) Talk about greedy, huh? 

Underhill: Did your mother also work in the store? 

Bailey: Yes, she did. She just worked all the time. She was a good cook, too. She worked with Daddy a lot. At this time they were living in <Winslow> and running the trading post on Front Street. And Daddy would have other things. He'd go out to the ranch, and Mom would run home to get supper, and I learned a good lesson. When a man is hungry, you set the table, and then you start cooking, because they think it's imminent, it's gonna happen real quick. (laughter) But she was a good sport, we had lots of fun. 

Cole: What was the name of the store in <Winslow>? 

Bailey: Downtown? 

Cole: Yeah. 

Bailey: It was just J. B. Stiles Trading Post on Front Street. And it burned after.... Let's see, I think Daddy had sold it, and then it burned. But we had a robbery there, too. Some high school kids--I don't know where they thought they were going, but they went from the roof into the trading post. Inadvertently they went into the pawn room, and they just grabbed pawn from everywhere and stuck it in a sack. And nobody knew a thing about it for about a year-and-a-half. And then one day these kids were riding down Highway 66, going through <Winslow>, and a policeman saw 'em pull up a string of beads like this, and another string like this, and that's who done it. They had buried it. So a lot of the turquoise was ruined. A lot they got back. I have a string I put together with all just trash that was left over. But it's amazing how little people know about anything.

And like I say, these people from <New York> would come by and go around and visit with Daddy in the trading post, and they couldn't understand how that worked out at all well. (laughs) One of the things Daddy wanted worse than anything in the world was a four-horned sacred sheep. And he was having a lot of difficulty with a gall bladder. So it finally got so bad he went to Cottonwood to have it taken care of, and while he was down there, this Navajo brought in a head with the four horns. And Betty and I were down there, and we thought, "Oh, Lord! what are we gonna do now?!" Well, there was a big deep freeze down there, so we put it in there, and it stayed there 'til Daddy was well enough to take care of it, and then he had it mounted. It burned up in the store. That was sad, 'cause there's not very many sacred Navajo sheep anymore. 

Underhill: Was your father a member of the United Indian Traders Association? 

Bailey: Oh, yes, yes. And they went to a lot of their meetings and went to <Phoenix>. He and Johnny O'Farrell would always get together. Now, Johnny O'Farrell finally went from <Tonalea> or <Red Lake> to <The Gap>. And he had that trading post over there. So when Swinerton [phonetic spelling]--do you remember the painter Swinerton? (

Underhill: Unt-uh.) Well, he did a lot of beautiful landscapes. And he had the little canyon kids in the Good Housekeeping magazine. So when he died, he had requested in his will that he be cremated and brought to <Arizona> and put in the Colorado River. So that job fell to Johnny O'Farrell. And he had a suspicion that it wasn't proper to spread ashes anywhere in <Arizona>, and especially not on the reservation. (chuckles) So he had to be real careful about the highway patrolmen comin' up and down that strip. But he finally got the ashes in the Colorado River for her. And I always thought that was pretty neat. 

Underhill: Did you ever attend any of the United Indian Traders Association meetings? 

Bailey: I did, but I don't remember it much. We always went shopping. (laughter) It was a break to get to a big store. 

Underhill: Do you remember what your father's number was, the hallmark number? 

Bailey: I don't know. I have several of his cards around here, and I don't know whether they might be on there or not, but they'd be out in the garage, so I don't know. But he was well-known among the traders. He had a lot of customers that bought sheep or cattle in <Colorado>, because I could remember they shipped a lot of them there. And then toward the end, the Santa Fe had given up shipping any livestock, so then they had to be trucked out. The sheep would go in the triple-deckers, and one morning I was out at <Castle Butte>, and they were loading sheep, and this big triple- decker had just come, I don't know, coming in with a load, and that thing tipped over, and not one of those sheep was hurt. 

Underhill: Huh! 

Bailey: It was going real slow, and it was just on an incline and got the thing off balance and over it went. But boy, it was just harrowing to watch that. 

Underhill: Now, how long did your family stay in the trading post business? 

Bailey: Dad semi-retired, I guess. He never did retire, he still kept buying sheep. There's still Navajos that come here and ask me if I'll buy a cow. (chuckles) They track me down. But until he died, he was still buying cattle. He had a big ranch between here and <Flagstaff> from Dennison--if you know where Dennison is on the Santa Fe--to Sunshine. And it was the Sunshine Ranch. And when Roger was killed, he couldn't handle that ranch and five trading posts, so he started narrowing things down so that he could handle 'em, and then he bought the one out south of town. And then he died and Mother and Betty and I didn't know how to run a ranch, so we leased it for a while. First we let it lay fallow, and that was the smartest thing we ever did--just not to let any livestock be on there at all. And it rained well and built up grass and the tanks filled. But Betty wasn't interested in it, so most of it ended up [being my responsibility]. But I'd always gone with Daddy.

Now whenever there was anything medical to do with cattle, Betty run the other way. (laughter) So Daddy would come and get me, and oh my! this one young heifer had aborted, and we had to get the afterbirth back in. So he sterilized a Coke bottle, and we got her in the chute, worked and got it back and stitched it in. And I said, "Daddy, what's somebody gonna think when she goes to slaughter and they find a coke bottle in there?" He said, "Oh, I'm sure they find a lot of other things that's unusual." But that's what kept it in. It had been out too long and was too dry to stay. You'd have had to soften it a lot before you ever pushed it back.

But he was a remarkable man. He certainly knew a lot about everything. 

Underhill: When did you stop working in the trading post? 

Bailey: Well, after he died, it burned. He had sold it before he died to George Baker. And then it burned. So George Baker moved out east of town, and it's Brachman's [phonetic spelling] now. Bill Brachman bought it. But he was raised with a trader, so he understood.

Oh, one time.... Let's see, this must have been in the forties. Yeah. Mother and Daddy had decided they would take a vacation and go out to <Los Angeles> to visit with my sister. She was living there at the time. So Daddy says, "Well, as long as we're goin', let's take a whole lot of pawn and see if we could peddle some of it." So he got all the dead pawn. Now, pawn goes dead after a certain time. But these bankers that would come by and talk to Daddy were astounded. "You mean you keep that stuff for a year without any payment at all?" "Absolutely! And longer if they're good." You know, if they're good customers. He said, "You just have to know your people."

Anyway, so they filled a big boot box and took it to <Los Angeles>. And Daddy loved the horse races, so they went to <Santa Anita> while Betty was doin' other stuff with the kids and Charles was at work. They went to the Santa Anita Race Track and they had the best time. They took their boot box and put it under their seat. And they spent the whole afternoon there watchin' the races. Then they were all over, so they left, and they got out quite a ways from the racetrack, and Mother said, "Jot, did you put that in the car?" And he said, "No, did you?" "No." "Well, let's go back and get it." So they went back, looked, and there it was. Isn't that amazing?! In <Los Angeles>, even in the forties. So they still had their jewelry to peddle. (chuckles) Oh, my, there were a lot of funny things that happened.

One cold winter morning, the Collier's magazine had just come, and I was down at Mother and Daddy's and I'd been looking through it, and it was all about going to the moon, and how they were gonna get there. So I took it to Daddy and I said, "Daddy, look at this article. Do you think they'll ever get to the moon?" And he said, "Honey, I can't even begin to think about that. I've got to get to <Holbrook> this morning, and I can't figure out how I'm gonna do it!" (laughter) I thought that was a pretty good answer. 

Underhill: How did you see trading change over time? You saw it from the time you were very young. 

Bailey: Yes. It was a totally different thing-- especially when they first started the CCCs [Civilian Conservation Corps], and they put those men to work killing.... What are they called? Prairie dogs! Prairie dog crews. So they would hire all of these young Indian men, and they would go out and use poison grain and hit every prairie dog town they could, to get rid of 'em. They thought they would bring an increase in the amount of grass. Well, that wasn't causing the overgrazing. The overgrazing was too much livestock. But that was one answer to the United States government.

And at that time.... John Collier was his name, and he wanted to reduce all of the herds of the Navajos. So he forced them to sell--not taking into consideration that these were how inheritances.... Livestock was always an inheritance from the mother. She owned all the livestock. And if there were four or five children, they would just not have anything left if they had to kill all of these, which they did. And traders bought 'em and sent 'em to <Kansas> City by train. So his name just became a swear word among the Navajos. I don't know if you've ever heard that or not, but it was, it was just a swear word--they just hated him. 

Underhill: How did that affect your business? 

Bailey: Well, there was no price of anything at that time. You know, everything was Depression. But Daddy always managed to make money with his rugs and with the trading post--it always made a profit. Like I say, he was a shrewd trader and he knew how to do it.

When they first started the draft--and that was before we were in the war--they sent all kinds of flyers out to all the trading posts to open up a place where these men could come and register to sign up for the draft. So Daddy thought that was a real good idea, so he put a.... We had a big ceremonial hogan that he had bought after one of the ceremonies close to <Castle Butte>. He bought the whole thing and had the men come up and set it up by <Castle Butte>, because it made a wonderful place to have an extra bedroom or just extra room, which we didn't have much of. So he put up a flag pole and flew a flag, and put a big Navajo rug out there on the side of the hogan, and that's where these men signed up. Well, that morning that they were to sign, this young Navajo man came. One of the first ones, and he had a bedroll on the back, and a rifle mounted in a scabbard on the side of his saddle, and he hung around all day long after he signed up. He was still there when we were eating supper. And Mom said, "You know, I think you ought to go out and ask that man what he's waiting for, Jot." So Jot puttered out, he asked him what he was waitin' for. He said, "I'm waiting to go to war. I'm all ready. Just as soon as they tell me where I can go, I'll go." And he said, "Well, it doesn't work that way. You've got to wait 'til you're drafted." But they were good people. My, a lot of them were very good--real good friends.

When Daddy died, they came to Mother immediately, two different medicine men came. And they said, "We want you to know that we're having the same ceremonies for Jot as we would have for our own." So Mother said, "Well, now, let me help you with it." And she took the key to the store and went down and gave them flour and sugar and coffee and whatever else they needed. So it was the day that Kennedy was shot. I had just come home from school, and my daughter came home to have lunch with us, and his name was Honagotnee [phonetic spelling]. He came with his daughter, and he said, "Now we need to finish the ceremony with your mother." So we sat out on the front porch and he went through his chants with his corn pollen, and his daughter interpreted for us. And that's the only ceremony that I know of that was ever held for a white man. And I thought it showed a great deal of respect, and Mother was very well pleased. But the fact that it happened the same time that Kennedy got shot was a little unusual.

Ask me some more questions. 

Underhill: Did your father arrange for people to work with the railroad? 

Bailey: No, I don't think he ever got into that kind of a deal, no, when they were hiring like for the CCCs and whatever else, because there were a lot of government programs just starting up to helping them. Then they would come. I don't know how they would get, how it would ever be known, but <Idaho> would come. People from <Idaho> would come and take Navajos as laborers into the potato fields and all those big heavy fields where there was a lot of heavy work to be done. And they'd be gone all the time.

And then as the Navajos got better educated, it helped a great deal, because when Roger was drafted, he had to take in a group of Apaches that didn't speak any Navajo or any English. And I've often wondered how stupid can the government get? Here they've got a man that can speak Navajo, why don't they use him with the Navajos?! And this one guy I was telling you about that was court martialed, he was the number one scout in the South Pacific, and they were battling over there and he was in some kind of a charge, and he ducked down like this and caught a shell here, and it knocked out his eye. But he was around from <Castle Butte> area. So there was just a lot of 'em that served and served well. (inaudible)

And I still have people come here to see me. This guy that pawned this watch (chuckles), and I didn't even know what I had. Shows you how smart I am. It's a Citizens band watch. The jeweler says the watch alone is worth $200. 

Underhill: Oh, my gosh! And the band? 

Bailey: And the band, I don't have any idea. 

Underhill: What other kinds of services did your family provide at the trading posts? 

Bailey: Well, there was always burying the dead, which at that time they were most superstitious about. And I don't know how many people Daddy buried. But if they didn't do that, they had to go through a ceremony that lasted nine days, and destroy the hogan. The north side of the hogan was always knocked out to take out a body. It was never taken through the front door, which always faced the east, you know.

There were a lot of wonderful customs. When we were first starting in the trading and we were around there all the time, it was just very seldom that a mother-in- law ever saw her son-in-law. And the warning that they would come in and say if they saw the son-in-law coming toward the trading post and knew she was there, they would come in and say there was an owl outside. And she would either sit there with her shawl over her or not, but that was the warning.

And let's see, one day there was a.... When they have squaw dances, they move every daylight. They dance all night, but they move the next morning. Whoever is chosen as the--I guess it's the princess of the dance, has a baton with ribbons on it. And she holds that upright all the time. If it ever drops, it's all over, it won't work. So this one morning there was all of these people, horses and wagons and trucks and everything, and these people in front stopped and they didn't move anymore, and Daddy went out and asked, and they said, "Well, there was a coyote that just went across our way, and we can't go on by. We've got to do something else, or call the whole thing off." (aside to pet) So they mulled around awhile, and pretty soon they found a way to go around that the coyote didn't go, so that they could go on and have their sing or squaw dance. But that's what we usually went to when we took the truck, was a squaw dance, because Daddy--and like I told you, he had the little blanket, the chimayo. 

Underhill: How did things change after World War II? 

Bailey: Well, I think the Navajos knew that they couldn't make a living with just staying on the reservation, so a lot of the men went to work for the Santa Fe. And they were good workers. When they had the ice docks in <Winslow>, they iced all the cars at night. And a lot of those Navajos came in and worked as ice workers. And of course the upstairs of Mother's house, the windows were always open in the summertime, and Daddy could listen to all the Navajos talking as they loaded all this ice. (laughter) And he could understand what they were saying, and sometimes he'd just wake up. Everybody'd just be asleep and he'd just wake up laughin' his head off. (laughter) Oh, they're a great group.

And I like the Hopis, too. And I fire all the time now. I have a kiln, but it's down right now. Two elements are burned out. But I fire, and that box over there is greenware to be fired. Now they're using ceramics--you know, poured ceramics--to make these beautiful things. I'll show them to you before you go. They do beautiful plates. They make big bowls. Oh, there's some out there in <Polacca> that just do wonderful work. Now, the ones at <Oraibi>, I don't know what that's called now, but <Oraibi> are bringing theirs in. They're not quite as good as the ones around <Polacca>, but they bring in lots of it.

And there's two men that work out there in geriatrics that have degrees from <Flagstaff>, and they get hard up for money every once in a while and they build a bowl about this big the old way, and paint it, and then they fire it the old way so it will be variegated. Then they bring it to me and I fire it for ten bucks, and they take it to the Heard Museum and sell it for $3,000. (laughter) But they are beautiful things, and I just can't get out of it. I just love to watch and see what they're making. 

Underhill: And how did you get started firing pottery? 

Bailey: Well, in the seventies.... I had a friend when I was in the sixth grade. There were three of us girls that kind of stayed around together. But this one girl was always messin' us up. So she had done her tricks again and Peggy Eiler [phonetic spelling] and I-- Peggy Darling was her name--and I decided we'd be best friends. So from the sixth grade on, we were together. We went to college together, she stood up with me when I was married. We've just been together, and we went into business together in the ceramic business. And she did all the bookwork and I did all the teaching and all the stuff that had to be done. And we had that until I had an aneurism in my brain, and I was out of commission for a while. She couldn't run it by herself, but I had the kilns over here, and we had to transport all of that greenware here and fire, and then take it back to the shop. And if it had to be glazed, bring it back and fire again. So there were three big kilns out here. So I've gone through three big kilns. I'm waiting now to get some new elements, and I'll be back in business. But little things like those little storytellers over there--I just love to see those. And now she's doing turtles with storytellers. 

Underhill: Who are some of your favorite artisans that you've worked with over the years? 

Bailey: Oh, yes! And it's just wonderful. 

Underhill: Anyone in particular? 

Bailey: Yes, this Carol is one of them. What's-her- name Bailey. Effie Bailey is one of the best painters out there in <Polacca>. She does beautiful work. And there's a young man now that's started. He knows absolutely nothing about Hopi pottery, but he does all of their designs on greenware, and they're just beautiful. And I know he makes a good living with it. His name is Montoya. And I always like to see him come, because he has some unusual things. But I just can't get away from it. My heritage just won't let me do anything else. 

Underhill: Your father's daughter! 

Bailey: And that painting over there is a copy of the original--that Hopi dancer, snake dancer. Have you ever seen a snake dancer before? 

Underhill: Just in photographs. 

Bailey: Okay, well, that's what they look like. And the Hopis can recognize him. So his name was Logan Dallas. You don't often seen anything that's.... But they don't mind that I have it. It's not any big deal. And that's <Castle Butte> in that painting over there. That's from Gordon Pond. Do you know of Gordon Pond? 

Underhill: No, I don't. Very nice. 

Bailey: And this one is Homer Koolyama [phonetic spelling]. And there's a big picture in the back room I want you to see before you go, he painted of my father on horseback, and the rest of his family branding. Now, the picture that it's painted from was in just flat, open area, but he's put in buttes and everything. 

Underhill: (laughs) Changed the landscape. 

Bailey: And the picture, the horse's leg was not included on the picture. So he had to do it over. Now, the only time you ever see that there was a makeover on it, is when you take a picture of it. You can't see it with the natural eye. So I thought, "Boy, if I ever want to buy a big wonderful painting, I'm going to take a picture of it before I do." (laughters) Anything else! If they'll allow it. It would just be good sense.



Underhill: Now, you mentioned that you were married in 1941, December 6. How did you meet your first husband? 

Bailey: Well, I was a Rainbow Girl. Do you know about Rainbow Girls? 

Underhill: Equivalent to Girl Scouts? 

Bailey: No, it's a Masonic order for girls. And there was a big dance in <Flagstaff>, and this guy came up and danced with me and I forgot all about him. He lived in <California>, but evidently he didn't forget about me, so he came back when he graduated from high school to go to work for the railroad. And he worked first in the bridge and building, then he worked his way up to being a fireman, so that's when we got married. This Peggy Eiler and him are the ones that decided when I was going to get married. So they picked the date. Man, what a day! (laughs) The world fell apart the next day. Most interesting. 

Underhill: How many children? 

Bailey: I had three. I had Bruce and then I had Roger, and he died when he was ten months old, and then I had Peggy. Peggy's the only one I have left, and she lives in <Colorado>. So we're going up to see her the end of this month. And she had three children. Now, my sister had the same. She ended up with the same I did, a boy and a girl. Charlie McFetridge [phonetic spelling] and Margery [phonetic spelling]. And then they had their children, and they were the same as my grandchildren, three boys and a girl. Amazing! 

Underhill: (laughs) What a coincidence. 

Bailey: I don't think that would happen very often. 

Underhill: Are there any other favorite stories that you have from your years out at the posts? 

Bailey: I can't think of any right now. I did take the census one year--1960, I think. Isn't that when Goldwater ran? 

Underhill: In 1964. 

Bailey: It was 1964, then, I guess. Yeah, I carried his sign on top of my car from here to.... What is that place in <Colorado>, the first one? 

Underhill: <Cortez>? 

Bailey: No, that big pueblo thing. 

Cole: Mesa Verde? 

Bailey: Mesa Verde. All over Mesa Verde and back down the reservation. (laughs) It was fun. And I've got a whole lot of nice mementos from him that I'm saving. And it was a real fun thing. I was attendance officer at all the schools. The high school you didn't have to bother, because they don't have to go to school if you're eighth grade or older--just so you've completed the eighth grade, that's all they care about. And there was a lot of funny things that happened there, too. We had a mechanic in town that needed help a lot of the time, and his son was an eighth grader, and he needed him to help him with a lot of work. So my son Bruce had come out of the Navy, and he was home on leave. It was Frontier Days at <Winslow>, so they'd asked us all to dress western. So I had on boots and pants and a shirt. And before I left, Bruce said, "I'll go with you today. I want you to wear my gun." So I put his gun on, and we got the list and went out calling on these people.

So I walked up to this.... Bruce said he'd stay in the car, so I walked up to this guy and I said, "Why is So-and-So out of school?" And he said, "Well, I need his help today." And I said, "Well, you're not doin' that boy any favor to keep him out. If you have to have him work, work after school or on Saturday and Sunday. But it's just not fair to that boy." And he never was absent again! (laughter) But I wouldn't have shot a gun on a bet! Oh, my, I hated 'em. 

Underhill: And they weren't allowed on the Navajo Reservation, were they? 

Bailey: Guns? 

Underhill: Uh-huh. 

Bailey: We always had one. Oh, that was another story I was gonna tell you. When we moved to Turkey Track Ranch, radios were a real hot item, so Daddy had to have one. So he bought a battery-type deal, and he needed an aerial and a ground wire. So he took his rifle off of the wall, "blam! blam!" and he had his holes, and he put 'em out. Didn't have to go to the radio shed. (Underhill laughs) I always thought that was innovative. (laughter) Mom didn't care about much of the smoke. Oh, my, growin' up was fun!

It was a bitter cold winter in 1930. Cattle froze standin' up. The chickens lost their feet. We lived out, and you could hear the train whistles from <Holbrook>. So he had to break ice all the time. They use a tripod. When these cattle would get so weak, they'd get down and they couldn't get back up. So they'd work with horses and put a tripod over the downed animal, and a strap underneath 'em, and try and raise 'em up. Well, they would be on the fight so badly, they'd come at that horse and gouge them, and that was probably enough to send 'em back down, so you did the whole thing over and over and over again.

Before we could come to town, Daddy would say, "We might go to town today, but don't get dressed yet." And he'd take boiling water and pour over the manifold-- whatever that is--and then he'd attach the horse to the car, and they'd go around and around and around until the car would start, and then we knew we were goin' to town. 

Underhill: When you first went out to <Piñon>, you had an automobile then? 

Bailey: We had an automobile. It was an old one. One day we were going over to see Lorenzo Hubbell, and there was not even a good back seat--it was just padded back there enough so you weren't ... killed. And on our way, this Navajo man wanted to hitch a ride. So Mother was in an awful quandary. Was that Navajo gonna sit back there with us kids, or was he gonna take her place up in front? Well, she came back with us kids. (laughs) And we went to <Oraibi>. It had rained at some point in there, and we were up on the mesa, and we had to come down, and there were no brakes on the car. So this Indian fellah was still with us. Mom set us three little kids on the bank of the road, and she and this Indian would pull back on that car as Daddy would drive into the side of the butte, gettin' us down. Well, that was quite exciting. (chuckles) So you never knew. We always carried food in the car. We never went anywhere, even to go to <Flagstaff>. We always carried food in the car, and water. And a washpan and a towel and washcloth, because as we came into <Flagstaff>, we had to stop under a pine tree and be washed and changed our clothes before we ever got into <Flagstaff>, and stay at the Monte Vista. 


