Allen Wilson STEIGER:  Ok, so this is the River Runners Oral History Project and it’s October 28th, 2007 and this is Lew Steiger, and I’m sitting here in the kitchen of Allen Wilson, and we’re at Allen’s house in <Gold Beach Oregon> and uh... we’re going to do this deal.  And just so you know, kinda the way that this process goes, in general, is we’ll tape this interview and we’ll get it transcribed and you will get a chance to review the transcript... maybe I’ll transcribe it or maybe we’ll hire it done, but in any case I’ll review it and try to fix misspellings or whatever, try to clean up the  transcript and then I’ll send it to you and you get a chance to review it... usually I send them out to people and say "If you want to make any changes, you’ve got six months to do it..." [Wilson laughs] because it probably took me six months before you saw the transcript [both laugh] so I’ll give you six months, and if you want to fix anything we’ll fix it and then we’ll put in the archives at NAU and it’ll be made public.  And I have to say that because a lot of times I’ve sent them out and never got them back or never heard again from the subject... but at some point we want to be able to make it public.  And typically... 95% of the oral history requests from the public are for the transcript--that’s what people want, because the transcript you can look through a lot faster than this conversation we’re going to have in real time.  But a caveat... one thing that’s kinda come along since I started doing this is...nowadays they’re putting these things on the web.

WILSON:  Really?

STEIGER:  Yeah, they want to stream ‘em and put ‘em on the internet.

WILSON:  Huh?

STEIGER:  Huh.  Yeah, that’s what I said. [Wilson laughs]  Cause I mean when I think of all the stuff that I said on tape when I was doing these things, not thinking... cause I always had the assumption that these tapes were going to sit on the shelf and nobody’s hardly--well maybe somebody, somewhere...will ever listen to them again.  You know, people are going to want the transcripts.  But now that they’re doing this streaming thing, you’ve got to have it in your mind that maybe they’ll put it on...they might want to put this on the web, and you know, somebody, maybe one of your friends [Wilson chuckles] or former employers [both laugh] or something like that...[WILSON: Might look this over.]  Yeah, exactly.

WILSON:  You know, ...I don’t believe that I can even do this interview!  [both laugh]

STEIGER:  Okay, well let’s just forget the whole thing!  [more laughter] Yeah.  ...I’ve yet to do a BQR piece that didn’t piss somebody off, somewhere along the way.

WILSON:  Oh really, oh how interesting.  Well, I guess one person’s perception’s probably a whole lot different than another person.

STEIGER:  Well everybody remembers it differently and I’m constantly putting things in there that seem fine to me but then the other parties involved get miffed... so that’s kinda what’s going on there, and then the other thing that I never have been very good at doing is they have a release there at NAU that they want to get everybody to sign, giving them permission to do anything they want to do at any time with the interview and blah-blah-blah... [WILSON: Wow.]  and I never get anybody to sign them, because I hate those things.  [laughter] I keep meaning to, but I never can bring myself to do it.  So right now, just to cover my butt for those guys now, I need to get your permission.... We should say that you understand that this is what we’re doing and provided that you get a chance to review this, it’s ok with you to participate in this and it’s going to be ok with you that this’ll be in the archives and people can make use of it.

WILSON:  It’s ok with me for all the above.

STEIGER:  Ok.  Allright.  So here we go:  Typically what I like to do is just ask everybody to tell me a little bit about their family circumstances, just growing up or whatever, just your circumstances, thumbnail biography of your life before you got to the river.  Because I feel like that’ll put your perceptions into perspective.

WILSON:  MMM-kay.  Um, I’d like to start with my dad, who was Ira Wilson, and he was born in 1891 on the plains of <Kansas> in a sod house, and lived in a sod house until he was sixteen and then they went by train--they auctioned their farm off and went by train to <Washington> state.  To give you an idea of what that was like at that time, as kids they went out and picked up buffalo chips to cook their meals with and that sort of stuff.  There were no buffalo there but the chips were still there and they were still using them for fire.  I’ve got an incredible picture of my granddad sitting in front of the sod house with his long rifle and a buffalo skull up on the roof and his hat tipped back, not a cowboy hat... but sort of a cowboy type hat.  But he was a farmer, you know, he was a rancher.  So he did dryland farming, and then they moved to the same type of a location in central <Washington>... dry, miles from nowhere... and set up a little farm.  They had a little spring; and they started dryland farming again, and then eventually my dad... his dad died.  My granddad died at an early age and my dad, being the oldest boy of six boys and one girl, had to take over.  So he wound up basically having to work, and went to painting on a bridge over the Columbia River, and he was watching those steamboats going by under there, so finally he went down to the docks and was sitting around talking to the different captains and got a job shoveling coal on a steamboat on the Columbia River.  Then eventually he wound up in <Myrtle Point Oregon>, where he met my mother.  My dad had a service station there.  My mother answered a... actually my dad answered an ad that my mother’s schooteacher put in to get her off the ranch in <Roseburg>.  She was twenty-four or something and this teacher thought she was going to just die there, and she didn’t want her to do that.  So she wound up taking the bus to <Myrtle Point>, and the schoolteacher met her there and the teacher tells my dad that this is this woman that he answered the ad for... and

STEIGER:  Now wait, the shoolteacher put the ad in for your mom?  It wasn’t a romance ad?

WILSON:  No, just an ad for work.  But mom thought she was going to be living with the shoolteacher out in <Charleston>.  Instead, this schooteacher really, literally just dumped her on my dad’s doorstep and said, "Well I hope it works for you."  And drove off to <Charleston>, you know?

STEIGER:  Was she thinking matchmaking?  Or she just wanted to get your mom off...

WILSON: She wanted to get my mom off the farm and get her out in the world, and start doing some stuff.  The long and the short of it was, my dad took her in and my mother cooked for his wife, who was very very sick, and so they wound up... in a couple years his wife died and my mother married her boss, my dad.  Then shortly after that they moved, in 1939, to <Gold Beach>, which was a really really rural area.  Wood sidewalks, you know, and little bridges around town, just really... actually it was like that when I was a kid here too.  I was born in ’47, so anyway that’s my basic background.  My mother came from a little farm in <Roseburg Oregon>.  My dad came from <Colby Kansas>.  Then my mother didn???t have me until she was thirty-two and they didn’t believe in going to the hospital and they wound up with a chiropractor who was living in Coos Bay being the attending physician with a midwife here in <Gold Beach>, and the drive to Coos Bay in those days was like a two and half hour, three hour drive, depending on conditions.  So the chiropractor came to my parents’ house once a month, and when it looked like she was going to get ready to deliver, he drove down and delivered me in our house on the corner of 11th Street and 101, <Gold Beach Oregon>.  She had another kid two years later--my brother Bruce--and I’ve got an older half-brother who was from the first marriage, he’s still alive and is eighty-six.  So that’s sort of the family.

STEIGER:  So your dad’s primary business was the gas station?

WILSON:  The gas station at one point, and then in <Gold Beach> they became what they called a consignee, who was somebody that runs a company-owned bulk plant.  They did it for Union Oil, and they ran that for basically thirty years, and in the process opened up a tire shop just down the street a short distance, and had Firestone tires, and then my dad put a cap shop in, and I worked there as a kid a lot.  Then he got the contract to supply all the earth-moving tires for the construction of Highway 101 as it is now, which was done in the sixties... late fifties, early sixties.  So all this highway, you know, he supplied the tires for.  Which was an incredible amount of earth-moving tires.  You know, they were six, seven feet high when they were standing up.  It was pretty interesting.  They’d put them on, they had the trucks to go out and put them on.  I got involved in a lot of that stuff too when I was eighth grade, ninth grade, in high school.

Never much on the river.  My dad loved to fish and had a boat, but when I was born, he got rid of all that stuff.  [laughs]  Just because... I think his life just got too busy.  My dad, of course, was fifty-six when I was born.  So he was a little bit older...  I was the oldest of two kids, and then there was my older half-brother from his first marriage.  Anyway, that’s sort of what happened.  I never did anything on the river.  I never really learned how to swim.  My dad decided he was going to teach me how to swim and he took me up Hunter Creek, just right up here, and held on to my trunks and demanded that I do this stuff, and I just couldn’t do it so... [laughter]  I remember that real vividly.  But I never did learn to swim.  So I always wore a lifejacket, everywhere I went!  [more laughter]  I mean I could paddle around.  I actually felt very comfortable in the water.  I didn’t mind being in the river, you know, like if I’d get in or somebody’d throw me in or something... like floating Hermit or something, that was just a kick, you know.  I never got panicked.  When I did later river stuff, like up here on the Chetco, you know, that was all low water stuff, but you could really easily get yourself pinned in there.  I was just very aware and was able to... I don’t know, I just was relaxed, and I think that was important in being able to survive in water most of the time anyway.

STEIGER:  I guess we should say, for people like me who grew up in <Arizona> and don’t know anything about this country up here... we’re just south of the mouth of the--the Rogue River is just a teeny tiny bit north of us.  [WILSON:  Three miles north.]  Yeah, and there’s rivers galore in this country, coming out of--are these the Sierras here?  [WILSON: No...]  We’re on the coast side of a coastal range here... there’s a ton of rivers coming outta here going to the ocean.

WILSON:  And Curry County, the county I live in here--I’m glad you mentioned that--has a population of about twenty-two thousand, and that’s the whole county.  <Gold Beach>, the town I live in, is about two thousand, the county has five Wild and Scenic rivers, it’s got the Kalmiopsis Wilderness, which is five hundred thousand acres, and then there??s Bald Mountain Wilderness... I think that’s it for the Wilderness Areas.  There’s another one they’re trying to get implemented up on the Elk River, which is also a Wild and Scenic River.  So it’s just this really, really remote place, with... that started out by logging, lots of logging going on, lots of commercial fishing, big... the Rogue River is famous for its salmon fishing.  And lots of famous people came here and fished the Rogue, so it’s a tourism... fishing tourism industry.  Logging and mining were significant at one time and now, not very significant, even though they are... they felled trees in my back yard the other day so... [laughs].  [STEIGER: Sore subject.]  Yeah.  Because our property is adjascent to a big timberland holder.  So I don’t know what else to say about that.

STEIGER:  Well, let’s talk about river running.  Did you boat on any of these... so you’d go fishing...?  But you’d, he’d got rid of the boat...? 

WILSON:  My dad never took me fishing.  There was a guy that ran the cap shop for my dad that really taught me how to fish.  He was an avid fisherman, so we used to go fish some, but fishing wasn’t one of those things I wanted to do, I didn’t like to hunt, you know, so I was an odd guy here in Curry County, because everybody here was a hunter and a fisherman and that sort of stuff, and I was more into reading and playing.  I loved to hike.  When I was a little kid I’d hike up to the tops of the little mountains that were all around where I grew up, and that was the stuff I was interested in.  It always has been, and it worked really well for me in the <Grand Canyon>, because I loved to hike down there, and scale cliffs as much as possible.  [chuckles]

STEIGER:  So how did it transpire that you came to the <Grand Canyon>?

WILSON:  Well, basically I spent three years at a junior college, and it was up in <Coos Bay Oregon>, which is about eighty miles north of here... and my parents bought me a little trailer and put it in this little trailer park, and I just spent my time there.  And a lady in the park, who was another person living there, she came one day and asked me if I wanted to work in her AandW Root Beer stand.  So I needed money, so I went to work for her and wound up managing that place and going to school at the same time.  So I had these weird hours, you know, like a full-time job at the AandW, and I was most of the time doing twelve credits, so I was burning both ends of the candle and doing this job... it was just incredible, you know, I was doing a little book-keeping thing and all that, which I look back on now and go: "How in the world was I ever able to even think about doing that?  But it was a good job, you know... short-order cook, and I’d wait on cars... that was back in the times when AandW had... the car-hops went out... people parked, they’d haul the tray out to them, you know, I mean those girls got some good tips sometimes!   [laughs]  And it was a real kick, and it was a lot of fun doing that.  And in the meantime I wanted to travel, so I... there was a guy up there who had a Volkswagen... little place where he sold used Volkswagens, he’d fix em up, and I bought this Volkswagen bus, a 1960 Volkswagen bus for about a hundred bucks, but I had to get an engine... so I found an engine someplace and put that in it and started driving it around, and I was going to travel in that.  I just wanted to travel the <US>, and that was my goal, and I was going to do it in this bus.  So I painted it red, and I’d get ready to go, and it would break down.  So I’d have to delay my departure.  I didn’t have enough money to fix it, so I had to go back and work at the AandW... I had like five "going away" parties.  [laughs]  And never went away!  I never went away.  Finally I got the hell out of there, and there were a couple...  one of the carhops had a boyfriend that loved to surf, and he taught me to surf a little bit out there on the bay... <Charleston> and Sunset Beach, and those places... and so they wanted to go to <San Diego> and it was their honeymoon, so I met them in <San Diego>, and we went surfing down there and then I took off and headed to <Phoenix>, and then I went up to <Flagstaff>, and I broke down at <Flagstaff>, and I had to get a little bit of help there, and I wound up... in the process of making that trip I stopped in <Palm Springs> and talked to an old friend of mine, who was retired from working for my dad in the business, and he said "You know, one thing you’ve got to do is go to the <Grand Canyon>, and if you can, get on one of those boat trips that goes down the Colorado River."  He had this National Geographic with this story in it, and he showed it to me.  He said "You just have to try and do that."  That was in 1969.  So I took it to heart, and I did go to the <Grand Canyon>.  After I got out of <Flagstaff> I just went up to the South Rim and met a couple people there that camped with me.  It was a Jewish couple, real young... I was 20, so they were probably in that 20-21 range... and in the process I also met five guys from <New York>, <New York City>, and I did a lot of hiking around the rim with them, but I mean I was such a novice, and so naïve... I had no clue about anything.  So these guys, we were talking about going to <Phantom Ranch>, and so they say "Well, we’re going to go such-and-such a day."  And I said "Well Ok."  Well that day came and I got to thinking, "you know I really would be better off if I went the next day,"  so I said "Well I’ll just walk down to <Indian Gardens>, walk down there."  And I got down there and I looked back up and I go "Awww shit!"  You know?  There’s no way I’m going to go up.  So I just went ahead and went on down with them.  Well, we went down, and we’re standing in the line there... I don’t know if you ever had the opportunity, to stand in line at the window?  Where they’d roll the window up and they’d say "What do you want?"  And then they’d slam the window back down.  [STEIGER: To keep it cool?]  I think it was, yeah.  They were usually half... well they were usually pretty nice most of the time, but if they had too many people come to the window, they’d be a little grumpy.  But it was a lemonade deal, you know.  You buy lots and lots of lemonade there... but I was standing in line and one of the guys from <New York>, he said "You know, there’s..."  and I don’t know how he picked up on it, cause we all walked down the <Bright Angel Trail> and came up the river.... But he spotted these boats up parked there on the sand bar, and he said "You know, there’s these boats there and this is a boatman right behind you, and you ought to ask them if they need any help."  So I just turned around and walked back in the line and was talking to this guy and asked him if they needed any help.  He says "You know I’m quitting at the end of this trip and one of the other guys is quitting and they actually do need some help."  He says, "Go down and talk to Deubner.  He’s down at the boats."  So I got my drink and went down there and talked to Deubner and he says "Sure, you can go to work for us.  We’re going to need some help."  And so he drew a little map in the sand that showed how to get down to <Meadview> and down to <South Cove>, where they were taking out.  So I hiked back out, and wound up going to <Meadview>.  But the thing about that hike was I’d never hiked in any kind of conditions like that before.  I’d never hiked over anything but just little short jaunts uphill, and I... being a diabetic, I thought I was going to do this hike, that was where some of my naïve stuff came in.  I just thought that I could hike down to <Indian Gardens> and right back up again and I didn’t have to take my insulin with me.  So I wound up spending the night down there, over-eating tremendously, and when I hiked out it was hotter than hell and I was so cooked from the sun and so dehydrated, and my blood sugar had to’ve been, you know, 12,000.... I mean it had to have been really really high, and I was sick.  I was throwing up and I was crawling, and I just had an awful time.  But I finally, through just sheer determination, made it to the rim and the people, the Jewish couple that were with me, the guys from <New York>, they went up and got them and said "He’s going to need some help."  So they all came back and they helped me get over to the campground, and I started drinking water, and took my shot, which I knew I needed really badly and in about a day I was feeling good again.  So that was my first <Grand Canyon> experience.  [laughs]

STEIGER:  <Grand Canyon> kicked your ass, eh?

WILSON:  Yeah it did.  Big time.  [laughs]  I was lucky to get out of there, actually.  So, yeah... and then the couple I was with, they needed to get on an airpane in <Las Vegas> so I took them to <Las Vegas> and I was flat out of money.  They gave me thirty dollars, which was enough to buy gas and a little bit of food, to get back to <Flagstaff>...  But I had to go to <Meadview>... I guess I should tell that story, it’s not probably the most... well, I’ll tell it:  Drove out to <Meadview>, you know, and Alan said "Stop at the little store at <Meadview>..."  [STEIGER: Alan Deubner, and he was the manager or just a boatman?]  Well he was a boatman, but, ok, ARTA at that time, Lou Elliott ran the show and he was in <Oakland>, he never came... I didn’t know who Lou was until that winter when I went back to <Oakland>, but um... Alan Deubner was running the river part of it; Jim Elliott, Lou’s son, was running the shore part, which included... basically Jim made his money by shuttling cars so he did a heavy-duty car shuttle the whole time we were on the river and then... so he kept all that stuff going and then if we needed anything like--one time he bundled up a bunch of lifejackets and put a pump in lifejackets, because Deubner forgot his pump and Jim figured it out, so he flew over the <Grand Canyon> and found out where they were and dropped this pump in the lifejackets... just smashed the shit out of it.  It wasn’t any good.  [laughter]  And Alan loved to tell that story because, well they punched a hole in one, you know, and they had to blow their boats up by mouth and it was quite an ordeal.  [laughter]  But anyway, so that was the running operation of that company, and they had a sixteen year old guy who--his name was John Elliott, but he was from Orange County and not a relation to the Elliott family, and he was... I was talking to Mike Castelli about this and he said... one of Mike’s, first trips was with little John and he’s this wiry little kid but he just, for whatever reason he just couldn’t stay awake.  He slept all the time.  He slept at night, he slept during the day, and he was running this boat.  So he’d just give you the basics, and just say "Wake me up when you come to a big rapid or something."  So that’s what we did.  So really you learned to run the boat pretty good, just not having anybody there telling you what to do all the time.  So that learning experience... so the people in my life in terms of learning to run the river, was Hugh Wingfield... John Elliott helped in the beginning just from not caring.  Hugh, he cared a lot.  He worked for Georgie White, and he learned to run the river from Georgie, which was: you line the boat up at the top and you lift the motor out and you just crash through.  So I liked to call, jokingly, Hugh’s method of running the river the crash-and-burn method.  You really could crunch through some pretty heavy-duty stuff, you know, and those early frames that went across the boat width-wise were about, I don’t know, the boats were about fifteen wide so the frames were probably thirteen or something, I can’t remember.  They were put together with four-by-fours down lengthwise across the boat and plywood was bolted to the four-by-fours, and we just snapped those four-by-fours in two... usually in <Horn Creek>.  There were a lot of times they’d come through too.  Finally they built a bigger, lighter frame that was with aluminum tubing and plywood, and that really worked well.  We had a couple bent ones, but not very much.  That was a lot sturdier operation.  Let’s see, what else?  But Hugh, he was really good, because he really, really worked.   Paid a lot of attention to what I was doing, and helped me learn the real basics of how to follow the current.  I didn’t know anything about the current.  I didn’t know anything about that stuff.  So, I know the first couple of trips that I worked with Hugh were really really good, and then... basically I did three trips--one with Johnny, then two with Hugh, and then I got my own boat.  Then the next season they got so many letters proclaiming how good I was (which is kind of odd) but they made me a head boatman, and they needed to have a head boatman, and they chose me to be the second head boatman there, basically.  So I made it to head boatman and just kept on going.

STEIGER:  With four trips, or whatever it was.

WILSON:  It was three.  [laughter]

STEIGER:  So what year was that?

WILSON: 1969.  Yeah. 

STEIGER:  We been looking at your... before we sat down to do this Allen was showing me his scrapbook and we were seeing these pictures of these rigs.  Basically... maybe we can attach them to this tape.  The early ARTA rigs, basically it was a thirty-three foot pontoon and three snout tubes, one in the middle and then two on the sides and most of the gear was back there just on a pretty little platform that incorporated the side tubes, but it wasn’t all that much stuff.  Not clear out to the sides, but it was touching them, for sure.

WILSON:  Yeah, oh yeah.  It was out just past the center of the side tube, is where they had it located.  And then that way if you crashed into a rock you generally didn’t smash the frame too.  Had a little leeway there.  Which we needed a lot of.  [laughter]  Yeah.  I wasn’t the best boatman in the world, that’s for dang sure.  I have the distinction of probably busting more handles, and sheering more pins--we used Evinrudes and Johnsons--than any other boatman, you know.  And there was quite a little bit of criticism about my capabilities at the helm.  I look back on that and I just think, you know, I could not bring myself... if I thought there was a split second chance to miss a rock, I’d keep the motor in the water till the last second.  And I didn’t always get it out quite in time.  I was really bad about that.  I should have really adhered more to Hugh’s standards, when things went bad, just get the engine out of the water and go up front and sit down with the passengers! [laughter]  Just live with it.  [STEIGER:  He didn’t break too many motors?]  No, he didn’t.  But I was always trying to make precision out of the whole thing, you know, and it... I did a lot of damage.  [laughs]  But we were really good... the pontoons were World War Two, cotton, neoprene.  The cotton was rotten.  Then we used the bologna tubes which were, they were of the same vintage, and really, really, very marginal for strength in any kind of rough water at all.  Lou finally went to Buck’s War Surplus in <Las Vegas> and bought a whole tuckload of snout tubes.  They were nylon, and they could take the abuse.  [STEIGER:  The bologna tubes you’re talking about-- were those ones that were round on both ends?]  They weren’t as durable.  And the neat thing about the bologna tubes was, they had different diameters of tubes, and so you could get the smaller diameter and hook it onto the sides of your boat, so when you were just going down flat water, there wasn’t much dragging in the water.  So you could really... for those old boats with that big wide frame and a heavy load in there, those boats were dragging a lot of water.  So they didn’t go very fast, and with those awful Evinrudes it was even more of a problem because... I did have a Mercury for awhile, and it was a heck of a lot better.  The typical Evinrude gas consumption was eighty or ninety gallons per trip.  The Mercury,  I think it was like thirty, thirty-five gallons we would use, and that’s a huge difference.  The power was phenomenal--it was like you had two motors instead of one, with the Merc, yeah.  Oh man, the Mercury was phenomenal for power.  [STEIGER:  Now that was a Merc 20?]  Yes it was.  The Evinrudes were 18’s, yeah.  But I learned much later that they measured the horsepower two different ways, and the Mercury just was a better running motor.  But if you had to work on it, it was horrible.  The Evinrude, you know, I took two different types of bailing wire.  I made sure I had  a lot of that, what I call shoestring hoopie cord, we called it hoopie cord, the little Army-surplus parachute cord, and I just kept a little roll of that in my ammo can along with a whole complement of socket wrenches and box end wrenches and screwdrivers and pliers and all that stuff, because if you didn’t hit a rock or do something like that, then you still had to work on those motors somewhere along the way.  It was never-ending.  And, because Glen the motor-man, in <Flagstaff> would get the motors... he would always say, "I tested all your motors..."  Well we???d get on the river sometimes and find out they wouldn’t necessarily all  work.  So what we would do is take the two motors that were runners and put them on the transoms and the other two motors, that just wouldn’t start, we’d stick them underneath the load and they were our spares.  [STEIGER:  Under the load?  So you weren’t going to, like, change one out real fast or anything?]  Nah.  Wouldn’t matter if you could.  It wouldn’t run.  And so... though I did at times have running spares, and I was able to change a motor out pretty quick.  I was able to change a motor out at the top of Hance one time, and get it lined up and still run it.  So, you know, it was possible.  [laughs]  But, yeah... Lou didn’t want to spend a lot of money on that stuff, and the motors we had, there was no turnover.  It was just like the old motors were refurbished in the winter and the next year we’d go back and use them again.  The <Grand Canyon> operation... it seemed like the <Grand Canyon> operation was run on a shoestring, but the really good part of that was--I loved it.  Because my dad, having come out of the last century into this century, taught me a lot about how to make things work that didn’t work, having very little resources to do it with.  And I was actually halfway decent at it.   I needed to be because a lot of times when I broke things and I needed to figure out a way to do things those would still work pretty good.  And/or when you had a motor that just didn’t work, you know?  I guess I should tell this, though it’s kind of a condescending thing, and I hate to do this to Lou... but Lou had the really good stuff and the really bad stuff like we all do, and Lou was great, you know he just loved what he was doing and he just talked about it and created enthusiasm, and provided all these different river trips.  He had the largest river company in the world, you know, when I was working for him.  They had several hundred boatmen, and they were doing stuff in <Australia>--and that was before SOBEK--but  Jim and Lou were at <Lee's Ferry> one day, putting us on the river, and here’s a guy... Lee Eastman, and he was very capable, big, strong guy, and he had the other boat.  He’d had two trips on the river.  One as a passenger and the other as a helper, and he was running this first trip.  So he gets this motor that wouldn’t run.  I mean the other motor didn’t run and... we had three motors that didn’t run and we had two boats to run down the river.  Well, Lou’s there, and it’s embarassing because we can’t get this motor to run.  It’ll start but it won’t continue to run, and just on and on and on, you know, and so finally everybody hears Lou tell Jim "Well, push em off!  They’ll get it goin!"  [laughter]  So, you know, here’s Lee drifting down the river and he can’t get this motor to run.  [ STEIGER: Lou has Jim push him off, because he just doesn’t want them sitting there at the Ferry?]  (more laughter)  Exactly.  So... we wound up going down in the <Paria> riffle, and these were all low water trips, pretty low--ten thousand (cfs), five thousand, in that range. And we wound up... his boat got stuck on the rocks there in the <Paria> riffle.   Floated down there with no motor.  I tried to bump him.  I tried to push him out of the way, but the way he got pushed off, he was way too far right there and the current just kind of took him down and we’d drift along there, and I couldn’t get over on the rocky side to push him because it was too shallow.  I couldn’t keep my motor in the water.  Nothing worked, you know.  Anyway, he got stuck down there.  So Jim rolls his pant legs up and wades out there and they settle down to figure out what’s wrong with the motor.  And Jim was very mechanically inclined, so he found out that it was the fuel pump that was bad.  We didn’t have an extra; there were no extra fuel pumps.  There wasn’t even an extra one on the motors, because they tried all the others, none of them worked.  So there was a little, I think it was a little ten-year-old boy on that trip who squeezed the bulb the whole trip.  [laughter]  He was the most important part of the trip, was that little kid.  [more laughter]  But... having that experience... you know I would look at the Sanderson boats and I’d look at the J-rigs... I’d look at all those boats and they’re all precision and they have these booms that load the things onto the boats.  They load their frames on and get them tied down and it’s a matter of minutes and they’ve got a boat in the water ready to go.  It would take us hours to assemble our boats and do all the rigging that it took to tie all the pieces together... but it was such an incredible learning experience and it was so.... Aaah it was just... It was neat, you know?  It really was.  It was just really really neat.  And given the antiquity of the equipment, we were able to... we really got some good trips in--a lot of really really good trips.  Just because we were so enthusiastic about it.  I think that’s the reason why they called me "Crazy Al," is my enthusiasm was way overblown from what it should have been.  I mean I was in this world that was... look at... I grew up here, you know?  I didn’t even know what a desert was until I got there.  And I certainly had no idea what the <Grand Canyon> was like.  The next thing I know, I’m down there.  I’m running a boat in the <Grand Canyon>.  It was just remarkable.  At least for me it was remarkable.  I don’t think I thought about it that way but I look back and my enthusiasm... I mean I just typically, when I start doing something, I just put everything I have into it.  If somebody wanted something done they’d ask me to do it and I would run to do it, and everybody else would walk, you know?  It’s just the example of my first job...  oh, I was going to tell the story about Jim.  I do have to tell that.

STEIGER:  Now Jim is, that’s Rob’s big brother?

WILSON:  Rob’s little brother. 

STEIGER:  Okay.  We had talked about this, but not on tape.  Rob worked for the company but the <Vietnam> war was going on and Rob was a conscientious objector and so he had to go off and do community service, which he finessed into working for Outward Bound.

WILSON:  Outward Bound.  Right.

STEIGER:  How did you dodge the <Vietnam> war?

WILSON:  I was a diabetic.  They did not like diabetics.  They don’t like them in the military.  They have lots of diabetics there but usually they’d get it, I think, after they’re there.  Yeah, Rob went to Outward Bound and you know, Rob started Outward Bound’s river running program.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Which was really interesting.  I mean it’s interesting in terms of how it kind of pertains to things they do today.  You can certainly see the roots of everything that’s still going on today were back there with all that experience.

WILSON:  Yeah.  And you know ARTA started all those river running schools.  They’d take a bus and drive to all those rivers.  I never participated in any of those, but a lot of guys I worked with did.  It was one of those things that really generated a lot of interest, and they got boatmen out of it too!  You know, like Roger and Louise Hoaglund, Louise Teal now.  She came as a result of that experience, I do believe.  There’s others.  I don’t remember now who all they were.

STEIGER:  In ’69, ’70... how many crews were there?  How many motor boats worked for ARTA then?  Were running full time would you say?

WILSON:  In ’69, the first trip I did with them was the first time they put four boats on the water.  The trip prior to that they had put kind of a double-rig together, like Georgie had.  But they didn’t like it.  So then they decided to split it into two different two boat trips.  That was the first time, I think, they did that.  If they had done it earlier, nobody ever mentioned it, you know.  But they did a lot of three boat trips.  I know that.

STEIGER:  So there weren’t like multiple trips on the water at one time?

WILSON:  Oh no.  Not at all.

STEIGER:  Not a huge crew you were working with?

WILSON:  Let’s see, the first year, in ’69, the trips all ran at the same time.  Then in ’70 they did split them off.  So they were staggered, so they could work the put-ins and the take-outs appropriately.  Which I don’t recall now what the schedules were like.  But yeah, they did do that in 1970.  So I correct myself there.  God, where was I going...with that?  Oh well, you know there had to have been... out at the Burris Ranch, you know, there were times when there’d probably be twenty people around there.  I really can’t say for sure.  The second year I worked down there, and the third year I worked, they were getting so many guys that were coming from other rivers and learning to run the <Grand Canyon>, and they gave me a lot of trainees.  Every trip I went down I had a new trainee, and it was so hard to work with a new guy every time, you know.  You had to go from teaching them hauling the water to learning to run the boat and all that.  It was hard.  I got really tired of that.  I wish that I had somebody that I could’ve worked with more often, and had sort of a relationship built up that was compatible and would work really good and you could became an efficient team.  But that didn’t happen until a year or so later, really.  Let’s see... Jim, when he was in <San Francisco>, that trip where I drove down because Alan said I could work for them....  Well I drove to <Meadview> and I’m talking to these people at <Meadview> and they were just excited!  They just loved these guys--the ARTA boatmen.  They were these gods, you know.  So I come in and the restaurant, the little restaurant they had there, which was a trailer house... see the restaurant now is over on the east side of the road, the restaurant then, and service station and the little cabins were all on the west side of the road, the lake side of the road and all these little trailer houses... so Jim shows up and they’re just really talking nice about Jim, what a good guy he is and so they’re going out and Jim came with the first van-truck, like a two-ton truck with a van on the back and a lift gate.  It was a used Hertz truck or something like that.  So he comes up and they’re out there looking at it.  I’m just sitting in there drinking this coffee and so he comes in and they say "Oh, and by the way here’s Allen Wilson.  Deubner hired him to go on the next trip."  And Jim just went berserk.  [laughter]  He goes "Oh God..." you know, and cussing and swearing.  They’re going "Wow!  We’ve never seen this part before!"

STEIGER:  So Jim didn’t think that was such a good idea??

WILSON:  It wasn’t a good deal because he had these other two guys with him, that he’d hired.  And they were car thieves from <San Francisco>.  [laughter]  Jim and Lou had this really, really close friend who had these two cousins or whatever they were... they weren’t cousins, I don’t know, they were his daughter’s kids or something.  They were in a lot of trouble.  The cops were after them.  They needed to hide out.  They needed a different lifestyle than cruising the streets of <San Francisco> beating people up and all that stuff.  They were just like high school kids.  They were sixteen, seventeen years old.  So, they... I worked with them for quite a little while.  They were really funny.  Like up at <Lee's Ferry>, the first night at <Lee's Ferry>, the bats come out and were flying around.  They were so scared they crawled into their sleeping bags and just huddled under there the whole night.  [laughter]  It was the first time we went up there with them.  Well we went up... I don’t remember now... my first trip with four boats, we divided up into two pieces you know, that was with Hugh Wingfield... the first trip was with three boats and that was with Deubner and Steve Dupuy and myself and High Wingfield and then Johnny Elliott.  That was my very first trip.  Then the second trip was a four boat trip where we split it into two.  Then Hugh and I ran on into October doing trips, and of course all the other guys went back to school, because they were college kids, or high school kids, one or the other.  They went back to school, left early and went back.  Then Hugh and I were just doing two boat trips after that.  So I wound up that first summer I got seven trips in and I started... I was on the river when the first man walked on the moon.  So that was kind of cool. [STEIGER: 1969.]  Yeah.

STEIGER:  So you were like a swamper on your first trip, with Wingfield?  Or no, you were driving John Elliott...

WILSON:  I traded off between John and Hugh on the very first trip.

STEIGER:  And John would just sleep when you were driving?

WILSON:  Sleepy guy, yeah.

STEIGER:  And he wasn’t related, even though his name was Elliott.  And Rob’s little brother was Jim?  And even though he was pissed at you, or pissed they’d hired you after he’d hired those car thieves...?

WILSON:  No.  He hung on to me.  We got to be good friends.  He got over it.  Well, you know, like I always have a tendency to overdo things... he gives the three of us, our first job was to dig a new outhouse hole.  Because the old outhouse was unusable because the shit was piled clear up into the hole; at the warehouse, which was out at Parks.  Or not Parks, it was out at the Burris Ranch, which was when you go through east Flag and start heading out onto the highway, do you know where Dennis Prescott and those guys had their warehouse?  Where the dome was, yeah.  It was just back from there about a half a mile and you turn right and you drive down this long straight road that ended in the Burris Ranch.  We were down there renting the barn and a sort of a bunkhouse thing.  But there was no water there, and there was no toilet and so the three of us got to dig this outhouse hole.  So I encouraged them to dig a hole that was about six feet deep, and we would take turns getting in the hole and shoveling dirt as best we could into a five-gallon bucket and then we’d lift it out.  So we got this hole dug and put the outhouse over the top, and we just didn’t have anything more to do. Cause he figured it would take us two days to do it, I think.  We were sitting around there when they came back from town, and Jim goes "Well, how come you’re not digging the hole?"  "Well, it’s done."  "You mean, you put the outhouse back over the top too?"  I said "Well yeah.  Go take a look."  So he goes in... Jim is such a funny character, I just love it.  He goes in there and he gets down on his hands and knees and he sticks his head way down inside that hole and he goes "God-damn!" [laughter]  "How deep is that thing?!"  He comes out, he says "Well, good job, you guys!"  [laughter]  So that was the beginning.  And then I got pretty discouraged, because it seemed to me like... that there were an awful lot of irregularities.  Just funny things, people having... it didn’t seem like there was much of a business operation there and I grew up in a business.  [STEIGER:  And you had run a business too...]  Exactly.  It wasn’t really straightforward and I was getting a little bit on the discouraged side and so Hugh, he realizes this and he comes over and starts talking to me.  He goes "You know, just don’t pay any attention to all this stuff.  As soon as we’re on the river, we’re our own bosses and everything works really, really smooth."  He says "You’ll love it.  Just wait."  And he was right.  As soon as we got away from everything that was going on there then it worked out really good.  Nothing that was bad; it was just kind of frustrating for me.  So that was the beginning.

STEIGER:  So Hugh had already decided...

WILSON:  Yeah. He wanted me to work with him.  [laughter]  And that’s what happened.  Shortly I wound up with my own boat, so he and I ran boats together and then we had... I don’t remember too many of the assistants that we had at that time but they were still guys that ARTA had picked them to go do a trip.  A lot of guys working in <Idaho>, they were coming through.  They’d get a trip and we’d take them down and we’d never see them again.  Or they might come back and they may fall in love with it and come back, and some of them probably are still working there for all I know.  But yeah, Hugh and I had some good trips.  Lots of low water trips.  The rest of that season... it was, it was low water, you know.  <Horn Creek>, the two horns usually had... there were usually rocks sticking out of the water where the two horns were; or just barely covered.  It was that way pretty much down the river.  The next season they...

STEIGER:  When those two rocks were sticking out at <Horn Creek> did you go right to left then?  Or right between them?  [WILSON:  Right between them.]  Wow.

WILSON:  Yeah.  Uh, we did run some runs down the right, because between the rocks was unrunnable.  [laughter]  There was a huge rock down there that was just a barricade, you know.  So we ran our motor rigs down the right side.  Those trips were really low water.  A year later at <Lee's Ferry> we were getting these, all this low water stuff and so we were really tired of waiting until the water came up... you know, they’d turned a generator on and we were just getting one generator, and we’d have to wait for hours before we could get down the river.  So, let’s see, myself, and then Tim Means with Grand Canyon [Expeditions] we got together and decided "Well why don’t we run our boats down and park them off those ledges way down below the <Paria>... you go through the <Paria> riffle and way down there, there’s a big ledge on the right side.  Yeah, below the eddy.  But we never paid any attention to what it was like down there.  So we went down and we poked around with an oar, you know, to find out where it was deep.  And I went way down on the downstream side of the ledges and they stayed up in the upper end of the eddy there.  I mean we... nobody knew, you know?  Well my two boats were sitting in a pond, surrounded by sand.  And their two boats were high and dry.  You could walk under their boats, they were so high up on the rocks that were down there.  [laughter]  Yeah.  So the big job was to help get theirs... we had to just disassemble their boats, pretty much, and move them off the rocks.  Which we did.  All of us got together and helped move stuff.  When our passengers came, I figured out that I could tie a rope around the center pontoon and hook onto that and get like thirty people pulling on that rope and get a bunch of people behind pushing and grabbing and lifting and pushing, and we were able to drag our boats up the hill and down the other side into the river.  Then we loaded them, of course once we got them out into the river.  So that was an experience that we learned the hard way.

STEIGER:  Now, what were the flows?

WILSON:  You know, I thought that I had been told that they actually shut the dam off and turned on one generator.  So were getting... the lows were leakage and the highs were one generator, which I thought was somewhere around four or five thousand (cfs).  [STEIGER:  Was the high.] Yes.  That was my second year.  The first year we were running somewhere between five and ten thousand most of the time.  And then they had that stint in there... it was pretty interesting, I’ll never forget... I think the day that I realized I really, really liked low water was, we were down in the vicinity of <Nankoweap>, downstream there a little ways, and the water was so low that there were big boulders, like big boulders, taller than the boat was, that we were having to weave around through, and it was so cool.  I’m thinking "Wow!"  you know?  It was so cool.  And then seeing the Redwall Limestone up in <Marble Canyon>, where you were just seeing the bottom of the river... to me it was just an incredible experience.  I just loved it, loved it, loved it.  [laughs]  <Horn Creek> was always a problem.  Hance was an interesting problem.  I suppose most people who’ve worked there for a long time have experienced the different things with low water like that.  It was certainly a new experience for me.  Dubendorf was another incredible experience on really low flows like that.  <Hermit> had no waves and a little tiny rock downstream.  <Granite> was a piece of nothing.

