Loie Belknap Evans Part 3

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli 

April 5, 2009



EVANS:  Oh, so the lake boat we were talking about.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, the lake boat.  I was going to ask you, Dock has changed its name several times.

EVANS:  You mean Otis?

QUARTAROLI:  Well, Otis Reed Marston originally, but then he was The Parson way back when, was his first nickname that I’ve come across [unclear].

EVANS:  See, I didn’t even know about that one.

QUARTAROLI:  And then it was Doc, D-O-C, and then it became Dock, D-O-C-K.  So 

thinking by that time, 1960 jet boats, it was probably D-O-C-K.

EVANS:  As far as I remember, it was D-O-C-K, yeah.  It was originally on the boat.  They used those little sticky letters, peel-off letters, and that’s how those letters were put on the boat.  Wee Red-does it have any lettering?

QUARTAROLI:  I don’t remember it having that on there.

EVANS:  But anyway, Buzz definitely thought that the "National Park Service" should come off that boat.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah.  And the Wee Yellow sank.  The Wee Red is in the collection.  And I think the other boat was called the Kiwi.

EVANS:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  And I think that one went to <New Zealand>.

EVANS:  Oh, did it?

QUARTAROLI:  But I’m not sure.

EVANS:  Yeah, I don’t know where the Kiwi went.

QUARTAROLI:  Can’t remember.  Phil Smith was trying to track those down.  Don’t know if he found that one or not.  That would have been a logical place for it to go.

EVANS:  It definitely would, yeah.  And then the Buehler Corporation did give us another jet boat, so that was nice.  When the Dock went into the museum in <Boulder City>, and then they gave us another jet boat.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh, I didn’t know that.

EVANS:  Uh-huh.  They kept us in jet boats.  Wasn’t that nice?

QUARTAROLI:  Did that one obtain a name?

EVANS:  You know, not that I remember.  And the later boats didn’t quite have that great rooster tail that those early boats did-you know had those huge rooster tails and you could really knock a water skier off.  We had a lot of fun with the Dock down there on the lake.  That was fun, having a jet boat at our disposal.

QUARTAROLI:  How would you knock the water skier off?  How far away could you do that?

EVANS:  Oh, that rooster tail would be twenty-five, thirty feet.  It just would be the way you would turn the boat quickly.  If you did it just right, you could get your skier.

QUARTAROLI:  I saw some movies-and I don’t know whether they’re your dad’s movies or not-but somebody coming out of Surprise Canyon.

EVANS:  Skiing?  Yeah, that was Tick Segerblom.

QUARTAROLI:  Because it’s real common, you don’t see anything, and here comes a boat and a water skier.

EVANS:  Yeah.  I know there’s some still photographs of that.  Maybe we have copies.  Maybe the Cline made copies of it.  I’m pretty sure that was Tick or Buzzy coming out.  Yeah, the water was so high up in there.  It was pretty amazing.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear]

EVANS:  Yeah.  Don’t see that anymore.

QUARTAROLI:  No, not that far up.  Your dad also wrote a column.

EVANS:  He did.

QUARTAROLI:  For the....

EVANS:  Boulder City News.

QUARTAROLI:  I forget what that was called, but they’re in the collection.  It was great, I think Diane Boyer at one time went through and picked out some clips to run in the BQR somewhere.  I think he always put a photo hint in there of some sort, but he always had some great story about campin’ out down on the lake.  Burros comin’ through your camp.

EVANS:  Yeah.  He called 'em in.  He could imitate a burro like nobody else, and actually got a whole herd of burros in the fortification one evening.  Yeah, it was called "The Boulder Camera," I think.  He did it for about five years.  It was always a plug for the Photo Center.  Like you say, he would have a wonderful story about family trips, or sometimes my mom would be off on a trip and he’d be taking care of us, and funny stories.  It was just humorous stories, humorous stuff.  There’s a lot of great history in there, just early trips up in the canyon, or with his Explorer post, or the flood in <Supai>.  I think that’s in there.  One of the rapids down at Pearce Ferry, he talks about that in somewhere, a rapid down there at Pearce Ferry.  That would have been....  I think the column went ’50 to ’55, something like that, every week.  Once in a while my cousin, Bodie Battey [phonetic] would fill in for him, but he generally wrote 'em.  Pretty entertaining.  A lot about the Hopis, wonderful trips out at Hopi.  A pretty cute one about eating at Rod’s Steak House.  (chuckles)  A lot of great history in those columns.

QUARTAROLI:  I haven’t heard the name Bodie Battey [Lawrence B.] in a long time.  Diane Boyer used to like to say that.

EVANS:  Oh, Bo, Bodie Battey.

QUARTAROLI:  And that was on your mom’s side?

EVANS:  No, that was my dad’s sister’s son.  In later years he went by Bo.  He wasn’t that much younger than my dad.  His mom, Eleanor, my dad’s sister, kind of raised my dad too.  Her own son, Bo, and my dad really weren’t that far apart in years.  Bo just died a few years ago, lived in <Iowa>, and he came.  I know he was quite entertaining.  And Diane did a long interview with him, got great family information, because he was a fountain of information.  But he worked for my dad for a long time in <Boulder City>, before moving to <Iowa>.  He was a character.

QUARTAROLI:  Was he a photographer too then?

EVANS:  Yeah.  He did some photography, a little writing.  I think Bo worked for the paper too, and he loved going out and photographing wrecks and stuff like that.  (chuckles)  Bo was a good soul.  Ended up living back in <Iowa> where his mom was, back in <Grinnell Iowa>.  His widow-second wife-still lives there now.  But he loved those early years out here, he really did.  But he’s one of those people that just never forgot anything.  Should check out that interview sometime.  I think there’s probably a lot of good info in there.  I’d like to read it too.  I’m sure Diane had a great time doing that one.

QUARTAROLI:  That was probably a lot of the information that went on the website, the online exhibit, [unclear] your dad [unclear].

EVANS:  Yeah, I think so too.  Yeah.  And I miss him, because now when I have a question, I can always call him and get the family scoop that I didn’t know, because he really remembered it all.

QUARTAROLI:  Did he go boating also?  He did probably the lake stuff.

EVANS:  A little bit, but not too much.  I don’t remember their family being out on the lake particularly.  I would say some of the land trips and stuff.  He worked at the Photo Center.  So he definitely was into photography.  I’ll have to read that interview to brush up on all of the things that he did.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear] what we have.

EVANS:  Because she did, I’m pretty sure, an extensive interview with him.

QUARTAROLI:  Transcribed?  Have you see transcriptions?  I should take a look.

EVANS:  Yeah, I’m not sure.  I think so, I really kind of think so.  I think she went down to-he and Betty Anne used to come to <Phoenix> every year, and so I think she maybe went down there and interviewed him.  But I’m sure it was lengthy!  Lots to say.  He was a good soul. What else?  I don’t know.

QUARTAROLI:  Your dad had a pretty good sense of humor, from those columns.  And then you already mentioned about him writing "Cavitatin’ Katie," for Katie Lee, which she didn’t know about for a long time.  How that story came out, how the song lyrics came out.  So was it just your dad running into Katie on the river?

EVANS:  I think so, yeah.  She was always such a colorful character, and with Frank Wright and the boys.  I think it was probably easy to come up with a pretty funny song about her.  (laughs)  She felt better after she knew who wrote it, I think.  Pretty clever song.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, it is.

EVANS:  I’m sure you have the words in the collection.  They’ve gotta be there.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, we’ve got 'em.  I even had to prompt Katie at a GTS one time.  She was singin’ it, and I had to sit in the front to feed her the first line, the one she didn’t remember.

EVANS:  It goes on and on.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, she didn’t sing 'em all.

EVANS:  Yeah, it’s long.  I’ve got 'em at home somewhere.  Got anything else?

QUARTAROLI:  I don’t know.  What else?  What have we missed?

EVANS:  I don’t know, we’ll think about it tonight, I’m sure.

QUARTAROLI:  So you’re busy on the river guides, updating the other ones.

EVANS:  Yup.

QUARTAROLI:  And you talked about incorporating some things.  What else?  We didn’t much about John, other than you said, "I met John on <Lake Powell>," and stuff.  We covered it in some of the previous interviews, but Buzz and John met in <Antarctica>.

EVANS:  Yup.  And it was interesting, because John knew Phil Smith independently, from his earlier days in the Antarctic.  And so then when Buzz came down, they met.  Probably in <Washington DC> or somewhere there was a little training thing, and that’s when they met.  So they got to be quite good friends down there, traveling in and out of <New Zealand>.  And then my folks met John.  They went down to visit Buzz when he came off the ice, and they met John down there.  I didn’t meet him for another year.  He came out and did that high-water Sportyak trip down where they did the Quad-yak where he sank numerous times.  That was his introduction to boating, popping oar locks.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, ’65 when they were coming in at <Whitmore>, expecting just a nice little float, and it was high water.

EVANS:  Yeah, 40,000 [cfs] or something.  I’m sure Buzz probably talked about that whole thing.  That’s a pretty amazing story.

QUARTAROLI:  I know.  I got some information from you a year or two ago about kind of how that happened too.  So we went over it with Buzz.

EVANS:  Oh good.  Yeah, some great pictures from that trip.

QUARTAROLI:  Diane says your dad has some movies from it too, and I haven’t seen 

those.

EVANS:  Are they at the Cline?

QUARTAROLI:  Uh-huh.

EVANS:  Oh good!  Oh good.  Yeah, I’m glad of that.  Buzz and I were trying to remember.  We knew there were some, but we didn’t know....  That’s good, I’m glad there is some movie footage there, because that was....  And it was unusual because that was the first trip Buzz was in charge.  Dock wasn’t in charge, Buzz was in charge.  The tables were kind of turned, and I think Dock wasn’t so sure.  But it worked out.  And they were so concerned about him, because it was so cold in that high water, and he was seventy or whatever.  Buzz built that quad yak, and it worked great.

QUARTAROLI:  Tied four Sportyaks together with [unclear].

EVANS:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Because the water was so high.

EVANS:  It was just so turbulent, I guess, in those eddies-the Evans suckies, they called 'em because John got totally sucked down in one, Sportyak and all.  There’s some great pictures.  They’ve got to be there too, where the Sportyak is up on end, and gets sucked down.  And Dock was pleased to see-he always wondered if you went down in one of those, what would happen.  John emerged, every time.  So we met, I guess it was the next year, a Geographic thing on <Lake Powell> that Toppy was doing.  He asked us to figure out the boats and the food and everything, and so Buzz invited John to come along and drive one of the jet boats.  Of course John had never driven a jet boat.  So he came along, and that’s when we met.  We just spent a month driving around <Lake Powell>, exploring, and just having a great time.  So it’s pretty documented in that Geographic article.  It’s pretty funny.  That was a lot of fun.  So we got married about a year later.  And John loves boating, loves the canyon, is good at all that.  Big climbing background, climbed all over the world.  That was more of his thing.  The river was a new dimension for him.

QUARTAROLI:  And what kind of climbing?  Was he doing expedition type?

EVANS:  Yeah, he did lots of expedition climbing.  He did a lot of the early climbing-early for him-in <Yosemite>, some of the big walls in <Yosemite>, in the sixties, when it was the climbers’ camp out there.  I know he did the nose on El Cap.  It was quite different than it is today.  I mean, people weren’t free climbing, they used bolts.  But still, it was a big deal, he did some pretty neat ascents out there.  And then he really got into expedition climbing.  He’s been on two Everest expeditions, pretty interesting:  the international one in 1971, and then a medical one in 1981.  Spent a lot of time high, never submitted, but that’s kind of the way it works.

QUARTAROLI:  What was the medical one?

EVANS:  That was a whole team of doctors....  There were climbers, there were climbing doctors, and there were some just physicians, and they had all kinds of....  Dr. John West from <San Diego> was sort of the head physician.  They had all of this research they wanted to do, the high-altitude physiology and how it affects, I mean, you name it.  And they built a research hut, advanced base camp.  I think it was maybe 22,000 feet, where they were doing all kinds of....  People would come down, then they would hook 'em up to all this stuff and test.  But I think they put five people on the summit and got the record for the highest Frisbee toss, first Frisbee toss off the summit.  They hiked up some of that stuff, did some testing.  Had a couple of epic, some interesting things where they weren’t sure one guy was gonna get down, but he made it.  But it was a very safe trip.  John had been on a whole series of trips between ’71 and ’81 where they’d all had some pretty unhappy, just unfortunate things happen, and poor leadership, and poor decisions, and fatalities.  He was almost to the point where he just was done.  And then had an offer to go back and do this Everest trip and was able to be one of the three that really helped put the team together.  And he’d also been on-the previous Everest expedition he’d been on in ’71 was an international expedition with climbers from thirteen countries.  And it was sponsored by BBC, and it was gonna be a demonstration of international brotherhood and good will.  Guess what?  (chuckles)  The egos....  I mean, it’s all these top-notch climbers from all over the world, from Britain and <Japan> and....  They had a really sad fatality on that trip.  But then, boy, the egos started coming out, and it just fell apart.  And BBC filmed the whole thing.  It’s an amazing movie, an amazing movie.  I think he’d been on others where the egos just really get involved.  So I think it was a really nice opportunity for him to help put together a team where maybe it didn’t take the rock stars, but you took good guys and team players, and the trip was just extremely successful-make good decisions, and it was really good.  The ’81 one was just a great trip.  So many of those people remain great friends, and we still see a bunch of those people today.  It’s kinda neat.  That was a good one.  And he’s climbed all over <Russia> and Nanda Devi.  He was on a Nanda Devi trip.

QUARTAROLI:  Sounds like someone should interview him!

EVANS:  You know, they should actually.  In the Antarctic he was on the first ascent of the peaks in the Antarctic, the Vinson Massif Mount Tyree, which was much more technical.  That was a pretty amazing trip.  And that was forty years ago.  And then just a couple of years ago he was invited-he and some of the others-to come back.  You know, there’s all these adventure travel companies that come in and do it, and come back and give it another shot.  They got pretty [unclear] to the Vinson, and got pretty close.  A couple of 'em made it-John didn’t.  They were like, I don’t know, a few hundred feet, and they had to go back.  It sounds like he may get another shot next year, to go back and do that.  It’s a pretty amazing climbing career, yeah.  Somebody probably should interview him!  He has great diaries.  Oh my gosh, John just-he has very, very detailed diaries from a lot of those trips.  And he was trying to find his diary for that Sportyak trip, and he couldn’t find it, and we don’t know why.  Usually they’re all on the same shelf, the ’65 trip.  And I need to ask....  I’m just wondering if he loaned it to Buzz a while back or something, because he has great detail, and that would be a nice thing to have, because he probably kept more detail than almost anybody on that, I’m guessing, on his adventures of sinking.

QUARTAROLI:  What was the award that he got last week?

EVANS:  Oh, it wasn’t, he was just giving a talk.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh, I thought he was receiving something.

EVANS:  No.  He was giving a talk, actually, on that first ascent of the Vinson, and also Mount Tyree.  And the route that he and Barry Corbet did on Mount Tyree has never been repeated.  And there was another guy who’s climbed Tyree, and he was gonna be part of the talk as well, and it was at the Alpine Club.  I never made it, a snowstorm kept me from gettin’ there.  I heard it was good!  He’d definitely got some great mountaineering stories.

QUARTAROLI:  Does the Alpine Club have an oral history project?

EVANS:  You know, they should.  I don’t know, but that would be....  You know, the Alpine Club is huge.  It’s all over the whole country, but they have a headquarters in <Golden>, and a really nice library now, and a wonderful museum.  It’s really something.  So maybe....  And I think that’s where all the history files....  I think ultimately that’s where John’s diaries from those trips should probably be.  I don’t know what they have for oral history, but I think it would be a great thing.  A lot of those guys are gone, though.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, but you’ve got to get 'em while you can.

EVANS:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  That’s not an excuse for not starting.  You gotta start at some point.

EVANS:  Yeah.  Of course a lot of those....  They have a yearly publication of climbs.  That’s probably one way that they really record a lot of-it’s not just individuals, but a whole climb.  I know that’s one way they record a lot of mountaineering history.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, we’re about at the end of this tape.

EVANS:  Oh good!  Okay.

QUARTAROLI:  What do you think, call it quits?  We can always do a repeat.  If you think of other things when you get back.  Because you get out here about once a year.

EVANS:  Oh yeah.  Oh always.

QUARTAROLI:  We can do some follow-up.

EVANS:  Yeah, there may be some other things that kind of occur to me.  I think we covered a lot of stuff, a lot of family history up here at the canyon, because we talked about the ranch and all that stuff.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, actually, the ranch out here, we didn’t.  Should I pop in another tape?

EVANS:  It’s your call.  We can do it now, or do it next time.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, why don’t we, while we’re thinkin’ about it....  I’m just gonna change tapes.

