FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Mrs. Elizabeth (Wallace) Dobrinski

Interview number NAU.OH.28.13

Elizabeth Dobrinski, who was born and raised in <Flagstaff>, and who now works at the Research Center at the Museum of Northern Arizona. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on December 11, 1975. Transcriber: Susan Deaver Olberding.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1 Side 1

    Born in <Flagstaff>, 1923 

    Grandparents 

    Anderson 

    Wallace 

    Parents 

    Married in <Flagstaff> 

    Father worked for Forest Service 

    Homestead at <Mormon Lake> 

    Father fighting forest fires 

    House at 416 N. Sitgreaves 

    Schooling in <Flagstaff> 

    Emerson School 

    Teacher, Jean Rosseau 

    Tomboy adventures in <Flagstaff> 

    Volunteer fire department 

    Riding horses 

    Brothers and sisters 

    Pow Wow and Frontier Days 

    Skiing 

    Coltons 

    Junior Art Show 

    <Flagstaff> down town 

    Social activities 

    Monte Vista hotel 

    Masons 

    Big snowfalls, flood in 1930’s 

    Safety, left doors unlocked 

    Depression of 1930’s 

    World War II, ending celebrations

Tape 1 Side 2

    Tourism 

    Trips 

    <Oak Creek>, <Walnut Canyon> 

    Snake Dances at Hopi villages 

    Roads, always stuck in mud or snow 

    Programs at schools 

    Train station mentioned 

    Jobs 

    Newspaper 

    Northland Press 

    Museum of Northern Arizona 

    Minorities in school 

    Grandmother hated <Flagstaff> area

(Elizabeth Dobrinski is a descendant of William Francis Wallace and Ethel F. Anderson, both parents from early pioneer families)

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Elizabeth Dobrinski, who was born and raised in <Flagstaff> and worked at the newspapers and Northland Press and now is secretary at the Museum of Northern Arizona. This interview is being conducted on December 11, 1975 at the Research Center at the Museum of Northern Arizona. The interview is being conducted by Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City - Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mrs. Dobrinski, when and where were you born?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Here in <Flagstaff>, December 6, 1923.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK. And you said that your parents came here-

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, my grandparents Anderson came here when my mother was two months old in 1883, in August of 1883. And my Wallace grandparents came here in 1887.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, can you tell me why they came and where they came from?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, my grandfather Anderson happened here by accident. He was an asthmatic and had moved from <Kansas> to <Los Angeles> for a place where his health would be better, and he was not better there. They had lived there for several years and he was really heading back to <Kansas> ____ to go back to <Kansas> and die. And he got to the mountain country and was fine, and he lived here- he was 86 years old when he died. Lived a very active life, he was a farmer and a stone mason, and raised a large family, and, as I say, he lived to be 86. And anytime he went down off the mountain, went down to the valley or back to <California>, he always had an attack of asthma, but he always seemed to be fine here, so-

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, did he homestead?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: What area?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Right out Fort Valley Road here, just a little ways from the Museum.

SUSAN ROGERS: And, uh, what is the name of the homestead? A special name, or-?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, it was just the W.H. Anderson homestead.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, um, did he move into town at all?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes, they moved into town in about 1909, I believe, and he owned the block that is surrounded by Cherry Avenue, Bonita on one side, Park on the other, and Dale on the fourth side. There's a blue apartment building on part of that land now.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about your other grandparents?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, my other grandparents- my grandfather Wallace came here to work in the mill, the lumber mill, and he migrated from <Canada> to <Michigan>, and then from <Michigan> to <Arizona>.

SUSAN ROGERS: So, did your parents meet in <Flagstaff>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Alright, can you tell me a little bit about their-?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Um, they were married here in <Flagstaff> in 1904 and my father and his sister married my mother and her brother in a double wedding, (chuckles) in the Methodist Church. The Church is not in the location now where it was at that time, it was located on the corner of Aspen and Leroux at the time they were married. It is now the Methodist-.oh, I can't even talk- Mexican Methodist Church over on South San Francisco Street. They moved the building from its former location to where it is now.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, what did your father do?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: He was a cattle rancher, principally- well, he was one of the first forest rangers on what is now the Coconino National Forest. There were four of them that, uh, covered any number of miles; I don't know how large the area was at that time. As I remember the stories that were told to me, it was part of <Yavapai County> I believe, but, uh, he was a forest ranger and there were only four of them that covered the entire area on horseback. If they had a forest fire, why, one person went out and fought the fire. And he had- he was at the ranger station at <Mormon Lake> for a number of years and that's where he and my mother spent their honeymoon. And he homesteaded on the west side of <Mormon Lake> and my family still owns that property.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, let me ask you, which is your maiden name?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Wallace, my father's name was William Francis Wallace.

SUSAN ROGERS: And, then your mother's name was-?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Ethel F. Anderson Wallace.

SUSAN ROGERS: And, they homesteaded at <Mormon Lake>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes, in 1909.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, can you tell me a little bit about the homestead?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, it's on the west side of the lake and, it was, um- there's some forest and some open land and he farmed it. Among other requirements of a homestead, you had to improve your land and build a house, farm certain amounts of it that sort of thing. And he complied with all of the regulations and he sold it in, probably in 1927 or 28. And a club or organization of people from the valley had purchased it and they built a number of cabins and had a, well, a gun club and boats and that sort of thing there and then the Depression hit and they defaulted and he had to take it back. So, we still- the family still owns the property.

SUSAN ROGERS: So, is the homestead still there? The actual house?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it the one that's right west of the lake?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: (?) Just west of the lake- it's just, just north of-

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you see it from the highway?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh yes, you go by an old log barn that now has a-(?)

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, that’s it? But no one's living there now or anything.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, in the summertime. One of my sisters actually owns it, and our children, two of our children, have cabins out there, and, um, another sister’s son has a cabin out there, and we're out there often on weekends and that sort of thing.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were you raised out there then?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, I was only about 3 years old when my father sold it and we were there only in the summer time. My uncles had cattle and sheep also, and my parents had a home in town and often my mother would bring all of the children to town to put in school. My aunts would stay out wherever they were working until after the fall round up and that sort of thing and then they'd move to town. But, our home was kind of headquarters for everybody that went to school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Since you lived out at <Mormon Lake>, does your father- were there a lot of Mormons out there?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: No. That was after the Mormons.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, they were gone from the lake by that time.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, can you remember any particular adventures he told you about the Forest Service, any particular incident that he used to tell?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, not a lot, except that he always kind of felt that the way they fought fires in later years and he died in 1941, so he wouldn't have known about slurry bombs and that sort of thing. But he always felt that when they could take care of a lot of the fires on an individual basis or even the fires would burn, it was more an act of nature. And the grasslands came back and there was more grazing land and that sort of thing, because all the underbrush was burned out. He always hated to see places where the little jack pines grew up, just like hair on a dog’s back or something, where it was so thick that the grass couldn't grow. And he really felt rather strongly that some forest fires should be allowed to burn, and let the grass come back and not let all the little trees just take over completely, that sort of thing.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he tell you about fighting any particular fire, and how did he do it all by himself?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, apparently they maybe didn't do much of anything, except if it was a small blaze and where they could dig a fire line or something, I'm sure they must have done it. But what can one person do if you have a tremendous great big fire and then with no communication really, they probably had hundreds of them they never knew about. But, maybe the rain would come after the lightning and would put it out. I really don't know about that at all.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, you said that your parents had a house in town. Where was that?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: It's where I live now; I live in the same house that I was born in. 416 N. Sitgreaves. Course it's a much different house now, but my Father bought in 1904, in March before they were married and then it's been added to and remodeled, and one thing or another, and I inherited that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know who he bought it from?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: A Mr. Greenleaf.

SUSAN ROGERS: Greenleaf, I've never heard of that.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I don't know the first name.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK. Let’s go into your childhood now a little bit, tell me about your schooling. What kind of schooling did you have in <Flagstaff>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I went to school at Emerson School and started in kindergarten and went through eighth grade there. Went to Flagstaff High School and I graduated from Flagstaff High School in spring of 1941 and I went to Arizona State College, which is Northern Arizona University almost a year and a half, and then I got married. Then during World War II, part of the time I was here and part of the time I was with my husband, who was in the Air Force, and then I never did go back and complete my college education.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, you went to school at Emerson. Do you remember about how big it was and maybe, you know, how many classrooms, how many teachers?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Not really, except, uh, as I remember, there were probably two first grades and two second grades by the time I got to about third grade, and third grade through about fifth grade often two classrooms were combined. I'm sure I was in a classroom in third grade where we had third and fourth, and then I'm not sure how the next combination was, probably fifth and sixth, but twice during my grade school years I was in a class where there were two grades.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any special teachers that stick out in your mind?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, Jean Rousseau, who still lives here in <Flagstaff>. She retired from Flagstaff High School probably four or five years ago now. She seemed to be promoted each year as we kids were and she was my teacher for about four years through grade school. And then she, finally, like I said, was a teacher in high school. She was an art teacher ultimately, but um, she was my teacher, I believe, the first time in third grade. I had her many, many years; she was a very fine person. A good teacher.

SUSAN ROGERS: What were some of your daily activities when you were a kid in <Flagstaff>? Family chores, what you did with your friends-

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I guess I was a tomboy. I was the youngest of five children, and a lot younger than the rest. I was thirteen years younger than the youngest of the first four. And one of my brothers was a volunteer fireman. And if I could get to his car by the time he left for the fire I could go to the fire and if I wasn't there I got left and I remember standing out on the sidewalk screaming my head off because I'd been left at home. And every summer they brought a horse into town for me and we had to learn to ride bareback before we could have a saddle. And this old horse that we had was ancient, way in his upper 20s and a good kid horse. But every time a bird would fly or a dove would run out he'd shy and I'd fall off and then I'd lead him up to a post or stump or something to get back on. And he'd just wait till I had my leg up to get on him and he'd move over just far enough so I'd get down between the horse and whatever I was standing on. Once again I'd lead the horse and bellow at the top of my lungs and cry all the way home while I took him home. We rode horses a lot, um, as I got older-

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you ride right through <Flagstaff>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh yes, uh huh, see we didn't have very many paved streets till World War II, and it was just a small country town. As I got older, when I was junior high-high school age we rode all over A1 Mountain and this area. One of my uncles had his summer sheep range at what is now the Ordinance Depot area at <Bellemont> and we could always ride whatever pack burros we could catch. And we used to catch the burros and ride over across Volunteer Mountain and down into Garland Prairie and we just kind of spent our summers outdoors enjoying ourselves.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to go to <Mormon Lake> in the summer and stay down there?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, not much. Because at that time, it was about the time it had been taken back from the people who bought it and my father had a caretaker there. We would go out on a picnic or something, but we really didn't stay there much.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me a little bit about your brothers and sisters, what happened to all of them.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, they're all living. My oldest sister lives in <Phoenix> and she was County Recorder of <Coconino County>, within six months of her 21st birthday. And at the time, <Coconino County> was larger than Los Angeles County. Since that time, Los Angeles County is much larger than Coconino, but at the time she was elected Recorder she was the youngest elected official in the largest county in the country. And her name is Marion, M-a-r-i-o-n, which is an unusual spelling for a woman. And my oldest brother, he's a resident of <Phoenix>, and he is badly crippled with arthritis but he's always earned his own way and done very well. And then my second brother is a retired forest ranger and he went into the Forest Service. He started working for them when he was in school. He worked on roads and that sort of thing, until he was old enough to be a fireguard. And through his college years, he worked as a look-out, then he taught two years, and then he went to forestry school at the University of Colorado at <Fort Collins> and got his forestry degree and he worked for a number of forests particularly in <Arizona> and <New Mexico>. And, I believe he's been retired now for about five years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, does he live in-

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: He lives in <New Mexico>, <Silver City New Mexico>. And then my youngest sister, the one who's closest to my age, is also a resident of <Phoenix> and she's been a partner in a brokerage firm down there for a number of years, and she'll probably retire in about one more year.

SUSAN ROGERS: You said that one of them was a volunteer in the fire department. Do you know anything about that fire department, the development, or anything?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Not the development of it at all, I'll tell you somebody who could tell you a lot about it if you'd like to know, would be Herman Dunnam, maybe you've already talked with him.

SUSAN ROGERS: No, I haven't. How do you spell that last name?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: D-u-n-n-a-m, and both Herman Dunnam and his wife, and I think his wife is a native also, but he was one of the very early volunteer firemen and they had a volunteer fire department here until fairly recently, the 1950s or something.

SUSAN ROGERS: Um, what kind of big celebrations did <Flagstaff> have when you were young?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, I remember the first Pow Wow. I remember the last of the Frontier Days; I was 3 or 4 years old. I don't remember going, but I remember them burning a covered wagon and then the early Pow Wows were fun.

SUSAN ROGERS: What did you actually do at them? What went on?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, basically the same things that goes on now. However, they encouraged the Indians to develop their lifestyle, and for the first few years that they had the Pow Wow they had community food preparation. And the Pow Wow committee would put barbecue and beans and prepare all the food in large amounts and then the Indians would come from the various camps with their containers and get the food and take it back to their camp to eat it. It was a fun time. It was a good trading time--the Indians would bring their rugs and their jewelry and things and come to town and trade for the things that they wanted. It truly was trading; there was not so much money involved.

SUSAN ROGERS: It wasn't so touristy as it is now?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, a lot of tourists came, up to nearly World War II, the Indians nearly always came in their wagons and it was a big thing for them. You know it was maybe once a year that they'd get to town and that was how they came.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any particular episodes happening out at the Pow Wow because of the Indians being in town?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: Everybody got along pretty well-

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, yes, the most annoying thing about being close to the City Park was that you'd get your garden all growing and lawn going well and the livestock would come walk across it. But, other than that- that was just part of the Pow Wow and nobody got very excited about it.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about Christmas? Is Christmas ever celebrated in special ways here?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, I don't know community-wide. We always had nice family occasions for all the holidays; we were a very close family. We're members of Federated Church and there's always something going on at church. So, I don't really know of anything community-oriented that was particularly outstanding. I always liked to go caroling on Christmas Eve, or during the Christmas season, most the time it was Christmas Eve.

SUSAN ROGERS: Any special winter sports?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: We skied.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you ski?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Hmmm.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was the Snowbowl open?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes, when I was in high school it was. But, well, do you know where the Michelbach place is, out just west of the Snowbowl?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah-

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well that was one of the places we skied some of this before the Snowbowl was open. But it was more cross-country type skiing, I think, and, course, we used Mars Hill for coasting and where the high school is now, there was a nice low place and it would get full of water and we had a good place to ice skate. And we ice skated on the city pond there behind the city dam and city shop, but that never was particularly successful because the ice would melt so much in the daytime there wasn't any way of keeping it cold. Whenever there was ice we took advantage of it, but it was a real catch as catch can-

SUSAN ROGERS: So, you skied at the Snowbowl when it was first open.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me what it was like.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, there was a rope tow and it was when the old lodge was there. It was lower down on the mountain than where it is now. It burned, so they rebuilt it. It was a nice log building with a fireplace in the center with fireboxes on three or four sides. As I remember it was four, but it might not have been, it might have been three, but it was a very pleasant lodge, and just a very simple rope tow, course, it didn't go up the mountain like it does now, either.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you rent equipment, or did you have your own?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, I had my own equipment. I had skis and ski boots.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember how much it cost, about?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: No, not really, but it wasn't expensive at all.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was it crowded, or was it pretty much of a local thing?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: It was local; course you had some people coming in but it was much more local than it is now or as it has been in a number of years. Well, at that time it was quite a distance from <Flagstaff> to <Phoenix> 'cause you had to go over either through <Jerome> or through <Ash Fork> and <Prescott> over the White Spar Road from <Prescott> to <Wickenburg> into <Phoenix>. So you just didn't run back and forth to <Phoenix> and to <Flagstaff> as you do now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Let's see, what was <Flagstaff> like then? What kind of buildings are around the area that you lived? How much has it developed?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, I lived in an older part of town where it was fairly developed; very similar to what it is now, there've been a few things added in my area. But north of us, north of the high school and on out Fort Valley Road, of course, was the Pinewood Dairy and farmland. There wasn't any development out this way. The Museum was out here, I remember the Coltons way, way back. Mrs. Colton started the- still goes on, the Junior Indian Art Show, but the first year that she had it was when the Museum was down at the Women's Club building on Aspen and it was just a junior art show for all school children and I participated in that. And I knew the Coltons personally.

SUSAN ROGERS: What were they like, can you tell me a little bit about them?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well she was an artist, and Dr. Colton was a professor at, I believe, the University of Pennsylvania. And they- she was very interested in encouraging the Indians to continue with their arts and crafts, their weaving and jewelry-making, that sort of thing, so she was very active in that sort of thing, and all kinds of art endeavors. And, Dr. Colton, course was a charmer in every way. And he was particularly interested in trying to keep things that were unique to this area in this area. Because so many of the eastern schools were sending out their people for archeological digs and that sort of thing, and taking everything that they found back to museums in the east. And he felt very strongly about that, and that was the reason for the Museum being started, of course.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, what about the downtown area, has it changed a lot or- how do you remember it when you were a kid?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, there again, the core really hasn't changed that much, um, the outlying areas I think have changed far more than the downtown area, except for putting on new store fronts and the owners changing, why, basically the same buildings, yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where were the big dances held, or big social activities?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, when I was in high school, what the high school kids did if it wasn't at their church or in their school, it was at the Monte Vista. The Monte Vista had a very nice dining room and a large area for dancing. And the Masonic building was another place where we had a lot of parties of one kind or another and, Arizona State College, NAU, of course, was much, much smaller, but that was a social gathering place.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any big- let's see- disasters, or fires, or floods, or blizzards that happened? That stand out in your mind?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, several. I often wondered if it was because I was small and the snow looked big, but it seemed like there was a lot of snow at various times. And a number of snowstorms from the wind would blow the snow and drift it behind some sheds along the alley where I lived and we kids would get up on the roof and roll off into the snow bank. So there was a lot of snow. But, it always seemed like we had too much water or not enough. In the 1930s, we had to haul in water from Winslow. And we could go out to the various springs around town and bring in drinking water because the water tasted so bad coming off the railroad cars-

SUSAN ROGERS: It did?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Aw, it was terrible and then one spring, I don't remember, it was in the mid-1930s, but we had snow and then warm rain on it. And everything was under water and some houses got water in them, and over around Five Points there was enough water to float a rowboat. And some people had a service station over in that area and they had to go in a rowboat to get the money out of the cash register. So the water got kind of high through there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Any particular crime that you remember at the time?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: No, not really, nothing locally.

SUSAN ROGERS: You think <Flagstaff>'s really a pretty safe town, and has been.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: It was then, we never locked the door. I mean there were- didn't just leave everything open and accessible to anybody. I suppose a lot of bad things went on. I don't remember anything really in the crime line, except for Lindbergh kidnapping. And that was really the first thing that I recall in the way of anything really bad so far as a criminal was concerned, and that really didn't concern anything local.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, do you remember anything about the prohibition they had here?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I don't remember that, it was repealed when I was too young to really remember.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, what about the Depression. Do you remember any particular hardships <Flagstaff> had, or you as a family?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes, we were rather fortunate; my father had a steady income all through the Depression. But one of my uncles lost everything when the banks closed. And so, everybody came where the food was (chuckles), and at various times, you know, that sort of thing happened. But I think families really hung together and whatever you could do for the other one, why you did it- So, they came and stayed until things got a little better and got things back together so they could buy groceries, but he had been out of town. I don't know whether he had been just at the ranch or where, but he came into town and bought groceries and gave a check to buy the groceries and they handed it back to him and said the check isn't any good, so he said "What do you mean? My check's always good" you know, and they said, well, the banks closed yesterday. So he had ____.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did he ever recover?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about World War II. Do you remember if it affected <Flagstaff> or how it ended--any special celebration?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: The end of what?

SUSAN ROGERS: World War II.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, you bet there was a special celebration. (chuckles) The whole town broke loose.

SUSAN ROGERS: Really?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: And we had a lot of fun about that. My husband and I had been in <Florida> and I had come home in April. And when he was being transferred from <Florida> to <California>, and he was on a delay in route. And here, the day that the Japanese split, and he had four fellows with him, and they were all big city boys, and they had never been in a small town, and they just had a ball. They were driving the fire engines, and they, one of them, went into a restaurant and got a big pan and a big spoon-

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, can you tell me when you remember a lot of tourists starting to come into <Flagstaff>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, I think there were always tourists, being on Highway 66, people seem-

SUSAN ROGERS: There always seemed to be a lot of hotels here.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: And motels, early. I wasn't very old when we went several places where there weren't motels, and I always thought motels were something that just grew alongside the highway. And I didn't know that there were towns that didn't have such things.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's see. When you were little, did you used to go to <Oak Creek>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Occasionally.

SUSAN ROGERS: What kind of trip was it then?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, <Oak Creek> was a lot of fun. I remember one time we were in a touring car with canvas sides on it, and my mother was always afraid of bees or wasps or anything. And they kind of picked her out of a crowd. And it was when the switchbacks were such that you had to back up to go around the corner, they were so sharp. And probably we weren't going very fast because you always honked to go around the corners, around the curves. And we'd have to back up to a wide place, or the person coming up would have to back up to a wide place to get around. So I'm sure we must have been going very slowly. But a bee got in the car and she got out with the car moving. I probably was about 3 or 4 years old at that time - a very impressive memory. It's getting so noisy out here, would you like to move into this office?

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's see, I was asking you about some of these different trips. Did you used to ever go camping?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did you camp?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, various places. Ah, my father- had a friend from <New Mexico> who used to come out to go to the snake dances out on the reservation. And I don't remember a thing about the snake dances. All I remember about would be getting stuck in either sand or mud. (chuckles) My earliest impressions about roads is that we were always stuck.

SUSAN ROGERS: How about <Walnut Canyon>?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, we went to <Walnut Canyon> often.

SUSAN ROGERS: And what was that like?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I believe, what would be equivalent of the Visitors Center was on the west end of the Canyon as you go out on the old road, and you could walk the trails down through the bottom of the Canyon; you didn't just go to the cliff dwellings. You'd looked up to the cliff dwellings when you walked down through the trees, and sometimes there'd be water and sometimes not.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, do you remember any special <Flagstaff> artists, this includes like musicians, too, that were in <Flagstaff>. Either local or big people that came through?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I don't remember any names, but we often had live programs. Both at the college and the public school, the high school had a number of programs, and probably by the time I was in junior high, the community concert program was going. And we often attended whatever musical or dramatic programs were, and we had a lot of children's programs. They had dancing classes and that sort of thing, and it seemed like when there was a recital, it was sort of a community affair rather than just the parents of the children participating. There were quite a few programs of different kinds to attend.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, were there special groups that came through on the trains a lot?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, perhaps. I don't remember-

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember if the train depot was a big place to go when you were a kid, to come watch the trains, or not?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did everybody gather down there?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Pretty much. But of course, there were a lot more trains then, too, a lot of traffic.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, let's go into your jobs. You told me you worked at quite a few different places. Do you want to tell me where you worked and how you got started?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, I worked when I was going to school for Merle Sauer at what is now Foodtown Market. I was a checker there. And then, the early part of World War II, I worked for the ration board for a short period of time. And then, I didn't work until our youngest son was in school and I answered a blind ad and it turned out to be a newspaper job. And the reason I was rather interested in going to work- my husband had had cancer and our oldest child was 12 and our youngest was 6. And while I hadn't worked in a long time, I hadn't finished school and, you know, just nothing- and I thought, well, it was time that I find out that I could earn a living if I had to. So, I answered this blind ad. And as I say, it turned out to be the newspaper. And I thought, oh, I don't want to work on the newspaper. And then I had taken the time to answer it, so I went in for an interview and it sounded like kind of a fun thing and a challenge. So I went to work at Arizona Daily Sun, and at that time it was down on Aspen.

SUSAN ROGERS: What years-?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, I don't know, about 1956, 1955. And I worked there two years, I did all kinds of things. It was a smaller place, course, than it is now, and if anybody was on vacation, why everybody else just filled in. And I was hired to take care of the classified advertising. But I worked in display advertising and I did their legal ads and I helped the bookkeeper. And when the society editor was on vacation, I wrote society items. And you know, just whatever there was to do; so it was a real training school. And then the job shop from the newspaper was being sold to an individual, Mr. Fine, who had Fine's Dress Shop, and started, and had bought it from the Nackard family. And he'd been there for a number of years. And he was looking for some investments and some things to do- getting ready to retire. And so he had purchased the job shop from the newspaper, and that was the beginning of Northland Press. And the man who had been the manager of the job shop in the newspaper, went with Jack Fine, to create Northland Press, and I went to work for him. Well, I was there two months before Paul Weaver came in. The manager was fired, and Paul Weaver came in as manager, and then a year later, he bought Northland Press. I worked for him for 9 years. And I learned a lot. Book publishing is fun, telling a story is a very challenging occupation.

SUSAN ROGERS: When was this building built for Northland Press?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Ah-

SUSAN ROGERS: Or, where did you start off?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: We were in the Babbitt warehouse building next to the Post Office on Agassiz, and I was trying to decide what year was it we moved out here. I think it was 1965, 66. And then I came out here in about 1968 and I've worked first as the publications secretary here and secretary to the director. And I've been administrative assistant here for two years.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's go back to Northland Press. Can you tell me how they got their publishing policy or how they sort of developed into what kind of books they do now?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Paul Weaver did this. He came in with a dream that he didn't want to be just a little printer on the corner and he wanted to get out of job shop work where he wasn't just turning out postcards and letterheads and business cards and the little forms that man throws away. He wanted to design books, so he went more and more to the book designing and book publishing and less and less to the job work, and now it's strictly a publishing house.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know a little bit about the development of the museum here. I know you haven't worked here long, but do you have a little history on it?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, Dr. Colton started the museum in 1928 and the Women's Club, which was the old library building down on Aspen, just recently been torn down, well that was the first location of the Museum of Northern Arizona. And I believe the date was 1936 that they got the museum building across the street. And then it was in the mid-1950s that they built this building. And over at Dr. Colton's old home, which is just north of Northland Press, back on down towards town, the original research center building is now called the Annex. It's a small building that grew like topsy. He first had just a lab there and then it was increased in size to include a library, and other offices. And it's still used as an office for the museum. And there's a conference room over there, and any number of things going on over there. But that was used until this building was built, and all the laboratories and offices came to this building. It's grown, but all of us are scattered around over about 200 acres. And in some ways it's dreadfully hard to deal with when it comes to phone systems and all of the little things that I'm concerned with. Its kind of hard to keep the wheels all oiled because of our being spread out so much.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's get back to, like when you were going to Emerson School. I forgot to ask you, were there any minorities there, going to school, that you remember?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh, yes. There were a number of Indians-

SUSAN ROGERS: There were some Indians. Now did they live in town?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, one girl, this is museum connected; you've probably heard about Jimmy K. or anybody who knows any museum history at all knows about Jimmy Kewanwytewa. But his daughter, Flora, and his two sons, were in school with me. Flora and I were in the same grade from the time we were about in second grade through high school. And we still see each other or hear about each other once in a while. Jimmy's widow lives out on the <Hopi Reservation>, at Shimopovi, and I see her at least once a year, so I stay in contact with Flora and her two boys, so we knew them very well. And there were a number of black kids in school, and we didn't have any racial problems. There weren't any to be had. It was a small town and everybody took everybody for- you know, whatever they were worth, and that was it. Didn't necessarily make real buddy-buddy friends with them, but you never not- sat by them, or you were in a group together. I don't even think that I realized that there was such a thing as racial problems until I was a grown woman.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about Chinese?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: The Wong family were here. Bill Wong, June's Custom House- Bill, you know him, I think. And his sisters and I were in the same grade, and I believe Bill is one or two years older. We were all in school together and the brothers, and we were all friends.

SUSAN ROGERS: That just about covers my basic questions. Do you have anything you think you want to add, or any little stories that you can remember?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: I can't think of anything right now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about your grandmother?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, she thought that she'd just come to the end of the world when she came to <Flagstaff>. Apparently it snowed every month the first year she was here and she didn't even have a stove. They had a one-room cabin, and she had a boy about 9 years old and a girl about 3 or 4. I'm not sure how old that child was. And then my mother was a small baby, she was only six, or about two months old, when they brought her here. So she had the children to take care of. And she had to cook on a campfire outside the cabin because they didn't have a stove. And she just thought this was the most gosh-awful place she could have happened to; it was just terrible. She was used to being a nice city lady and it didn't turn out that way for her here.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did she learn to like it, or do you think-?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Not particularly.

SUSAN ROGERS: But she stayed.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh yes, and she kept a diary and some of her entries in her diary, diaries, are fun. And I was reading one of them one day, and it was on her fortieth wedding anniversary and she said, "Forty years ago today I gave up all freedom,” and all was underlined! She was a woman's libber before her time, I think. But, she very much resented a lot of things that happened to her in her lifetime… she felt that were absolutely unnecessary, like being a farmer's wife.

SUSAN ROGERS: Your grandfather really liked the area.

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Oh yes, he was healthy here. So that made a lot of difference.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, anything else you can think of, or…?

ELIZABETH DOBRINSKI: Well, he was known as Spud Anderson. He raised potatoes, and that was his nickname.

SUSAN ROGERS: OK, sounds good.


