<Flagstaff> PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Durward and Goldie McKinney

Interview number NAU.OH.28.30

Mr. and Mrs. Durward McKinney, who have been in the <Flagstaff> area since 1900. Mr. McKinney worked in the early power plant, was an undersheriff and county assessor. Mrs. McKinney has taught at many of the schools in the area. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on January 27, 1976.

Outline of Subjects covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Mr. McKinney, born in <New York> 

    Parent’s background 

    Father, telegraph operator for Santa Fe Railroad 

    Moved to <Flagstaff> in 1900 

    Father had telephone office 

    Houses lived in 

    Moving houses around 

    Moved to <Idaho> 

    Father had power plant at mill 

    Sketch of life 

    Schooling 

    Normal School 

    Marriage, 1918 

    UofA, 1916 

    WWI 

    Worked of Garing dairy farm 

    Deputy sheriff 

    Goldie’s house lived in 

    Maiden name was Parsons 

    Going to <Sedona>, picking strawberries 

    Show pictures 

    House below Observatory Hill 

    Grave yard below Observatory Hill 

    Normal School 

    Dress code 

    Teachers 

    Classrooms 

    Sports 

    Racetrack, turkey shoot 

    Going barefoot 

    Races 

    Fourth of July 

    Rio de Flag flood, 1906 

    Chinese in town 

    Stole pigeons and sold to Chinese restaurants for two bits 

    Blacks 

    Johnsons, worked as a lather 

    Snowfalls and walking to college 

    Summer activities 

    Horseback riding to Peaks 

    Emerson school 

    South side 

    Red light district on S. San Francisco 

    Cemetary

Tape 1, Side 2

    Looking at pictures 

    Homestead near Peaks 

    Bootlegging, mentioned 

    Mrs. McKinney’s teaching experiences in town 

    Emerson School 

    4 years at <Winona>, 13 years at Doney Park, 20 years at S. Beaver 

    Lura Kinsey, mentioned 

    Marshall school and Mortgage Flats 

    Skating rink 

    Background information on Mrs. McKinney 

    Father was rancher for Babbitts in <Kansas> 

    Normal School 

    Dr. Thorpe, English teacher 

    Picnic lunches to <Walnut Canyon>, rode a hay wagon 

    Mary Boyer, Minnie Roseberry, Dr. Tinsley 

    Dr. Blome 

    Persecuted in town for being German 

    Activities at school 

    Girls basketball 

    Story about dressing for games in a closet under the stairs 

    Chorus 

    Chautaugua, plays that came to <Flagstaff> 

    Trip to <Grand Canyon>, camped out 

    Snow

Tape 2, Side 1

    Snow in 1916 

    Working at power plant, electricity in town 

    Methodist Church 

    Social activities 

    Christmas 

    Earthquake during a party at the church 

    Auto races on Peaks, Weatherford Road 

    Showing pictures 

    Undersheriff experiences 

    Story about capturing fugitives 

    Bootlegging 

    Car stolen by college professor, McCrury 

    Power plant, mentioned 

    Flu epidemic of 1918 

    Mormon Lake, spent summer there when 15 years old 

    Dairy farm 

    Fred Garing 

    Neighbors in <Flagstaff> 

    Story about wild turkeys all over Parson’s barn

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Durward McKinney who lives in a <Flagstaff> residence since 1900 and he worked in the early power plant there with an under sheriff and also county assessor. The interview is being conducted on January 27, 1976 at 316 South Bypass Highway in Cottonwood, which is the McKinney’s home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers representing the Flagstaff City Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Mr. McKinney when and where were you born?

DURWARD McKINNEY: At Kaywood, <New York>. It was a little station on the railroad there but it’s not there anymore and my dad was telegraph operator there. My father was born in <Galt Ontario> and uh, then sometime between then and 1900 we acquired ten acres <Phoenix> and Dad- we stayed down there for about a year or two and then sometime around 1900 we arrived in <Flagstaff>.

He was a telegraph operator for the Sante Fe railroad and I remember very vividly that the first time we were at <Canyon Diablo> (?) which is east of <Flagstaff> and we stay in a boxcar there. The reason I remember it is they had a stove up on bricks and a cat. Then the stove fell down and killed the cat and I thought I was ruined and then sometime after that we came to <Flagstaff>. My dad was station agent there and uh, that was around 1900 or 1901.

And then after that sometime I don’t know between then and 1910 he acquired a telephone office and it used to- it was up on where the present parking space is for the First National Bank. It was two-story house there and Agassiz acquired a house afterwards. Took the top story off and the bottom story is moved straight up the street. And Sammy Coinseo was the barber there on Front Street, has that house now. And that was a regular thing in those days where you just move houses out and they’re all over east <Flagstaff> and every place. And about uh, well I don’t know too much up until when dad sold the place. I do know that I was in the- used to spend the nights in the upper story of this house and I’d uh, anybody called or two uh, I’d charge ‘um two bits to connect through nine and seven o’clock in the morning.

And after I graduated from Emerson School, eighth grade, was 1910, I- why we went through <Idaho>. Dad had an idea that he’s gonna do a lot of farming. We got up there and we run into trouble. We three of us had typhoid fever. The brother next to me died and dad and I got outa the hospital alright and after we buried him why we forgot about <Idaho> and beat it right back to <Flagstaff>. And then he went up to Milton and that’s when we had the light plant up at the mill. We just had it at night. We used those mill engines and he’s runnin’ that. Get dark why then we’d turn on the lights and turn um on. And uh, like where there’s uh, present training school that was one place where we used to have a kind of uh, power platform.

But after that I went back to, went to college there at Flag and uh, it seemed to me like about 1911 I was recuperating from that flu and I went out at uh, Mormon Lake, spent the whole year out there with a forest ranger, Jerry Fisher. And then I came back and went to uh, to Normal school. They had the high school there. They didn’t have any other high school and I graduated from high school in 1916. My wife graduated out a college for teachin’ for 1916 and that’s where we met.

And then in ’17 I went to the University of Arizona on a scholarship and uh, war broke out. About 1916 I went down there. War broke out and they sent me home a month ahead of time if I would work on some dairy farm. And so I worked on the Garing Dairy Farm and then my month was over the day before I was 21 just 20, May 28th, 1917. I enlisted in the Army and I was down on the border and up in Camp Verde during that time. While I was still in the Army I come home on furlough and uh, April twenty uh- when is our weddin’ anniversary?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: April 21st.

DURWARD McKINNEY: April 21st 1918 and got married to my present wife and I went back-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: We’re celebrating the 58th year _____.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Discharged and uh, went to <Phoenix> first, both of us. We stayed there about six months then we went back to <Flagstaff> and I worked up the Mill (?) <Williams>, anything I get at until uh- well when I was appointed deputy clerk. That was about ’23 or ’24, and board of supervisors, then after that, from that I went to- I was a dazed they didn’t have this nepotism or whatever you call it, and her dad was sheriff and he appointed me deputy sheriff, under sheriff. I was in there from ’24 to ’25 and I’ve got some pictures of that if you’d like lookin’ or keep um, I don’t know what. She claims that she owns it so I guess you have to talk to her about um.

But then in ’29 and ’30 Nelson- well, name of Nelson McKinnney Water Company, we had _____ and that was during hard times we went broke. And Art Vandever was sheriff going into ’30 and then in ’31 and he was a deputy with me in between ’24 or uh ’25 to ’28 and he appointed me under sheriff. I stayed there till uh May the 1st 1937, and the board of supervisors appointed me to take the place of Fred Turner as County Assessor, who was killed on the road to <Fredonia>. So I went in there the 1st of May and uh, stayed there until 1961, then retired and I been retired ever since.

Now then I got some old pictures of mine that show the people going out to <Walnut Canyon> and so forth, things like that, and I have some school pictures up there too. There’s a picture that’s up by the courthouse the old Heller house that’s where Goldie used to live, sidewalks you know.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: That’s the old kind of architecture there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: That house had been when we came to <Flagstaff>- my mother rented it and they had it. Was an old house then and a-

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it there anymore?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: No it’s been re a- a Solbergs live there now and they have rebuilt it. They tore down the big house.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah, I know the Solbergs live, because I interviewed them, yeah.

DURWARD McKINNEY: That’s where Ole is, Ole Solberg.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right, was Ole house and they tore it-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: They rebuilt it.

SUSAN ROGERS: But he does have part of this house in his house now?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well I think maybe he kept part of it. I don’t know how much of it he rebuilt. I think he pretty much destroyed all that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Would you want to come and, and sit up here and let me hear a little about your stories since you are practically a <Flagstaff> native too. Maybe we can-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Oh, I’ll just-

SUSAN ROGERS: I don’t know.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Oh, I’ll just tell him what he’s forgot.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, okay. Let me turn it off first.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I was not over ten years old but I used to go down to <Sedona> and pick strawberries. There was a straw- a Mr. Schnebly now he, he was evidently not married when we first went there because my mother and father stood up with um when they were married. I used to pick strawberries down there then but he’d take um to Flag. He had four horses up at the top of Schnebly Hill and I’d- a, we disconnect the front team and I’d ride one back and lead the other back down the snow (?). And I don’t know exactly when that was but uh, this picture right in the back of the bank, I cut all those pigeonholes and this is the house I was telling you about. That over here- but that’s the barn. Now that’s right in where they parked cars right in that alley it was behind that barn.

SUSAN ROGERS: My goodness. There you are picking strawberries.

DURWARD McKINNEY: That oldest boy next to me there is the one that died and the other brother is living in Inetica (?) now, <Illinois>. And my younger brother that was not in that picture wasn’t born then; died of cancer in <Phoenix> about ten years ago.

SUSAN ROGERS: Um hmm. Okay. Uh, let me ask you a little bit about when you went to NAU, okay? Now where did you live when you were going there? Did you live at home or did you live on the campus?

DURWARD McKINNEY: When I was going to- well I lived part of the time up at Belton where my dad was, where the power plant of course. And then about ‘14 dad bought some land lots over just below the observatory and that’s where our house was built. We built the house over there, or he did most of it of course and there was a graveyard right below. And I remember when I was going’ across, and I ah- going over to Comptons, or were over at the cemetery. But there was old cemetery there, an old, and they had these coffins with (doorbell and dog)-

SUSAN ROGERS: You were talking about the coffins at the graveyard.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh, they had glasses over the face, over the head, and a lot of those glasses were broken of course by- that’s one thing that I remember I used to go down through there. I had to go through there in order to get to town or a Comptoms on the other side and when I went to school too, same way. But they still didn’t get um all out because there was a couple of buildings down there when they had the foundation, they got some turned up, some uh-

SUSAN ROGERS: Turned up some graves. Okay. Can you tell me a little bit about Dr. Blome? Do you remember when he got fired?

DURWARD McKINNEY: About what?

SUSAN ROGERS: Dr. Blome.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well the one thing I remember about it, we didn’t run around in overalls and long haircuts and everything like they do now. That we had to have neckties on, we had to have coats and pants. He was a very good educator but outside of that I just think sometimes I go up there how things- I guess they happen to care uh, but uh-

SUSAN ROGERS: They’ve changed.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah, they’ve changed a lot.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember when he got fired?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No. He must have got fired after I was in the Army, along about that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you tell me a little bit about some of the classes you had and maybe prominent teachers that you remember?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well I remember the Spanish teacher. I can’t think. She was all dressed up like uh, some kind of a Mexican or Spanish don or something. I uh- she was a female though and we had our room up on the uh, main building there upstairs, that’s where it was. And there wasn’t any building there to amount to anything except for the mess hall where Mrs. Hanley was and uh, Morton Hall. She married Mr. Tom Pollock after that. Ah, see ah, Goldie would know, Uh, Hahn is one. I think he’s in Prescott, or oh, he surely must be dead now. And uh, Gooding was another one. I know he’s dead. But we just had that one big room there, and put in their desks, were numerically like all the backs were along the row then. I remember that much but uh, as I say that was just the high school in uh- I mean they seemed to run the high school in with the teacher’s college. I don’t how they did it ‘cause Goldie took teachers- she took her five year term, and I took- to be about that long too _____ four.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me something about some of the extracurricular activities? Were there a lot of dances and or anything?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Do what?

SUSAN ROGERS: Dances, different clubs and organizations.

DURWARD McKINNEY: No I don’t. As far as sports is concerned I think uh, well we just started to play football, and I was- remembered was at one game over there in the mud and uh, that time where the present stadium is. That was where we had a racetrack and I remember seeing races. Every horse races things like that uh, uh we had turkey shoots over there. I remember I used to go out there and a guy’d shoot a turkey, why I’d go out and get it for him, bring it back and he give me two bits. I remember that part.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Now where did the students hang out? Where did they get together just to drink coffee or something?

DURWARD McKINNEY: I never drank coffee, no. I quit drinkin’ it now while it was two bits. No uh, we get- at night we’d- I had a horse and most of the rest of um, and we’d play run and seek, run all over <Flagstaff>. And uh, had board sidewalks. Nail was generally sticking their heads up about that far. I remember when I used to run around barefooted. I don’t know whether I could afford to do it, dad couldn’t afford shoes, or whether that’s just the way I’d wear um. I remember one time jumping off where the Black saloon on the corner there, 66 now, off in the dust and getting a rusty nail. And uh, where Joe’s Place is, there was a drug store, I think it was Ruffin (?) and uh, somebody carried me in there and they pulled the nail out. And then uh, I guess they must have phoned my dad because he carried me home, so I was really pretty young at that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did that heal all right though?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Huh?

SUSAN ROGERS: Did it heal all right?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: You never had any problems from it.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I just remember that, you know a person doesn’t, uh- another thing I remember right there where you go down between the two banks, it was nothing but dirt road running down towards the court house. They used to have these races with uh, pull (?) carts, you know the fire hose you had to pull to um. That’s all that we had in those. And I remember John Cooney, he used to be a engineer up there once, and narrow of course- he does it all the time you know. But I remember him very well running in that, and that’s about all they, that turkey shoots.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about some of those early Fourth of July’s ___.

DURWARD McKINNEY: They always still had them.

SUSAN ROGERS: What were they like?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Uh, it seems to me uh, during those days it rained, just during those days. It rained just about every Fourth of July at noon. I don’t know that, uh- and uh- I know when I was going to Emerson school up there that must’ve been 1908, no 1906 because a friend of mine Fred McMine- or, not a friend but somebody I knew, had killed himself and he’s buried over there in cemetery. And I spent lots of time over there since I been retired until I got a heart attack. So that’s about 1906 that the floods would come down the Rio de Flag, come clear down to Weatherford Hotel and go in the basement. And we couldn’t go to school for a few days. Of course we didn’t care about that; that didn’t bother us any but I remember that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there any big fires you remember?

DURWARD McKINNEY: I guess there were some but I, I’ll be darned if I remember a fire. I don’t remember any fires. I remember we used to uh- stone chinks down there some chinks _________ when you asked us what we did well that’s one thing we did. And uh- [appears to be speaking about Chinese people in the area]

SUSAN ROGERS: Now is this on the south side then that you used to go down and do this?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Huh?

SUSAN ROGERS: Was this on the south side?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. The chinks were down there on the first street to the left as you go across the track down there on the corner. That’s where the chinks grocery was, or a laundry. And then another thing we used to- us kids would get up and steal the squabs out of somebody’s loft. Those pigeons was running wild mostly. You see the holes that I put in that there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, in this spot.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. That’s for pigeons. And we’d take um down- It seemed to me like every restaurant in town on Front Street there wasn’t a saloon was a chinks place and we- they’d give us two bits a pair for um, not very bad.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. What about any Indians? Were there any Indians around?

DURWARD McKINNEY: They must have been around but they sure didn’t register with me.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about blacks?

DURWARD McKINNEY: There’s only one black family that I know of and that was Johnson, and he was a good fellow. He was a lather. Oh, he sure put those lathen up. That’s- in those days where they lathed and they plastered. Don’t do it anymore. That’s a long _____. And he lived on the north side of the track too, lived over there, way over almost to the college uh, to the racetrack.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did the town have any trouble with any of these people? None at all?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well I guess I stole some pigeons out of a loft and a guy and I got caught. I don’t know we weren’t uh- maybe we was ten or fifteen years old and if it hadn’t a been for his pull with his dad a running a sheep company with Babbitts uh, we’d probably gone to reform school. But uh, I don’t know, you didn’t think much about that in those days.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Any big snows you remember in particular?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh yes- there’s ______ going to college up there and looked up on the hill, Goldie was down on the bottom. And there’s a couple uh, snows there that- That’s another thing, we didn’t- nobody took us there, carried us to this college, and they didn’t feed us or anything. We took our lunch or we didn’t get anything. But I used to break the snow up ____ and she’d follow behind me. Now it took us about an hour to get to college from over there. And there was no underpass there, we had to go up over the railroad tracks. The underpass was put in practically oh, around ’40 I guess it. She could probably tell you more about that than I could.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Tell me what you used to do in the summer time as a child. Do you usually stay in <Flagstaff>?

DURWARD McKINNEY: In the summer?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well I’ll tell you what I did, uh had this horse. I went up the pipeline in the Peaks one Saturday, to come in the saddle [part of a hill, not horse saddle] and then come off of that, on that saddle. And so darn steep that I’d tie the reins on the saddle horn and let the horse follow. And I’ve often thought if I’d a broke a leg or something up there I’d been up there yet. But you didn’t think about those things, no. Then I’d come down over Doyle’s saddle right down into <Flagstaff>. That’s another thing we used to do, we’d all- everybody had a horse. All of us kids we'd go out to Sunset or go up on the side of the peaks and that’s about all ____.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you tell me a little bit about Emerson school?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well here’s a picture of it. That’s uh, there’s one thing I was always sorry about. We had a Negro in there and for some reason or other we didn’t get her in the picture. I don’t know. But there was seven of us graduated in 1910. My wife graduated a year later I think. She??s about a year uh, little over a year ____ but, uh, as far as Emerson, she taught there and could probably tell you more about it. It was- I don’t remember, except I remember Mrs. uh- the two Perkins girls taught there and then a woman, her name was Smizer, but I don’t remember.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now- was there any competition between you and the Catholic school?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh no. I never even knew the Catholic school was there. No. We were just like this ______. These pigeons I’m talking about, we stole them from the Catholics and Baptists.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Did you ever get down to the south side?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh yeah. We used to uh, go down there. Then when the fourth of July, we’d go down in there, and celebration there- which over at the race track, that’s where the stadium is now, just before you get to the cemetery.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now uh, what kind of reputation did South San Francisco Street have at that time?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well the red light was there, that’s all I remember and as far as reputation, we didn’t worry about reputations in those days we just went on. But I do remember there, starting on the right hand side going down both sides, was red light. That’s the Nackard’s (?). He bought them out- in fact old man Nackard (?) did. And I don’t know when that cemetery was made but it must a been sometime before oh, around 1910, somethin’ like that, because that was when they was taken the- no it was later than that. It was about maybe ‘14 when Dad built that house up there. ’14 that, ’15 or ’16 when I went down by it. They had a grave in the cemetery there but uh, I didn’t have an interest in anything like that, anything more than just ridin’ around horseback and trying to get through school.

Begin Tape 1, Side 2

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

DURWARD McKINNEY: These are- here are just pictures of uh, what used to have- there’s Elden you see ____________.

SUSAN ROGERS: This is a little rodeo or something?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. You- something that, I don’t know why we didn’t put dates and stuff like that on there. Just uh- it’s a dirty shame.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don’t think of it then.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. Well that’s out on our homestead.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want to tell me a little about this homestead. How you came to acquire it?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well, those days you just went out there and ____ on account of my time in the service I only had to stay about seven months. Ordinarily they had to stay seven months out of every year. Then you had, in order to prove up you had to have fenced certain ____ plots, certain uh- have some kind of a house on there. First I’d say that was 1923, and I don’t think there’s been any homesteadin’ since then.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now exactly where was it located?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Right north, the Peaks- if you could go straight ahead it was just straight ahead of <Flagstaff>, oh, it’s on <Flagstaff> 27 north and just 23, so it was just straight north several miles there, but go around it’s 28 miles. You go either through Kindrick or around by Deadman and then cut off in Deadman across.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is there a ranch house still there?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Hum?

SUSAN ROGERS: Is the ranch house still there?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. I, I didn’t make that into- well yeah, the one I ‘proved up on was still there around 1950. I _____ so I had to do somethin’, so I built me a rock-house right there; seventy feet long and twenty feet wide. Built it all myself, and it was a lotta concrete and rock, mixed everything myself; we didn’t have any mixers then.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is this near the Hochderffer house in Michelbach?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Hum?

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it near the Michelbach place? Have you heard of their ranch?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No. Michelbach was at the top of me, up side of the Peaks. You know where Michelbach’s is?

SUSAN ROGERS: More of less.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. Well he’s, he’s around eight, nine thousand feet.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well, he’s that high up?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah, way up in the Aspen. I think it’s awful high up there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you grow crops out there?

DURWARD McKINNEY: What?

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you grow crops?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well, not uh- I had somebody out there that wanted to do something. They were raisin’ some beans and giving me a piece of it, and so forth, but I never made a living on there. You couldn’t make a living. It was just too dry. If you could reach up and pull a string and have it rain, why you’d be in good shape because you could grow anything out there. But there’s just no rain; pretty dry.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you actually live out there seven months a year, or did you have somebody watching it for you?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No. We uh, had to stay out there so much- well we got that house and my wife was teaching in Doney Park. And uh, we- that was the time when Siggys first come out, we had one, we’d go out there and stay all night. Go back in about three of four times a week for seven months, that’s all. But we still did have to fence part of it, and uh, hogs. I remember old Tom Reese was the clerk at the court, that’s where I proved up.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you remember any bootlegging experiences?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Who?

SUSAN ROGERS: Bootlegging.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh. I had a lot of experience with that when I was in the sheriff’s office.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. It was, we- I’ve got some pictures here; stills I got. Yeah, and Tom Reese, Bob Noack, he used to be sheriff, er constable. I thought about it and I was lookin’ through them the other day, and I think it’s in there. You know it’s, it’s a dirty shame you don’t put the dates on these things. Uh, here’s- that’s the dining hall.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit more about the bootleggers?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Can you, uh can you find a picture Goldie? Sit down there and tell her about Emerson school and I’ll try and find those pictures.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well there’s Emerson school graduating class.

DURWARD McKINNEY: You want to talk about Emerson school?

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. A little bit about- you taught there too, a little bit about your teaching experiences, maybe.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well I went to Emerson in uh, early grades and graduated there and uh-

SUSAN ROGERS: _______.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: That’s all right, and uh, I’m used to um a little bit more.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: And uh, I uh- when I first went there Dr. Benson was the superintendent of the school and then uh, uh and then I- one of my teachers I remember was Miss Rudd, and these Rudds were pioneers in, in uh, <Flagstaff>. This is Bill Rudd’s sister, and he was the one that was sheriff. They live in <Flagstaff> for a long time, then they moved to <Winslow> and he was the sheriff down there. Maybe it was <Holbrook>. Was Bill Rudd in- was Bill Rudd in <Holbrook>, or uh-

DURWARD McKINNEY: Hum?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Bill Rudd, was he in <Holbrook> or in uh-

DURWARD McKINNEY: He was <Winslow>.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: <Winslow>. That’s what I thought. And, Velda Rudd, his daughter; she’s there in <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well, no. I guess she’s in <Carefree>, in <Carefree> now, or something.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Ah, here’s that picture.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Emerson was uh, well- and uh, then I taught- oh, when the war- you know- see, I had decided not to teach anymore, so play bridge.

SUSAN ROGERS: Have a good time, right.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: And uh, I had gone to work when Durward came back from the Army, you see. He didn’t have a job and he had been in the university when he went into World War I, and so I went to work to help us get by. And you know how those things just keep going on and on, and now it’s quite the thing to do, but in those days a married woman couldn’t teach in <Flagstaff>, you had to got to the country. So I was- I taught in, in <Winona> for four years and then I taught in Doney Park for thirteen years, and uh, so then I quit. And as I said was gonna have a good time playing bridge.

And uh, the war came along and uh, the superintendent of schools, J. Q. Thomas, had been my worthy patron when I was worthy matron of the eastern star. And uh, he called me one night, it was one Sunday night, to see if I would go to, to South Beaver school, which is uh, Mexican school then, and uh, to uh, well, till they could get somebody. And they didn’t know who they were gonna get, and uh, the men teachers had been all drafted you see, or else they had been in the service and had to go, and so I told him no. I- first they wanted me to go to junior high, and you know I knew enough about- I’d taught 20 years and I knew junior high and I didn’t think I wanted to teach junior high in <Flagstaff>. And I says oh, I just can’t, and they want- It was a English class too. And so then I went to- eventually he kept calling me and he said Freddie Anderson would take the English class at the junior high if I would go to South Beaver and teach fifth grade. So I got over to South Beaver. There were 60 children in the 5th grade and the room wasn’t big enough. They were from wall to wall, and uh- but they were such sweet youngsters. I didn’t know what- I hadn’t ever been to a teachers meeting I didn’t know what was, and the first thing they had was a fire drill. ____ so I- the youngsters told me what to do and we did it and got along fine. But I was at South Beaver for about 20 years. And then uh, they wanted me to move to Emerson, so I moved to Emerson; they had a lot of children. We had three fifth grades, and I had fifth grade.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now what year is this about, that you moved over to Emerson. Is it the 50’s or-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Oh heavens, do you know?

DURWARD McKINNEY: ______ I don’t know.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well I don’t know. I ____ ____.

SUSAN ROGERS: Somewhere in the 40’s or 50??s you’re talking about, or-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well let’s see. I quit in 1960 and, yeah, it must a been-

SUSAN ROGERS: Somewhere in there. Okay.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Or, I think it was- Lura Kinsey was the principal at both the uh, uh-

SUSAN ROGERS: South Beaver?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: No, she was principal at uh, Emerson, and that uh-

DURWARD McKINNEY: Thomas.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Thomas school. And at the one where I went to teach, and I can’t remember its name. It’s still up there. It’s a-

SUSAN ROGERS: _______ _____ I don’t know.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: No. It isn’t, it wasn’t- it was up uh, up by the junior high. Anyway, we uh, she was the principal. She was a wonderful principal, and of course we’d been friends for years. But she was a native, almost, in <Flagstaff>. And uh, Emerson at that time even had uh, uh fifth grade down in the basement. When I moved over from uh- I knew they didn’t have any room over there you see, and when I moved from South Beaver I said- no they gave me my choice, didn’t I want to come over. I said no. I don’t want to go over there and be in the basement. I said there’s no room over there except in the basement. Well Mrs. Salter took the basement and they gave me a room upstairs. After all I’d been there 20 years and I felt that I didn’t want to go to the basement. After that I started in- in the first place, just as an accommodation. And by this time Cromer was the principal and uh, J.Q. Thomas had retired and gone to <Washington>. And uh, so I taught at- oh, what is that over in Mortgage Flat, what’s the name of that school? What’s the name of that school?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Marshall.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Marshall. I taught up there.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Called Mortgage Flats ______.

SUSAN ROGERS: That’s what I was going to ask. Why is it called that?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Because everybody had a mortgage on it.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Everybody had a mortgage when they first built that place. I don’t know.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Now when they first built those places they built smaller places.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I was assessor when they had that, built that place.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: And uh, you know it was a housing development out there really, and so most people had a mortgage on it. They named themselves, but uh, we- when I was little all that land around Marshall school was a big skating rink. The water would run in there and the snow would melt then it was uh, just like a big lake, you know.

DURWARD McKINNEY: _____ Pollock had his racetrack, too.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh really.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Pinewood Dairy was in there.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Emerson school- I taught fifth grade first and then I taught oh, I taught fifth grade several years, then I taught grade and uh- I just was tired of fifth grade, I thought, and- but when I went to Marshall, I went back to fifth grade. I really like fifth grade best of all. They’re old enough to do some really interesting things and-

SUSAN ROGERS: You want to give me a little bit of your background. I don’t even know what, like what your maiden name was, if you were born in <Flagstaff>.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: No I was born in <Dodge City Kansas> and my name was Goldie Parsons, and uh, I went to, when I went to Emerson- I guess they’ll tape this.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah ______.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Anyway-

DURWARD McKINNEY: ____ dad here.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: J. O. Parsons, he was later the sheriff of Henry, and uh, well, I went to school with Mary Drane, and have you talked to Mary Drane? She can tell you a lot of things.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well why did you move to <Flagstaff> or why did your family move?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: When uh when I was born my- I lived- I was born in <Dodge City Kansas>, but my father was working for Billy Babbitt on a ranch back in <Kansas>, out on a cattle ranch and uh, he used to ship cattle. He’d come out here and get cattle and take ‘um to <Kansas City> to the market and uh, he liked <Flagstaff>, and so we were on a ranch in uh, uh Colorado, eastern Colorado a place called Powers, and it belonged to a big company in England. But uh, uh Dad wanted to move to <Flagstaff> and so he told my mother that if we came to <Flagstaff> he’d never ask her to move again. But she thought that she didn’t want to be out here with the wild Indians. And so he agreed to go to <Phoenix> and we came from, from <Dodge City> on the- from Lamar, I mean <Colorado>, on the train. And uh, we were coming out, there was a cow puncher coming along with us, and he kept telling me we had to go to the top of the peaks after we got far enough. That’s where we were going, up on top of those peaks. Well of course I was frightened. Just a little thing and I was so frightened. But anyway after we got to <Flagstaff> we uh, stopped and we were at the Commercial Hotel. It was quite a nice hotel in those days and uh, but mother wasn’t satisfied, she wanted to go to <Phoenix>. It was August. We went to <Phoenix> and you know how, how it was. And there was uh, the only cool place we ever found was when we were eating, there was a little Chinese boy would pull a string and that would put these fans back across the booth, you know, where we were eating.

DURWARD McKINNEY: _______ <Phoenix>.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: That was <Phoenix>. Well we, we got in there one day and stayed all night and the next day we came back to <Flagstaff> and didn’t ever leave. And uh, then uh- oh, I had a horse. My father of course was working with cattle on, on the different ranches you know, and uh, I had a horse. That’s how I got my husband. I had a horse and he had a horse and well no-

SUSAN ROGERS: And you met, huh?

DURWARD McKINNEY: We both went to college too, at the same time.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: We used to sit behind the big post up there, at the, what is now the university. At that time they had a study hall and there were these great big posts and so we sat behind those big posts.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Do you remember some of those teachers up there? She asked me and I can’t remember anybody.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Oh there was Dr. Thorpe. He was the English teacher, Mary Boyer, she was an English teacher.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little about these people? What personalities?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well Dr. Thorpe was uh- he wasn’t a doctor then, he got his doctorate later. But uh, you understand when we first went up there we were going to high school and so we were treated as high school people. And we uh, uh I had graduated at Emerson and we came up there and Dr. Thorpe was one of the- my first English teacher up at uh- in fact everybody who went from Emerson went to Dr. Thorpe’s class; and he was a very kind person. He was a very brilliant man and good teacher. Of course some people didn’t like English and they didn’t get along, you know. But he was, I thought he was very smart and he was one of those kind that took us on picnics. And one time he took us on a picnic up to uh, uh the cliff dwellings out-

SUSAN ROGERS: <Walnut Canyon>.

DURWARD McKINNEY: With a wagon, or did you go in a car?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: No we didn’t have any cars. We went in a wagon, a big hay wagon and it was uh, it was a very nice party. Took picnic lunches you know, for there was no place to eat out there. And uh, we walked and, and uh, I invited Durward and we walked all around through there.

And Mary Boyer was a very fine teacher. She uh, well I think I had her in third year and then I had her after I was back while doing college work, and it was a normal school at the time. And uh, in 1916 there was another teacher. Of course you know the- who’ve been there just lately, but uh, another outstanding- and Minnie Roseberry was an outstanding teacher. And uh, I uh, enjoyed my classes with uh, the history- Dr. Tinsley, he was a very kind teacher. See, I was there pretty near a lifetime going back to school.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now were you there when Dr. Blome, Blome was hired?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Yes, Dr. Blome was there when we were both there, and he uh- it was, it was unfortunate, but you see the war came along and he was German and they really persecuted him, a lot of people. Those of us who knew him loved him because he was an outstanding person and he; he so appreciated his uh, being able to live in the United States. That’s one of the things that he stressed to us because it was something that we had no comprehension of, you know at that time. He uh, he had live in places where you didn’t have the freedom that we had here. And uh, he knew what it was, and he told us about Heidelberg and the good things of Germany and he also told us about the things that weren’t so good, and why he came to the United States to raise his family. He was a true American if ever there was one. But a lot of the people in town, ignorant people I think I’d say, uh, just tortured him. And I think it really killed him in the end because he had given his whole life to that school. Of course you know it was built as an insane asylum, that didn’t go over, and then they were gonna have a reform school there, and that didn’t pay out, and so then they had a university.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there any kind of a protest on the day that he was fired? Do you remember anything ______?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well there were people who protested, yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: In what way? How did they do it?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Oh well to the-

SUSAN ROGERS: They just didn’t go to classes you mean, or-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: I wasn’t there then. I wasn’t at the school at that time so I don’t know about that. But uh, that was after. See I was out of school and teaching at that time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you, did you live at home when you went to school?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Um hmm. I missed a lot by not being at the college and at the dorms.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you ever used to eat with dining rooms, either of you?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Yes we ate in the dining room. Food was good. Mostly we didn’t eat at the dorm but ever occasionally we were invited to the dorm. Some friend, or else we know there was some class that was doing something, that some project that was going on there _______.

SUSAN ROGERS: I asked your husband about different social events up there. He couldn’t remember too much. He said to ask you that one too. Do you remember any special extracurricular activities or social events?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well mostly I think our social events came through the church. And uh, but, the uh- of course had the junior prom, and oh, you know, those things. And uh, I played basketball and he played football. Those were I guess- that’s social events.

SUSAN ROGERS: I guess there was quite a big basketball team; girls basketball was popular then, wasn’t it?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Yes. We had uh, um hum. I was- this is kind of funny. We had to dress in a clothes closet over in Burry (?) Hall. That’s what it was. And uh- it was the boys dorm, But they had this great big, under the stairs closet, only it had a lot of things in there, but the girls had to dress in there. There wasn’t any place else for us to go. And all the downtown girls of course, and uh, Virginia Feeling was a big girl, red hair, she was uh, oh uh, the back of this closet and she said, "give me room". And she pushed her feet out, and I was on the outside, and I rolled out right in front of the dean of the dormitory, and uh, the other girls right behind me of course. She was a big girl; oh she was over six feet, and no wonder she was good at basketball. But uh, I remember that we used to play <Winslow> and uh, oh those things.

Then we had uh, these picnics that I told you that Dr. Thorpe took us on. And uh, we didn’t really have too many things. Sometimes we’d- I think the thing that I enjoyed the most, and I can’t sing at all, but we had a music teacher uh, Miss Luskow. She was then, I think afterwards she might have been married, but she was an outstanding person and she got us all to sing in the whole, the whole school. Of course we were all in one room but uh, the school wasn’t so big. And uh, we uh, sang the best of the musical songs and choruses and things, and to me, that was- we didn’t have television, we didn’t have radio. We had the old phonograph and uh- so this was an introduction to some of the better music. That meant a lot to me.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. Right, right. Along those lines do you remember any special artists coming into <Flagstaff>, any special performances put on up at the college or anything?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well we had a- what did we call those things that uh-

DURWARD McKINNEY: I don’t know. Every year-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: They used to come around from town to town and put on these plays.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Chautauqua.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Chautauqua. That was it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Chautauqua, yeah.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: And uh, they’d come in, and that was an outstanding thing. They’d be there a week and they’d put on these different plays, and every night a different one. And that was something in <Flagstaff> at that time. And of course uh, when we graduated we always put on a play or something of course, that sort. Durward graduated in May of 1916 and I graduated in uh, at Christmas time of 1916.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I didn’t tell you that uh, Frank Bennet (?) had a livery stable right back there where Crayton building is now, back there. And uh, I went down there and got a team and a buckboard, no wagon, wasn’t it?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: It was a wagon.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I believe that’s before we were married, that was in May of ’16 and uh, her mother, my mother, my little brother-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Who was 18 months old.

DURWARD McKINNEY: <Grand Canyon> and the first night we camped out there.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Espey Tank.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah, Espey Tank.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: I asked him what it was and he said Southern Pacific. That wasn’t it.

DURWARD McKINNEY: It, well it ________ then we went to <Grand Canyon>, and it took us two days.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: We got to Grand View the second day.

DURWARD McKINNEY: That’s the old road.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: That’s out through Dead Man’s Flat, and off that way.

SUSAN ROGERS: It took, takes two days, and did you stay over night up there?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh, we stayed about a week altogether the whole trip.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: We camped out in a, in a campground up there under those big trees, and of course at that time there weren’t very many tourists there and uh, it was beautiful place. Then uh, Durward took me down- he bought the tickets and we, I think we paid $5.00 apiece to take the trip down to the river and back on mules and I had-

DURWARD McKINNEY: I got pictures of them going down the trail there someplace. I don’t know where all those pictures are.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well there in, there in that box right _____.

DURWARD McKINNEY: But she wanted to know about snow. I tellin’ her about Brackin.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well he lived up on the hill after they had built this house up there, and I lived at the foot of summit ______ and uh, he’d come down, of course at that time didn’t, girl’s didn’t wear pants, and we were, you know you, you just-

SUSAN ROGERS: Hold on just a moment.

Begin Tape 2, Side 1

DURWARD McKINNEY: -Theatre.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: 1916.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah, caved in, the snow _____

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember that happening?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Yeah ‘cause we were, we were graduating from high school. I was graduating from 2 years normal. Did my husband tell you that he carried a fulltime shift at the light plant (?)?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Last year I went to college up there, uh high school, I remembered the plant, which was down and uh, way down in town. You see it’s still there but they don’t use it anymore from uh, three o’clock in the afternoon to eleven at night. And I go home and stop by and see her about two o’clock in the morning and my dad was uh, he was a chief engineer there so he’d come down evenings and that, we had time to study and we used to ___________.

SUSAN ROGERS: Um. About how many people at that time had electricity?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Well most everybody in town.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did they?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: When- well when we came there in 1905, most everybody had electricity then. The light plant burned slabs(?) from the mill. They’d get these big- you know where the barks on, still on, and they threw them into the boiler, into the furnace to keep the boilers hot to make the electricity, to generate the electricity.

DURWARD McKINNEY: When they started that down there, that’s the first time that they had lights in the daytime. When we was up there at Mill, when Dad was up in Mill, they just had lights at night, but that’s all we had, dark.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh, there’s a ________ where Sprouse-Reitz store is now is where the old Methodist church used to be, and that was torn, torn down. I remember being late to school at the Emerson one time watching them tear it down. And then it was moved up uh, built the new one up about 1908, wasn’t it?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: I don’t know, but my father was out there during that time and worked for the man that was hauling these big rocks. And he helped to take these big rocks, and he helped to take, carry the stones from there up to where the Methodist church is now, in these big trucks uh, not trucks but wagons.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well, that’s when I- well I belong to that church since 1905.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: He joined in 1905. I joined in 1910; course we went to church.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now you said that social activities were centered around the church. Now, what kind of activities were there?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Oh, they had parties and, and the different teachers had uh, uh oh, different occasions they’d have parties for you know, Halloween and different times they’d have parties and things like that for us. And the church of course always had a big Christmas tree. And I was never so homesick in my life as I was when my mother- this is my first Christmas away from home after we’d been married. And I was in <Phoenix> and uh, my mother sent me a sack of that old hard candy off of the Christmas tree. And I looked at that and I just couldn’t hardly take it so far away. But uh, it is the, the church did all kinds of things. We used to have uh, uh oh I remember one time in particular we were over at the church having uh, just a young party, and that night we had a slight earthquake. It’s the only earthquake I ever felt in <Flagstaff> in all these years. But uh, we were sitting on chairs, we were playing musical chair and I was sitting down in this chair, and it just shuffled the chair around on the floor. And I was kind of frightened and I said, "well what was that"? I thought the building might be falling in and uh, somebody said, "oh, that’s just a light earthquake". Then I was really frightened. But uh, any occasion you know, Valentines and Christmas and Thanksgiving, all these different occasions there was some kind of party at the church.

DURWARD McKINNEY: We used to go horseback riding. That’s about the only thing I remember.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: We were Methodist, we were Methodist.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Stealing pigeons.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want to tell me some of those bootlegging stories now, maybe.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Yeah. That would be good.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I have this _____.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Have you got a picture of them?

DURWARD McKINNEY: You don’t probably, don’t know about that, but they had a road up the top of the peaks. In 1930 they had an automobile race up there. There’s my uncle up on top, that’s on the very top of the peaks up there.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: It’s called Weatherford Road, it was.

DURWARD McKINNEY: That’s on top of the left hand peaks up there, but uh, we drove our car right up there just below that and then walked up. I think most people have forgotten all about that Weatherford Road but we used to drive cars up there all the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now did you have to pay a toll?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No, wasn’t-

SUSAN ROGERS: It was free?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well Weatherford built it, the fellow that built the Weatherford Hotel, that owned that. Here’s uh, <Lees Ferry>. That’s where the sheriff’s office is, this is a picture of the ferry. I fixed that Studebaker right there. Now that’s our house. That’s my brother in Wyoming.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Now I’ve got a big old- someplace.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now can you tell me about this? Where you found it?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Can you tell her where you found that?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Uh no. I don’t know what all, judges about Anderson Pass. That’s where most of the bootleggers were. So I guess I should’ve gotten-

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, uh huh, you have that- oh, a Babbitt.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: This is a book my father kept of Billy Babbitt’s ranch back in <Dodge City>. That’s not to do with <Flagstaff> but-

SUSAN ROGERS: To do with Babbitt.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: But it has to do with Babbitt.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh.

DURWARD McKINNEY: That was about 1930 somethin’, that’s uh, Judge Rusell, he was county attorney. Then we were on the road to the <Grand Canyon>, I mean the- <Williams>, out there in Belmont Flat. That’ll show you deep the snow was. There’s a picture of me around 1898.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh my goodness.

DURWARD McKINNEY: That’s what we were, stayed in tent. Around here, my dad didn’t build that house down there until you went back, when I was in the Army. In the 18___ I had to go back, already lose his water rights, so they quit <Flagstaff> in ‘18 and they came to work down there.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now you were an under sheriff. Can you tell me a little bit about your work there?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well I was under sheriff J.O. Parsons, this is him, that’s me and that’s our grandfather (?) he’s still alive. He’s down in <Sedona>. This is a _________ constable, he’s dead, and that’s Cooper, is city marshal; he’s dead. And I think Dean Keelan is too, I don’t know. I haven’t heard anymore. But uh, I was under sheriff for him. As I say in those days they’d- you’d hire your sister if you wanted to, your brother. But you can’t do it anymore, but I was his under sheriff for four years, forty, or ’25 to ’28, and then I was with Art (?) in ’31 to ’37 as under sheriff. And uh, May 1st of ’37 I went into, as assessor, and I stayed there till I was retired.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you tell me- Okay, do you want to tell me some of your adventures as sheriff? Did you have to make any arrests?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh yeah, lots of um.

SUSAN ROGERS: Anyone in particular you remember?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh I remember one. In those days they’d come down from some other state, got kicked out, and get somebody that uh, escaped from or something. I remember one time that a fellow come down from Elko, Nevada and he had uh- they’d been trailin’ a murderer out at <Lees Ferry> and uh, finally decide he was up there with Martin Buggeln, this side of the <Grand Canyon>, in a castle outfit was workin’ up there. So I went up there and ____ and took the deputy from <Williams> with me and uh, Martin says uh, now the boys are all out, but he says, they’ll come in about 4:30 for supper, and he sends the wife over to talk to the guy. That’s the fellow you want. So I said, alright I’ll sat down there in a bedroll and uh, coffee pot out there on the fire; of course that’s the first thing he wants, a cup of coffee. I was sittin’ there and Martin went over to talk to this guy. He started to take the saddle off, then he uh, he decided, he told me afterwards that if he???d just felt something was wrong, he’d just about jump back on his horse and took off. He came back here. He came over to the fire and he kept his eye on me. I was settin’ there of course uh, he didn’t know me, and I had- my deputy was in the barn. My back was turned toward him and uh, I had my six shooter hidden so he couldn’t see it, but uh, when the cowboy reached down to the coffee cup, he got the cup and I pulled out the six shooter and told him he was under arrest. He dropped it and said he thought at the time that he was gonna run, but he didn’t. And I said, "it was a good thing you didn’t because the deputy from Elro and our deputy from <Williams> were right behind you with a thirty-thirty". And uh, the aftermath of that was they took him up there and he got away again. I don’t know whether they ever caught him or not.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don’t know, huh?

DURWARD McKINNEY: But uh, mostly it was a bootleggin’, thing like that. And uh, the public weren???t in favor of Prohibition in those days. I mean, in favor of the Prohibition down there. And most people weren’t. In fact I can’t say now but I think that more criminals breaking the law that never thought of it before. I know it did there in <Flagstaff>. We had guys there that would never have thought about breakin’ the law, still they would until there was bootlegging’. And they sell the whiskey but they didn’t think anything of it, you know, just that _________ didn’t care. You know that’s the only- oh we had lots of um like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Anyone in particular that you could relate to me? Any one incident maybe?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh I- well up one time, I know it was some reason or other I was staying out in the truck here one night, but uh- no I was home, and a fellow that used to be a, a teacher up there at college. I can’t think of his name right now, but away he pulled up to the house and said that somebody stole his car. So I said, all right I’ll be down there. And so I got dressed and went down to the sheriff’s office. At that time though we had just a man to sit there at night. It was not fixed up like it is how. And another thing, when you left on a trip you didn’t know anything that happened until you got back. Now you know right now. You can come back, but sometimes we'd be out two three days _____ know. But anyway, I got down there, I was talkin’ to him, and darned if that car didn’t come right by us. So I run out and jumped in my car and took in after it. And out there about where oh, out there about halfway ____ they uh- east <Flagstaff>, there of course, there wasn’t anything down there, just farms. Uh, I tried to turn on the sirens and the lights, try to just see if I can go in a little faster, so I thought I’d start shootin’. So I shot with my left hand and I was driving with the right. I was uh, I shot one of his tires out, back one, and when that went, why of course, he went to a ditch. The time I stopped the one of um, there was two in there, one of um got through the fence and gone off, I don’t know where, he went but the other one hit the fence, knocked him out, and that’s the one I picked up. _______ he used to be a college professor up there at Emerson for years. Goldie would know his name, let me ask her.

SUSAN ROGERS: Get that on the tape what was his name?

DURWARD McKINNEY: It was uh, McCrury.

SUSAN ROGERS: McCrury?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. He used to he was a college coach up there and he was uh, uh-

GOLDIE McKINNEY: He lives in that mobile home park on the right hand side as you’re going past.

SUSAN ROGERS: Know what his first name is? If you think of it, huh.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: If it comes to me _____.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Is it Aaron, no.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Uh, Aaron McCurry. No that’s ________.

GOLDIE McKINNEY: His wife’s name is Elsi. I used to teach with her. He was the uh, uh um recreation, uh-

SUSAN ROGERS: Coach or something?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: Coach and, and, and had charge of the sports. Can’t think what they called him. They lived in a-

SUSAN ROGERS: A trailer? In a trailer park?

GOLDIE McKINNEY: In a double uh, double wide umm, huh. I guess if they’ve gotten back from Europe _______.

DURWARD McKINNEY: You know the older you get the easier you forget names.

SUSAN ROGERS: I forget um myself.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I’m sure you’re not very old.

SUSAN ROGERS: No uh huh. Let’s go back to the power plant for a moment. Now was that a private company?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No. It’s uh, <Flagstaff> uh-. George Harrington run it but it uh. It might have been owned by somebody in town, but I don’t remember that. I didn’t think so at the time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about the rates. Do they, were they considered reasonable at that time?

DURWARD McKINNEY: The what?

SUSAN ROGERS: The rates.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Rain?

SUSAN ROGERS: Rates of the service company, how much people paid.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh no. I don’t, I don’t.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don’t remember that.

DURWARD McKINNEY: But I know it’s a whole lot less that it is now. I know that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Right. Now can you remember when the company was absorbed by APS?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No, uh uh.

SUSAN ROGERS: You don’t remember any of that.

DURWARD McKINNEY: No. When I went uh, last year- well I went to school up there, that was in ’15 spring ’16. That year was when I worked down there, and after that I worked at the university four years. Then I went in the Army and I don’t know what happened after that. A lot of things could’ve happened.

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Um, do you remember that flu epidemic of 1918?

DURWARD McKINNEY: I uh, remember it very well. I was in the Army, Camp Curdy, right out of San Diego and we had to wear flu masks. Now Goldie’s father and uh, her mother and herself used to go around and help these people that uh, had flu, and I don’t know why they didn’t get it. Her dad would haul the dead ones off to the- and he never got it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Huh. Now do you know where they buried them? Did they have mass graves for them?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No. I don’t think there was any mass business. I think they just had a regular- of course, I say and I don’t know they were buried. I wasn’t there. She could tell you about that though.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. After she gets back in here. Now you said that you worked down at Morman Lake. Now were you working for the Forest Service?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No, no I was just a kid. I’d just back, that was 1911. I was only about uh, fifteen years old. No. I went out there to recuperate and Jerry Fisher was the uh, forest ranger out there. And uh, he was a great friend of my mothers, and that’s where I got ____ and I took a horse out there and spent the whole summer and part of the year. But I remember going across the lake, it just as dry as a bone. There wasn’t a bit of water in, and the dust. They had a round up on the end of the lake and I remember seeing Don Chisholm and his wife who were, afterwards were pretty good friends of ours. But, uh I don’t-

SUSAN ROGERS: Now were there quite a few families out there in the summer time?

DURWARD McKINNEY: No.

SUSAN ROGERS: No.

DURWARD McKINNEY: I don’t remember anybody except the forester. But the Forest Service cabin is in the same place that it is now, on the other end.

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh huh right, I know where it is.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Now at that time they used to round up cattle and it was a nice place to brand them, and so that’s about the main occupation out there in the country, is cattle raising.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now you mentioned something about a dairy farm. Did you work on it or what?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. Fred Garring had a, a dairy where Zarwechis’ is now out in Dry Lake. You go out a town like you’re going to <Williams>, and turn to the left down there. It’s in between two cinder hills there, but that’s where Zarwechis is now. And I didn’t know how to milk a cow, but I found out before got through. But I- some reason or other they left. I was taking a dairy or a agriculture course down at the university. That’s one of the reason that I got out. And soon as my month was up, they let me out of school a month early.

SUSAN ROGERS: So then how long did you work there, a month, or-

DURWARD McKINNEY: Huh?

SUSAN ROGERS: How long did you work there at the dairy farm?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well just the month that I had to, yeah.

SUSAN ROGERS: And you lived right there?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Yeah. And then I got out and went in the Army. And when I got out of the Army, why about all they did was just give me a ticket. They don’t do like they do nowadays. If I could had all this stuff they had I, I could’ve stuck the university, but I had to go out.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay.

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh Pojoe quit that, quit, get out. She don’t want to play with that, goodness sakes. (talking to pet).

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Ehat about some of your neighbors when you lived in <Flagstaff>? Who were some of the people that lived around you?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Well uh, there’s uh, Chaffeys, and he just- that was a- oh, I don’t- most of um’ are dead that- The neighbors up there on the hill, I don’t remember anybody except C.B. Wilson. His house was right above ours. I remember Goldie’s mother used to have a bunch of turkeys, and C.B.’d come down the alley one day and told her, hollered over the fence, and said that her turkeys are out, and she looked around and they were all over the top; but it wasn’t hers. They was wild turkeys from down, from, come down from the hills, and uh, because all hers- she had um all penned up there. But he thought they were out, but that whole barn was covered with turkeys, wild ones.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well you just about answered all the questions that I had. Can you think of any stories you want to add, or anything I forgot?

DURWARD McKINNEY: Oh, do you think- do you want any of these pictures or not?

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay let me turn this off for now.


