Hopi History Curriculum Project

Harry Nutumya Interview

Interview number: 61-1

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

Koyiyumptewa: Today’s date is July 7, 2004. My name is Stewart Koyiyumptewa, and I work for the Hopi Tribe’s Hopi Cultural Preservation Office. I’m working on the Hopi History Project, along with NAU Cline Library. With me today is Chella Vaidyanathan, an intern that we hired for the project. Today we will be talking with Harry Nutumya on his day school experiences at Oraibi Day School, and also his high school boarding school experience at Sherman Indian High School in <Riverside California>. [I’m] just going to start in, asking you these questions. Again, what is your name?

Nutumya: My name is Harry Nutumya, and I’m from the village of <Oraibi>.

Koyiyumptewa: Did you like attending day school?

Nutumya: Back in those days, we didn’t have no choice of what school to attend, so it was like either you go to school there, or you didn’t go to school. My experience there was kind of vivid. You know, it was kind of a long time ago. I think that the days at the Hopi Day School were times of fun and times of challenges, because from the very beginning, we were not accustomed to going to school. And so from the beginning I know it was a little hard to go to school. But as far as coming from <Oraibi> to <Kykotsmovi> it’s about a good two-mile walk. Although there were buses that were coming to the village, it seemed like it was the pattern of walking to school and walking home, rather than riding the bus. The boys, that was their choice. The girls rode the buses, most of them, but most of us walked to school and walked home after school.

Koyiyumptewa: Even in the winter?

Nutumya: In the winter, yes.

Koyiyumptewa: What were your thoughts about Oraibi Day School?

Nutumya: Well, the Oraibi Day School was like kindergarten through eighth grade. And so, like I say, from the beginning, it was, I think, a little challenging for us. But after a while, I think we--after we made friends with the <Kykotsmovi> kids, I think there were students also from, in the seventh grade, I know, that came down from [unclear] other places that were bused to Hopi Day School. But kindergarten through sixth grade, we primarily were mixed in with the <Kykotsmovi> students. We had one classroom type of environment where the teacher covered all subjects. So we [didn’t] really [go] from one classroom to another--we were kind of like stationary in one room.

Koyiyumptewa: Can you tell us what the day was like, from getting there and then coming home? What did you guys do when you got there? Did school start right away, or did you have breakfast or what not?

Nutumya: I think we came into school. We primarily got started right in with the classroom, with the teacher. I think there was like the pledge of allegiance and things like that we were taught from the beginning in the class, in the morning. There was no breakfast involved. But then we had recess, I think, in the morning, and then in the afternoon. I know after lunch we had a recess, too. It was kind of divided into different subjects. So it was kind of interesting--we weren’t focused on one subject all day.

Koyiyumptewa: What subjects were taught at the day school?

Nutumya: Well, basically, reading, writing, arithmetic, the Three Rs, a little bit of science. I know in seventh and eighth grade, we had Mr. Rood [phonetic] for science teacher, and he was down here for a long time, and he taught pretty good aspects of chemistry, biology, and things like that--even normal plants. You know, like when we would stick trees together and put them together, so that they would grow. We learned different things in that class.

Koyiyumptewa: Which subjects did you like the most, and why?

Nutumya: You know, the teachers varied, but I myself was always keen on reading books. A lot of it was fiction, but I think a lot of it was actual stories of different places and people. That kind of interested me into kind of thinking about the possibilities of ever seeing or meeting some of these people. And one of them, I remember clear was learning about the Pueblo tribes in <New Mexico>. And it was kind of like a far-off fantasy or dream where someday, if I could only have a chance to live among them. And that was kind of like what I learned from reading, that there are many cultures out there.

Koyiyumptewa: What type of games did you play at school?

Nutumya: Well, basically, we played basketball, volleyball, softball, things like that. You know, running track and just things like that, that was available.

Koyiyumptewa: How long was the day at school?

Nutumya: I think we came to school about eight. We left for home around three o’clock.

Koyiyumptewa: What did you wear to school?

Nutumya: Well, you know, we were raised--I would say that we were introduced to the white culture a long time ago, so we wore pants, trousers and shirts, and things like that. Our parents dressed us in the modern days that we were being raised in.

Koyiyumptewa: Did your school provide you with some food?

Nutumya: Yes. During the day, they fed us at noon. I even remember that during our term of initiation, we were fasting, and there were Hopi cooks there that knew of the traditions and the foods that we should eat, and so they cooked special foods for us, that didn’t involve grease and sugar and salt and things like that, and greasy foods. We were prepared or raised in or given the right kind of food. And I think, like I mentioned the Hopi cooks were there, and so they always fed us good. [inaudible]

Koyiyumptewa: So did you like the food that they served?

Nutumya: Yeah. Well, you know, there are certain things that you never get accustomed to. Like me, I never really cared for beets. That’s one thing. But most of the other foods, we ate, we felt no thoughts.

Koyiyumptewa: Who were your teachers?

Nutumya: Well, if I remember, there was Mrs. Barbara Mendez, probably early on, like grades two to three, or one to three, I don’t know. Then we had, I think, Mrs. Johnson. She was a black teacher. She was probably teaching four-five. Then there was another lady, Ruth.... I can’t remember her name off hand, but I know there were several teachers during the seventh and eighth grade. I mentioned Mr. Rood. The English teacher, I think her name was Ruth something. Then we had Mrs. Cook. She was an arithmetic teacher, I believe. There are several people that come to mind, but I can’t really think of their names.

Koyiyumptewa: Were there any Hopi assistants or Hopi teachers there at that time?

Nutumya: Mainly I think they were like--there were a few that I can probably say that they were more like office workers, or they helped. Maybe they did help, but not to the extent of teaching and stuff.

Koyiyumptewa: Do you know the principal’s name at that time?

Nutumya: I can’t remember off hand who it was.

Koyiyumptewa: What did your parents and relatives think about the day school?

Nutumya: Well, I think that was something that they wanted us to attend, because I remember they would wake us up in the morning, dress us up and tell us to go to school. A lot of times, some of the students would revolt and not want to get up, because they didn’t want to go to school. So the overall mentality, thinking of the parents and our family members, was to go to school and learn something. That’s what was promoted to us.

Koyiyumptewa: So did they encourage you to learn?

Nutumya: Yes.

Koyiyumptewa: Were you allowed to speak Hopi in school?

Nutumya: I believe there wasn’t much debate on that. Most of us were raised in that language at home, so that was our home language at the time. But I don’t ever remember any of the teachers ever punishing us for speaking Hopi in class--that was before our time when I heard they used to do that. But in our time, I don’t think it ever was done to us. We’d get scolded for different things, but we never--it wasn’t--like our mouth wasn’t ever washed out with soap and stuff, like they used to do.

Koyiyumptewa: What kind of sports did you participate in?

Nutumya: Basketball. I played Hopi Day School basketball. I think that was kind of like one that everybody did, most of us did, ‘cause we played with <Hotevilla> and <Second Mesa>, and <Polacca>, in the same age group. So that was something of a challenge.

Koyiyumptewa: What were some of the major holidays that you celebrated at school?

Nutumya: Those type of things, I don’t pay much attention to. A couple of them, pretty much all of them. But there wasn’t something that I remember, ‘cause, like, a holiday is a holiday. Still, to me, I don’t really go to extremes to celebrate; like this Fourth of July, I stayed home, I didn’t go anywhere. Of course I know much better now about what independence means, the freedom and all that. I’m happy to live in a country where we can express our freedom. But I don’t take it to extremes where I have to go and do stuff.

Koyiyumptewa: During the course of our research, we’ve come across a lot of photographs on Christmas. Did you celebrate that, giving gifts or receiving gifts, or just having school plays on the birth of Christ and stuff like that?

Nutumya: Yeah, back in those days, they had programs at the school. I remember clear, Mrs. Cook, she played the piano. And so we sang songs, and that was a good feeling. We learned a lot of songs. Her and Mrs. Point [phonetic], they were very good in music, so they taught us a lot of songs. And that was like a heartfelt feeling, to be in a choir. But at the same time, when we had programs, there were some plays that we did, and that was something intentioned for us to learn how to act and be somebody, be something. I thought it was good.

Yes, about Christmas, we exchanged gifts. The only time we gave cards out, that was something that I guess we were taught, or part of our culture was to--back in those days, we’d heard of Christ, but we didn’t really know what it really meant, although they had Bible studies or church at home, too. They had this well-known lady, Miss Burke [phonetic], who used to come to our village and teach Bible studies and things like that. But mainly I guess we were young, we didn’t really pay much attention to what was being taught. Mainly we went there for Kool-Aid and cookies.

Koyiyumptewa: Was there any kind of school project, like gardening or farming back then?

Nutumya: No, there was nothing that was taught to us in that area, how to garden and take care of plants and stuff. That was something that we learned from our parents, so that wasn’t taught in school.

Koyiyumptewa: Who were your friends back then, and what village did they come from?

Nutumya: Most of our friends were from Chipotsmovi [phonetic], because we were intermingled with the students here. But some of my personal friends were, I guess, you know, like people that I can say--Gilbert Williams, Philbert Dennis [phonetic], [unclear]--guys in that age group that were my friends, but also from the village, my cousins, like Aaron and Gilbert and some of my family members--we just kind of hung out together.

Koyiyumptewa: What did you think of your teachers?

Nutumya: Of course, you know, some of them were good, like I know James Darood [phonetic], he was really down to earth with the students. I think some of them were very good, instrumental, and some of them weren’t very attentive to the students [unclear]. I remember one guy used to read a book in class. He didn’t mind the students, what they did, but he just read a book there during the time. There wasn’t much talk. So it varied from one teacher to another.

Koyiyumptewa: How did they treat you?

Nutumya: I think a lot of it was--most of us were treated very well. I think if you go out of the line, yeah, you would get scolded and so forth. But that was your own cost. But most of the time, the teachers took care of us pretty well. Back in those days, they used to use a ruler to slap our hand. I remember Mrs. Johnson did that a couple of times to me. But most of the teachers were very kind.

Koyiyumptewa: Did you like the teachers?

Nutumya: Well, you kind of get attached to them, one way or another, but they were like our mentors, too--took care of us. I didn’t have any negative feelings toward them.

Koyiyumptewa: How many children were in a particular classroom?

Nutumya: Probably, from early on, it was like about twenty, twenty-five. When we got into seventh, eighth grade, then the classes got bigger, like thirty to forty students at one time.

Koyiyumptewa: How was the school arranged? Did they have different grades--classrooms for each grade, or were they kind of combined, like one and two, three and four?

Nutumya: I think they were kind of grouped in certain categories, like one through two, maybe, you know, in close. Maybe some were separate. Sixth grade was maybe held separate. I think that’s the way it was.

Koyiyumptewa: What was your favorite memory about your day school experience?

Nutumya: That’s kind of hard. There was a lot of activity, like sports, with maybe basketball that drew a lot of people in, community members, people, our family, relatives. And then programs. There was, like at Christmas and certain times of the year, we had programs, and that was kind of good. Graduation, during times when we graduated, things like that.

Koyiyumptewa: If there was something that you could change about your day school experience, what would it be?

Nutumya: I think back in those days, the technology wasn’t readily available. It was all classroom instruction, and a lot of reading assignments. And I think that’s one thing that was good about it--learning how to be able to take the time to read on your own, to study and things like that. I think that was good. And also, applying multiplication and things like that, because there’s charts that you can make and use, and you kind of learn that by memory. Today, compared to that, we have calculators. A few years before, we had slide rules and stuff like that. But today, everything is computerized, and [totally redundant?]. The student rarely learns the real first-hand of how to do three times nine, that kind of multiplication type of problem, manual writing, and stuff like that. So I think the school of hard knocks, you might call it, learning the traditional method was good, because it gave us the theory and the system on how you go about completing those kinds of things, the longhand.

Koyiyumptewa: So basically you wouldn’t change anything about the school experience?

Nutumya: I think if I was to be a part of this teaching the students, I think you have to teach them how, why, things are done certain ways. We learn, we teach, type of thing. How do we learn these things? How do we apply it? That kind of theory, and sharing it with the students on why it’s done that way. There’s a lot that--like I mentioned the technologies are valuable now, but it kind of introduces us into a limitless type of environment, where it’s up to each student, if they want to be real progressive and learn more in their time at school, I think it’s there. But we all learn at different times.

Koyiyumptewa: Okay, let’s move on to your experience at the Sherman Indian High School. How did you get to Sherman Indian School?

Nutumya: Back in the days when we were going to school, there was no local high school. I guess they had Hopi Day School at one time high school, too. But I’ve learned that they closed that part of that school because--I don’t know if this is true, accurate information--but I know some of the people had more kids, they had a lot of kids, and they wanted them to experience the outside. They didn’t want them to be forever stuck at home. And so they, of course, did away with that. And I guess probably the other thing good that came about, too, was the boarding schools became more popular, because they built these schools in areas where there was more concentration of natives, on a regional basis. So my chance of going to high school was Sherman--my choice--because some of my family members were there already. And besides, a little bit further than P.I. [Phoenix Indian School] or Stewart. Stewart is kind of in another place, but I thought that Sherman was more of my place, where some of my family members were, so that’s where I went.

Koyiyumptewa: Did your parents drive you over there, or how did you get there?

Nutumya: We were chartered on the Greyhound buses. It would be like a twelve-hour ride to get there. But once we were there, it was a whole new environment, living in a dormitory. We were monitored. The dorm matrons took care of us. We had responsibilities early on. They taught us to clean our rooms, sweep the floors, make our beds, go eat breakfast, come back. You had chores of doing your part in keeping the dormitory clean. So we did that, and that was our responsibility that we learned early on.

Koyiyumptewa: Can you give us a description of what the place looked like, the buildings and stuff?

Nutumya: There was, I know, buildings, like freshman upper dormitory was Kiva Lodge. You had offices in the middle. They had a TV at one of--they had a recreation center. And they even had a weight room in the basement. But on both sides of the wings, that’s where the rooms were. So it was like a big letter "I." It had wings on it. The freshmen were housed in the Kiva Lodge, and next door.... Well, I guess the freshmen, and probably sophomores. And then the juniors and seniors, the males were in Hogan. And then we also had an honor dorm where well-disciplined students were housed on one wing. The other wing was for the girls. They called it [unclear].

Koyiyumptewa: How did you feel when you left home?

Nutumya: Well, you know, I think it was a little bit hard in the beginning. In those days, we were raised to be hard workers and to be involved with our family life, maintaining our family guardians and things like that. And just when we were ready to go to school, the corn and things were getting ripe. And so we missed out on that. That was kind of a little hard from the beginning. We knew that now they’re going to be roasting corn and things like that, and we’re going to miss out on that. So that was a little hard to take from the beginning, but I’m sure they missed us, too, because I remember at one time my family members, they drove all the way to Sherman to bring us some of that roasted corn, and things like that, to share with us. Then the harvesting and all that, there’s a lot of work that needs to get done, but we were boarded out.

But anyway, with the family members there, it wasn’t as hard. We were around them, so it was okay.

Koyiyumptewa: How was it to interact with other native people?

Nutumya: It was a little hard. You know, we had different circumstances where fights would break out. Different reasons, things would happen. But as time went on, it’s kind of like you--naturally you would get picked on for certain reasons, but after a while you just kind of have to prove yourself, that you’re worthy and things like that. And then things like that kind of slowly ended. But when you get involved with sports, that’s when you interact with them on the playing field and in the classrooms and you start to get that respect from them for who you are.

Koyiyumptewa: Did you play any sports there?

Nutumya: The first year, I ran cross country. My father was epileptic, and he passed it on to us, so it was a little hard for me, because when you get a little excited or motivated about something, then you would get a rush of that. But as time went on, the first year I ran cross country and the second year I went out for it again, but then it didn’t seem as something that I wanted to do, so I kind of--I ran for a little while, but I wasn’t happy with myself. So I joined the football team. Three years I played football at Sherman, and that I enjoyed much better than cross country, because there you could use your physical abilities to knock people down. I thought that was fun, playing a little rough.

Koyiyumptewa: These next questions are kind of the same as the day school--I’m going to ask them again. Did you like attending boarding school?

Nutumya: Well, yes and no. After a while. From the beginning, you were forced to do things in a military type of environment. You were forced to go to bed at a certain time, you were forced to get up at a certain time, and you were forced to clean your rooms and do certain things. It was almost like military. We would get fire drills and things in the middle of the night, and they would chase us out of our rooms. That was part of the exercise. But also, we had to go have lunch, breakfast, dinner, at certain times. After a while, you have a choice--either you want to starve yourself, or you want to be in the line. And some of the times the food wasn’t as great as you would expect it to be. So it wasn’t all that great.

Koyiyumptewa: What were your experiences, and were they pleasant or unpleasant?

Nutumya: Well, I think, you know, like when you become a teenager, you start thinking about experiencing different things. You become involved with girl activities and things like that. And so naturally your mind wanders off. Sometimes you can get a little curious, mischievous, and get yourself in things that was kind of forbidden. But we had a life where they had dancing, they had a school gym where recreation and things like that were going on, and movies and things that we went and attended. There was a lot of things that were happening, and sometimes on weekends we’d go to the beach. And so one of the things I liked to do was go onto the beach and go in when there’s big waves. It was a challenge to go way out there and come back on a big wave, and things like that.

Koyiyumptewa: You mentioned something about getting in trouble. What were the circumstances, or how did they handle students that got in trouble?

Nutumya: Well, there at the school, they had security, so they could go around and if there was problems, they would find you. They would take them to the detention hall, off campus, juvenile place. And it’s like any other place: your first offense, second offense, third offense, usually they would suspend you, or depending on how bad the consequences are, then they’d usually expel you. So I remember a lot of the students came from P.I., that were [expelled?] at Phoenix Indian, ended up at Sherman because of their problems at P.I., and vice versa, things like that. Some started at Sherman, some ended at P.I. or Stewart or some other place.

Koyiyumptewa: What were your thoughts about Sherman Indian School?

Nutumya: During the time the school was being--a lot of the classes were taught in dormitories in the basements, and then in other parts of the old dormitories that weren’t in use. They used them as classrooms, because there was a whole new school that was being built at that time. And so there was construction going on. Again, some of the things that I remember well, I enjoyed probably most was the vocational part of it, because we had hands-on. We did classroom instruction, and then we were actually out there doing things with our projects. So that was good. A lot of things, like welding, auto mechanics--some of the basics--electrical and carpentry and drafting and things like that. But I think that a lot of us also did a little bit more in terms of taking on a project, things like that.

Koyiyumptewa: What was the day like--again, like the same as day school?

Nutumya: Probably the same, like eight to three. After that, we were dismissed from classes. There were about six hours of instruction, or something like that.

Koyiyumptewa: And the subjects that were taught?

Nutumya: Pretty much the same, you know. I mentioned the vocational part of it, and a little bit more than what we were taught at the grade-school level. And then a little bit more intense in chemistry and things like that. A lot more intense.

Koyiyumptewa: Is there any subject that you liked the most? You mentioned the vocational part.

Nutumya: That was something, but personally, I think I liked history the best, because it taught me a lot about our past, the <United States>, and other parts of the world where, as I mentioned earlier, different cultures. There were a lot of things I learned that now I can’t think about. To this day, I’ve been fortunate to meet a lot of people from different places, and I’ve been to different places now that I can relate to.

Koyiyumptewa: Were there any Hopi workers over there at that time?

Nutumya: A few. I remember [unclear]. He was the coach at that time. And then he was also a cook there. There also, we were introduced to doing weekend jobs. I used to pull weeds and clean around [unclear] because he lived right down on campus. So he would pay me a little extra incentive and cash where I can buy my own candy or pop, or buy supplies for school and stuff like that. But also, I remember my high school teacher there, Mr. Norton [phonetic], he was a leadership teacher in English. For two years, I believe, I worked for him almost every weekend. He would pick me up and take me to his place in Jericho [phonetic] and he had about five acres, more or less, and he had a garden. I helped him plant and take care of his garden. And then he had a place up in the mountains where he had a little cabin, so I built him a fireplace up there. I did a lot of things with him, and we were kind of like attached. So I remember that well, where I provided for my own needs there, in terms of wanting to, so I didn’t have to call home or write home for money, because I knew that my dad worked as a seasonal worker, and so they didn’t have money all the time either.

Koyiyumptewa: So what did your parents think about you being at Sherman?

Nutumya: Well, again, they were encouraging us to finish school, encouraging us to learn something. I think as far as we finishing through the whole school year, that was encouraging for them to know that, that we did what we were told to do. So even though they may need us at home for certain things, they couldn’t just pull us out from school, because that was more important, our future.

Koyiyumptewa: So they basically, again, encouraged you to learn.

Nutumya: Uh-huh.

Koyiyumptewa: Were you allowed to speak Hopi over there?

Nutumya: That wasn’t discouraged at all. There were a lot of tribes there, and a lot of us spoke our native language. So it wasn’t forbidden there. I remember that there were some tribes, even at that time, [who] did not speak their own language. They had lost it already. But we Hopis were very fluent, and there were a lot of us there at that time, because there were no local high schools.

Koyiyumptewa: Again, did you guys celebrate the holidays there at Sherman?

Nutumya: I think so, yeah. Well, during Christmas, we would get two weeks of vacation. We’d come home for about two weeks, and then we’d go back. And so the major holidays like that, we celebrated at home: Christmas and New Year’s. It’s a federal school, operated and funded school, so I believe all the holidays were observed.

Koyiyumptewa: What about gardening and farming--did they have projects for that?

Nutumya: No, there was nothing. There wasn’t anything that was related to that. We didn’t learn anything about that.

Koyiyumptewa: Who were your friends there at Sherman?

Nutumya: Again, most of ‘em were my family members. But then there were other friends that we made with new acquaintances. So in general I had friends from different tribes. Some became personal friends later on.

Koyiyumptewa: What about teachers? Do you remember the teachers?

Nutumya: Yeah, there were some teachers that I can remember, that were very instrumental in helping us to be who we are today.

Koyiyumptewa: How did they treat you?

Nutumya: I think most of them treated us with respect. Their job was to teach us to be the best that we can be, and so I think that when we were portrayed to participate and learn, of course we were graded and things like that. You would say that you’re on your own in a lot of ways, you didn’t have a parent to mentor you or tell you you need to go to school and pick up your grades on this subject. It wasn’t like that. It was up to us to achieve to a level where we were happy with ourselves.

Koyiyumptewa: Were they still cutting students’ hair at that time, or were you allowed to have long hair, or express yourself?

Nutumya: Oh, cutting our hair? It was kind of funny, you know, some of us had long hair. I remember that was probably the only time when I had long hair, past about right here. We weren’t forbidden to cut our hair. We didn’t have a barber on the campus, so most of us had long hair.

Koyiyumptewa: What about dating, were you able to date?

Nutumya: Yeah, we had girlfriends, we had boy-girl relationships, but it was very common, I think, like I said, when you’re at that age group, you start to wonder about the other sex, and things like that happened. I remember a lot of couples were there. You could see them right there on campus, people holding hands and things like that.

Koyiyumptewa: What about the class size? How was class size?

Nutumya: Probably, again, twenty-five to thirty. Some of them were much bigger, depending on the subject. But I would say the average was about thirty to thirty-five in a classroom.

Koyiyumptewa: What about the students, were they happy in the classroom?

Nutumya: I think most of them were. Of course there was a lot of dropout rate, but the ones that stuck it out usually were pretty much happy with the environment, so they accepted that. And they went with the flow and did what they were told to do. And so it wasn’t a place of chaos where people were forced to do certain things.

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2]

Nutumya: It was kind of like--it was a given thing what we had to do, follow instructions.

Koyiyumptewa: What did the teachers do to discipline the students, and was there any corporal punishment, where you had to clean and scrub floors, stuff like that?

Nutumya: I don’t remember anything of that nature. But there were several times, part of our chores at the dormitories was to clean, scrub, clean the rooms with scrubbers, and stuff like that. But never on our hands and knees, using toothbrushes and stuff like that. I heard of it, but I never did that. Maybe some did, but I don’t remember. I don’t think the punishment from the teachers was even severe. I don’t think it was of that nature.

Koyiyumptewa: What did you do for recreation during the weekend?

Nutumya: Like I said, most of the time, I went to go work. Saturdays I would work, Sundays maybe sometimes I would go to the beach. Now, of course, there’s Disneyland, Six Flags, Magic Mountain, San Diego Zoo--all these places were around there. So I went to a lot of them. I don’t know how many times I went to Disneyland, <Hollywood>, and all these places.

Koyiyumptewa: Would you send your children to a boarding school today?

Nutumya: I have a son--oh, I also went to Haskell [phonetic] Indian Junior College, after Sherman. Mainly, basically I felt that I wanted to continue my schooling. I wanted to make something of myself, but I didn’t have the money, I didn’t have the confidence in myself to go to a university or community college, even to say the least, because I felt that--I knew that I didn’t have the money. So my choice was to go to Haskell. I learned a lot of vocational subjects were taught there, and so I wanted to be an electrician, so that was my choice, to go to Haskell. It’s another boarding school in Lawrence, Kansas. Now, that one was three, four times bigger than Sherman. I think Sherman had an enrollment of about 900, to begin with; and Haskell was probably about 2,000--you know, when you first begin. Of course it’s a community college, and now it’s called The Nations University. But there is a big accumulation of native students. My experience, there again, was to learn and to apply myself to a level where I can support my family someday. That was my thoughts. I wanted to learn electrical.

Well, last year, my son, after high school, he never went to school after he graduated from Hopi High. I didn’t want him to sit around the house doing nothing, so I told him, "If there’s no other place you want to go, then you need to go to school somewhere. Financially, if it’s tight, go to Haskell." So he went there last semester.

Koyiyumptewa: What years did you attend Sherman?

Nutumya: From ’71 through ’75.

Koyiyumptewa: What was your favorite memory about Sherman Indian High School?

Nutumya: I think being able to utilize the new part of the school that they built. It wasn’t complete, but the classrooms were built. And so for my senior year, I think, we utilized the classrooms. That was nice. The sports activities were at a more competitive level. Being on a football team, that was something, a memory. Given the opportunity to play football again, I would have played again, because that’s something that I liked and enjoyed. I think overall, the environment was--for schooling, it was a good place to be. I learned a lot of things over there about different tribes, a lot of friends I met, and also.... Well, I guess anybody would agree with me that high school days are the best times, in terms of your school years. I don’t know why, but compared to college or other places of schooling, I think high school was probably the best. I would say that was my experience in my time.

Koyiyumptewa: Well, that’s all the questions that we have. I thank you for taking part in this project and participating and allowing us to tape record you and get information from you. I’ve been working, doing interviews for a long time, and I know it’s hard to get Hopi people to share some of their memories and experiences, so I thank you.

Nutumya: I want to add on one more thing that I’ve experienced in my time, which isn’t taught in schools: to become entrepreneurs, to have your own businesses. Back in the days, before my time, even, they were taught, "Get a good education, get a good job, and get that job security." But today, it’s not out there anymore. Times have changed where today I think about businesses. I feel that the schools need to teach business to the students: how to make your own living without having to work for a paycheck, from paycheck to paycheck. Because in the real world, America, the backbone of America is small businesses. That’s why we’re a powerful nation, and I think we need to promote that, instill that in our students. If you want to be the best, or to have more in life than what you can get from a job, you need to be in business, because nobody can take that away from you except yourself, when you quit. A lot of us, our parents told us that it’s best that you work for things that you want, and earn it the hard way, than getting it free. And I think that’s what they mean by sweat equity, where you put a lot of work in something, and you get your fruits out of it. It’s like going to a garden, raising your corn, and then later on harvesting it. It’s the same process, but now, in the real world, I think that if--I mean, that’s how I mentor my nephews. And my people whom I’m related to closely, "Don’t take money from people." Even if they want to give you money for helping them, don’t take that money, because that’s a work mentality--trading time for money, hourly time for money. That’s not the way a business operates. And I don’t want them to think that now that they accept money, that they’re going to have to have, maybe it’s going to be like a job mentality. So that’s how come I tell them, "Don’t take that money. Learn the concepts of work, and apply it maybe where someday you may have your own business." That’s kind of how I tell them. That’s what I would promote in school.

Koyiyumptewa: Thank you. And I forgot to ask you who your parents were, and what clan you....

Nutumya: My parents are Eleanor and--her maiden name was Maisemptewa [phonetic]. My grandparents are Harry and Nicky Maisemptewa--Rabbit, Tobacco. And then my dad is Peter Nutumya, and Olin [phonetic] and Margaret Nutumya from Hogama [phonetic].

Koyiyumptewa: Thank you.



