CLARENCE BROOKS INTERVIEW

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

[Date of interview is October 4, 1999. Interview at 304 North Ellen St. in East <Flagstaff>. Interviewer is Dr. Carol Maxwell, Northern Arizona University, <Flagstaff Arizona>.] 

Maxwell: I'm doctor Carol Maxwell and it's October 4, 1999 and this is-could you say your name? 

Brooks: Clarence Brooks, Sr. 

Maxwell: Where were you born? 

Brooks: I was born in <San Augustine Texas>. 

Maxwell: And where'd you grow up? 

Brooks: I grew up mostly in <Texas> and <Arizona>. 

Maxwell: When were you born? 

Brooks: I was born November 17, 1934. 

Maxwell: What was <San Augustine> like when you grew up? 

Brooks: Well, it was basically sharecropping and basically we grew up on a farm and we didn't have our own property and we sharecropped and raised corn, cattles, cotton, peas, potatoes just anything to survive. 

Maxwell: You and your family- your parents? 

Brooks: Yes, my mother was...I was raised by a stepmother. My mother passed away when I was six weeks old. So I had a stepmother that I grew up with. Basically for the first seven years of my life my older sisters raised me until my father remarried again. 

Maxwell: How many sisters and brothers did you have? 

Brooks: Well, I had three whole sisters and four half sisters. I had seven brothers that was whole and I had two half brothers from the family that my father married- the lady that raised me after my mother passed on. 

Maxwell: How many half brothers? 

Brooks: I had two half brothers. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. So you had... 

Brooks: Seven whole brothers. 

Maxwell: So all together you had seven sisters and nine brothers half and whole. 

Brooks: Right. Yes. Seven of us whole brothers and then we had two half brothers. 

Maxwell: That's one big household. You must have grown a lot of peas. 

Brooks: Well, they all wasn't in the same household at the same time. It's just that some was in the service and my oldest brother was goin' to the Marines, and one went in the army shortly after I was born. They was only there...I can remember- I think I was thirteen- my second brother, he was over in <Germany> at that particular time and he went to Korean War...That's about the way it went. We raised stock and cattles and we would take care of the sharecropping and which we have it the way we survived from one crop to another. That's about it. 

Maxwell: What kinda life was that? 

Brooks: Well, you know it was sorta rough. Like sneakers the kids get today, like shoes and stuff like that, you only got one pair. But now you've moved on, you try to buy your kids now more than what you've had. Sometimes you run into problems- you can give 'em too much. I had it pretty rough. I knew the value of a dollar and you had to work for it. You couldn't go around and look for somebody to give you something. You had to earn it and so that's the way that I tried to raise my children which it didn't always come out that way. But I was a working person. My wife- I met Irene in she'd been working ever since we been together, and we don't have a whole lot, but we've lived a pretty successful life- we bought two homes in the <Flagstaff> area, and we helped a daughter buy a condo in <Phoenix>, in <Mesa> rather. So all the kids have gotten two or three cars out of my labor since I been here. (chuckles) I never owned a car or nothing until I was able to work for it myself andgt;cause my father- he died when I was sixteen years old and I wasn't able to, you know, him to buy me anything. I always said if I reached twenty years old in the score of my life that I would work and have whatever I wanted because I knowed how to work, and strive for it. You know, I worked at the dam, helped build Glen Canyon Dam. I helped build the powerplants in the area of <Page>, Joe City, and over at Coronado in Sunnytown. 

Maxwell: I'm going to ask you a lot about that experience of building those, but first I want you to think back to <Texas>. How long were you in <Texas>? 

Brooks: Well, I stayed in <Texas> off and on for the last nineteen years of my first life, and then I would come out here and I would go back. 

Maxwell: Come back to <Flagstaff>? 

Brooks: Yeah, I came up to <Flagstaff> in 1957. 

Maxwell: How did you decide to come here? 

Brooks: Well, with the sawmill, we came to <McNary>. My daddy cut. He would cut logs in different places, locations, wherever they needed him that he can make more money cuttin' logs. That's where he would go. 

Maxwell: Had he cut logs in <Texas>? 

Brooks: No, he just started after he got through farmin', and he decided to cut logs. 

Maxwell: You came here with your daddy? 

Brooks: Yeah. Yeah, he was the reason. 

Maxwell: You were little then. How old were you? 

Brooks: I was eleven years old. 

Maxwell: So he'd just come up and cut the logs? 

Brooks: Yeah, he would go back seasonally. He come here and cut then when he would come back to <Texas>. 

Maxwell: How did he hear about the log cutting up here? 

Brooks: Well, it was a superintendent that was over the Pineland, which was a timber and lumber company that was transferred here to <McNary Arizona>. And a lot of the guys knew him and that he would give 'em jobs when they come to <Arizona> to work. 

Maxwell: How did they know him? 

Brooks: They knew him through by the mills and things- pulpwood, cuttin' pulpwood, and logs and stuff there in <Texas>. So what we would do, we'd make a crop, and we would cut pulpwood when he wasn't workin' on the crop. 

Maxwell: What's pulpwood? 

Brooks: It's paper, like, you know, you have a paper mill, like Wisconsin Tissue here that makes paper. So that pulpwood is like we have over at <Snowflake>'s paper mill over there. But in <Texas> and <Louisiana>, they have the long wood that look like logs and they have the short wood that's five-foot, that's like [cordwood?], as they call it -you know, paper, they make paper out of it. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh, so the little pieces that they make the paper out of. 

Brooks: Yeah, they chop it and then they grind it up in order to make paper. They take [company name inaudible] was one of your paper mills down there. And then you had Buna down between <Beaumont> and <Jasper Texas>. They had a big one in Buna, a big paper mill that's still goin' strong down there now. 

Maxwell: What was that work like? 

Brooks: It was rough -rough work. It was just like if you've ever been around somebody to go out and cut a load of firewood. Then you constantly do that for eight or ten or twelve hours, sometimes fourteen or fifteen hours. And if you ever had seen a person run a power saw. And I was- a friend of mine- and since I came out here, and I used to cut right-of-ways for construction, you have to run that saw. They cut a lot of timber. 

Maxwell: It's exhauting!? 

Brooks: Yes, yes. You have to eat good. 

Maxwell: What kind of stuff did you eat? 

Brooks: Well, I ate a lot of pork chops, steaks, and I ate a lot of bacon, eggs, biscuits, and like I said, I never was hungry and I always work. I never, as becoming sixty-five years this year, I never been where I didn't have some food since I been in the world. I never have been able to not have food in mouth. God has blessed us with food. 

Maxwell: You raised pigs then when you were sharecropping? 

Brooks: Yeah, we had our own, and we raised killer beef when we needed to, and stuff like that. Then there, I raised -we'd have a little garden out there, our fresh fruit. Then my wife, she came from <Louisiana>, and her father had an eighty-acre farm down there, and she came from a place where they raised and fished and put stuff in cans- canned food and stuff. That's how we survived when you didn't have very much money to spend. 

Maxwell: She put it up? 

Brooks: Yeah. And as you can see over there, she quilts and make up bedding and stuff like that. 

Maxwell: She still does it? 

Brooks: Yes, she does. She'll be sixty-two years old next year, which you probably didn't want this in your interview, I'm sorry. 

Maxwell: No, that's all right. 

Brooks: But I just had to tell you that that's what she do, you know, and she made a lot of shirts and things when I was workin' at the dam, Glen Canyon Dam. She made a lot of my clothes to wear to work. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Brooks: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: That's heavy duty clothing to sew. 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So when you were eleven, you came out the first time with your dad, to the sawmills out here? 

Brooks: Yeah, not in <Flagstaff>- in <McNary>. In <McNary Arizona>. I came to <Flagstaff> in 1957, to live. 

Maxwell: When you came that first time when you were eleven, did you work also? 

Brooks: No, no, no. I never worked until after I was nineteen. Then I got in the- I worked as- I started hooking chokers down there of Haney Lumber Company in <Williams>, but I lived in <Flagstaff>, and we worked for a guy named Bill, had some log trucks, and I got my right leg broke in one place, so after I healed from that and got out of the cast, I joined the- in 1958 I joined the 556 labor union. And then in 1959, I go to <Page> and worked from there until 1966, on the dam. And I left the dam and I started workin' on the powerplant and helped build I-15 in <St. George Utah>. And when we wasn't workin' up there, I worked for [Mash Kanutzen?] and I helped put in I-17 down to <McGuireville>. We used to have to go down through Sedona all the time, and then we worked and built the I-17 to <McGuireville> to <Phoenix>. 

Maxwell: What did you do on the dam... Well, let me go back. Where did you meet your wife? 

Brooks: I met my wife right here. She came here. Her brother was workin' at the Southwest sawmill and she came out in 1961 to visit him. 

Maxwell: You came here in '57? 

Brooks: Yeah, to <Flagstaff> to live. 

Maxwell: How many times had you been to <McNary> and <Williams> and <Flagstaff> and all that, before you decided to move here? 

Brooks: Oh, probably about seven or eight different times, we was through here, goin' to <California>. I had an aunt that lived in <San Francisco>. And we would stop in and out of here, and after my daddy started to work summers and things, and cut logs and things, I just seed that this was so beautiful, and I just wanted to live here. 

Maxwell: That's why you came? 

Brooks: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Wow, you just like the place. 

Brooks: Yeah, I liked the mountains because in <Texas> was flat, and all you see, where I grew up at, was water. Water and the lowland, swampy land. 

Maxwell: Oh, really?! 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Well, <San Augustine>- where is that in <Texas>? 

Brooks: That's southeast <Texas>. 

Maxwell: I was goin' to say had to be in the east if it was wet. 

Brooks: Yeah, it was wet... It was twenty-one miles north of <Jasper Texas>, and so it's called- you've heard of the college of Steven F. Austin and <Nacogdoches Texas>? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Brooks: <Center Texas>, up in <Carthage> and <Longview>; <Tyler Texas>; and different places like that, you know, near, nearby within something like 150 miles from those places. But I was born in <San Augustine> which was between twenty-one and twenty-two miles north of <Jasper Texas>, going north, from <Beaumont> and <Silsbee>. 

Maxwell: Is it a small town? 

Brooks: Yeah, they's small towns. Some of 'em... I would say right now, they're probably larger than <Flagstaff> right now, but at the time I lived there, they called 'em one-horse towns. (laughs) One-horse, they called it. That means that it probably has.... Like when <Tuba City> and them, before they built up, and like Kayenta- you would say that they had a trading post and place to buy stuff to keep from comin' into town. Like <Williams>, you know, it's growing now. When I would come and work in <Williams> down there, they had just basically a few motels and a few bars, and the Chevrolet dealership down there. When I came to <Flagstaff>, the area I'm living in now, this was not even there to be- this was kind of not exactly a wooded area, but it wasn't any houses built in this area. 

Maxwell: Pasture? 

Brooks: Well, yeah, it was mostly grazing for Babbitts' grazing land, and a few woody areas here. They built all of this as I grew and stayed here. 

Maxwell: What was it like, what was the relationship between the owner of the land and your family? How did they treat you? 

Brooks: Well, I didn't have no -when I was growin' up and sharecroppin' and stuff like that, I never had any problem. You paid your rent when you was rentin'. Me and my wife, we rented from a family called Williams and the Flemons. And then they sold us our first place over on South Fountaine, where Miss Taylor lived, Alford Taylor. And we stayed there up until- I think we lived in that house thirteen years. But we rented from Beulah Williams for six years that I was workin' at Glen Canyon Dam. So we stayed over there off of Clay. 

Maxwell: Was that Mr. John L Williams's wife? 

Brooks: No, it was Louis Flemons [phonetic spelling]. No, no, I'm sorry, I take that back. Beulah Williams, no, he was a minister- I was just tryin' to think of... He's not any relation to John L. Williams. 

Maxwell: The other Williams family? 

Brooks: Yeah, they live in <Phoenix> now. They still owns a house right there by Springhill Church. They owned that property there, supposed to be remodeled, in between Springhill and... I guess you might know Sally Chapman, the one that had the.... 

Maxwell: Sally V? 

Brooks: Yeah, right, the one that had the bar. 

Maxwell: I'm trying to get a picture of what your life was like when you -you were twenty-three when you moved here, so when you were sixteen your dad died. What happened after that? 

Brooks: Well, I went to work. I had been working ever since I was eleven years old, off and on, but not where that the peoples paid me cash- it wasn't... I had a Social Security card since I was twelve, and so I did odd jobs like pump gas at stations, and when I became able to work in the woods or do construction work, I went at it. 

Maxwell: That's some hard work! 

Brooks: Yes. 

Maxwell: Makes you strong. 

Brooks: And then I started as -after I got through workin' construction, I had a- I tried a firewood business here, and my eyes wouldn't let me continue. It was pretty successful, but as you can't drive your own vehicles, and I had a bunch of trucks, and I had to hire people to drive 'em. Then I started to lose money, and I quit it. You can't run a business unless you can see well enough to run it. 

Maxwell: When you first came here, what did this town look like to you? 

Brooks: Well, it was, you know, the downtown was Babbitts' Store, and the little restaurants was down Santa Fe, and NAU was just a college then. It was small, and one place, and it spreaded all over the place. (laughs) 

Maxwell: Yeah. Sure has. (laughter) 

Brooks: Yeah, and it was just a little, what we would say, cowboy town, just a western town, western scenery. Everybody was friendly, and we got along and everything. Then as it started to build with different races of people started to come in until it grew. I seen it grow from, I'd say, from maybe about 3,000 or 4,000 or 5,000 peoples right here in town, grow to 60,000 or 70,000 people. 

Maxwell: Wow, that's an amazing change. 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: When the different races of people came in what happened? 

Brooks: Well, you know, you have prejudices and different peoples, until peoples... I think it's basic there's reason that you have these melting pots in these places where race play a lot of problem, because the peoples don't have the understanding about different races, how peoples want to be treatin' each other. But I never had no problem workin' with nobody, workin' with different races of peoples, the Navajo peoples that I worked with. One of the greatest people that I ever worked with, I worked with 'em, I was buildin' a set of schools out on the reservation for Holiday Construction, in the early seventies, and I worked at <Ganado>, <Chinle>, <Many Farms>, and <Red Mesa>. And I found a lot of the Navajo people that I worked with, which were skilled people to work, like electricians, cement finishers, operators. I found them to be some of the greatest peoples to work with, and I've worked with a lot of Hispanic peoples here, too; white peoples, and a few black peoples, too, that I worked with. But basic, like me, workin' peoples, when I was a pusher, you- in the black race you have a lot of people who would work- just like if you was my boss, I'd give you a better day's work than I do workin' for my own race. 

Maxwell: Oh? Why's that? 

Brooks: That's the way it seems, and I got more work out of workin' not only my peopleBmaybe I've had one or twoBbut when they want to give me a crew all of my own race, I would run into a problem gettin' my work out. 

Maxwell: Why? 

Brooks: I don't know. 

Maxwell: Did they want you to be easier on 'em? 

Brooks: Yeah. And so you can't show race- now you might have to put this in the category for me- just because I'm black and the person workin' with me is black, if I'm assigned to do a job, I have to get that work out. At least a company cannot pay me if I don't do my work. 

Maxwell: Right. 

Brooks: I can remember so well at Coronado Plant, that I was given a crew of men, and they loaded me up with about eight black guys and some of 'em, I was lettin' andgt;em come back to the union hall as fast as they come over there. Because they expect to smoke pot on the job- excuse me, I don't know whether you want to edit this out. 

Maxwell: No, no, there's no need to edit anything on this. 

Brooks: And they would set up in the restroom. You know, they had some "J" potty "J" johns on the job, and smoke pot, and I'd catch 'em, and I'd tell 'em, "Go get your check," because all peoples, everybody that use drugs, use drugs, of which I'm not knockin' that. But I had a job to do like find grade and get a pour ready to pour concrete at this powerplant or where I was given the assignment to go up in the boiler, 300 or 400 foot and take out the slag, the well, the cats, and the iron scrap and put it in a skiff and bring it down on the- you know, they had elevators, they had cranes, and made sure that this work was done before the job could move on. And so I run a pretty tight shift, compared. I was mostly company-oriented because if I did a good job, I got a bonus at the end of the year, even though I was in the union and I was gettin' so much money per hour. But those was my best years, I worked for Bectel [phonetic spelling] Corporation seventeen years. 

Maxwell: Really. When did you start working and when did you finish? 

Brooks: I started at Bectel, I believe it was in '69. 

Maxwell: So through the seventies and into the eighties then? 

Brooks: Oh, yeah. It was '83 when I quit workin' for Bectel. 

Maxwell: You said that's called being the pusher when you run a crew like that? 

Brooks: Yeah, yeah. I operate, I worked. I was a workin' person pushin'. You know, like they put a group of men under you, and you lead, but they would pay you foreman pay to be a leader, 'cause I knew the work, and I had experienced the work so long that I was pretty good, and I poured concrete all the time. Or either get the ground ready for the concrete to be poured. 

Maxwell: You build the forms and all that? 

Brooks: No, no, that was carpentry. We called fine grade, just like if you was gonna lay that tile under your feet there you would have to prepare a surface where you could stick that tile in there, which is concrete under that tile in that location, where you add to that little house you [inaudible]. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh, do you like grade it? 

Brooks: Grade it and then do the concrete work for the finisher. I know how to finish cement, but my job was to pour it, operate it, and lay it down. 

Maxwell: From the time you got big enough to start doing the timber and construction work, did you do timber and construction work in <Texas> until you moved here? 

Brooks: I did a little bit, maybe about eighteen months that I helped. Where I got interested in doing construction, they built a loadin' dock for the trains to load boxcars, and then the train track. And I helped pour a big ramp and the floor, and had to rub a finisher, wall, and make it look real beautiful. And that's where I got interested in workin' in cement. 

Maxwell: Oh, so that's your start. That was in <Texas>? 

Brooks: Yes. 

Maxwell: How did you just come to make that very decision to move to <Flagstaff>? What was going on then? 

Brooks: Well, I worked at what you call a furniture glue factory for about two years with a cousin of mine. He got out of the military, and he asked me to work for Southern Pine Lumber Company, and we worked in makin' furniture with a tandem machine. So it was real dusty, and I believe that's why I have asthma today. And that was about seventeen, eighteen years old, at that time I worked with him there. And I had a friend that I brought to Grand Prairie, <Texas>, on the other side of <Fort Worth>, between <Fort Worth> and <Dallas>. And he came out and he was gonna work at Southwest Sawmill. 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]

Brooks: I seed a lot of things that I never would understand. I seed peoples hunged, you know, on the courthouse square in <Center Texas>. And I asked my father if they had committed some crime. By my bein' the age I were, I didn't know that stuff like that, to see a person hung with a grass sack over his head, but I actually seed that when I was nine or ten years old. 

Maxwell: That's amazing. Was it vigilante stuff? 

Brooks: No, it was.... The only thing, we just came to town on this courthouse square. And the purpose of that, at the time that I was given through by my relatives. They wanted to take these peoples and hang 'em. They hung 'em out there for seven days in order to let other black peoples know that they will hang you back there. That's what I was told at that particular time. And that was one of the reasons I have relatives in <Texas> today, sisters and brothers live in <Galveston> and <San Augustine> my oldest sister still lives there- now she's eighty-two years old. And her children.... But they had it better to work back there than I did, and I came here to make more money, the reason I'm in the state of <Arizona>. And after I got here, you know, my life was pretty successful and raised up my family, and I was able to make a little money and save a little and live pretty decent for a po' black boy that never had an education. 

Maxwell: Did you have any education at all? 

Brooks: Well, I went to the eleventh grade, which is probably some of the schooling that I have gotten, which I didn't graduate like 'cause it's equivalent today with probably a junior college transfer or something like that. I know a lot of stuff, but if I don't be where- my eyes, you know, and stuff like that, I can show you some pretty good figurin', and I'm pretty good in math in my head or with a pencil. But I never run adding machines and computers, stuff like that. But I'm pretty sure that if I had the sight, I'm pretty sure I could master anything I ever seed, I could do. 

Maxwell: Eleventh grade was a good bit of education in the thirties and forties, wasn't it? 

Brooks: Yeah, well, you know, back then, you'd learn how to count, and that was the major thing that I learned how to do is, you know, when I could see, how to read, is read everything for 'em, and speak. I was always tryin' to speak to different peoples about different things. And I wasn't no person that wouldn't listen to people. I didn't think I knew everything. 

Maxwell: You learn a lot when you listen. 

Brooks: Yeah. And so that was the way that I was brought up. 

Maxwell: I think seeing some people hung in the town square when you're nine or ten sounds pretty horrible. 

Brooks: Well, yeah, it gives you a point of view in life to where if you don't see it with your own eyes, you wouldn't know what it was like. You know, you could read about a lot of things, and if you haven't experienced it, seen it, or lived it, or was around it, you wouldn't know how to accept, you know. And so I don't have nothin' bitter. Like I said in the outset when you began this, I don't haveBI think the basic thing is my thing that I have in life, is that we don't talk and visit races of peoples and get their understanding how they feel about things. I think this is half the problem, is the reason they say it's gonna be a meltin' pot and all this. I don't believe in that. I think it's you, I, and peoples that communicate to each other, treat people right. I think that's what it's gonna take. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I do too. 

Brooks: I don't have anything.... You know, it's just like, I was the type of person, I loved to make money. I loved to do things that paid me good (chuckles), you know. Of course we have an old Cadillac. We could have bought a new one if we wanted to, which is why I say I'll wait. She keep her cars ten years, until she get another one. And the first thing, you know, your peers, your neighbors, and different people will say, "Oh, they got money!" You don't have to have a dime if you save what you save, and prepare long enough for what you want, you're gonna get it. But you gotta prepare for it. You just can't run out, win a lottery or somethin' like that, and expect to have different types of stuff you want. We wanted a bigger house, but I liked this one, because you look out my back yard back there and look at the land I have back here. This is hard and it's flat. It's hard to get rid of somethin' like this and then go over and check University Heights, over in Continental, or up on 89 and buy a house with the driveway settin' up on a forty-five. You gotta shovel snow. So I love this right here. This is a nice location. The house is not no real expensive type of house or nothin' like that. I got to do a driveway next year. But I like this. I like flat land. I don't want the mountains where you slide off the roof. I don't want that. I coulda had a most expensive place here. I made the money, but this is what I want. 

Maxwell: Did you like to make money when you were a young man? 

Brooks: Oh, sure, I did. I worked, I had two jobs, different things I did. Over the weekend I would work and fix up old people's property, pour 'em a slab of cement and make 'em a patio, outside of my regular job, on Saturday and Sunday. I was thirty trying to make that mighty dollar. And I figured.... You know, we had five kids. My oldest boy, he got killed in <Tempe> when we was down there in '94. But the girl, which is my daughter Karen, the one right here in this here picture that's hangin' in front of you on that wall.... 

Maxwell: That real pretty one? 

Brooks: Yeah, that's my daughter. That's the onliest girl was in with me and my wife. I had four sons. That was what I basically spent my life, is make sure that they had plenty, and I sent her through.... She sings a lot, but she works for Carecom [phonetic spelling]. She started a job on the eleven of this month for Carecom, and I've stood by her. She has a little girl, now three years old, and she's not married. She's thirty-three years old. I spent most of my time helpin' her go through life and do different things. She sings professional, mostly, and make records and stuff like that. She sings church songs. She used to sing in nightclubs in <Tucson>. 

Maxwell: She's a beautiful girl. 

Brooks: Yeah. But she lives in <Mesa> now. Basically, I've spent most of my life preparin' for them, and Clarence Junior, which is my oldest son, he drives a truck for Pepsi Company, pop company. He's goin' on his second year of workin' for them. Darren- you know his problems. I got a call this morning, and they's gonna send me some papers to fill out to help him out. I think to try to get him to get some of his money from the military. 

Maxwell: Oh, like some assistance for treatment? 

Brooks: Assistance, yeah. andgt;Cause he owe the Coconino County restitution. I think it's $2,100. 

Maxwell: Tell me, how big was the black community when you moved here to <Flagstaff>? 

Brooks: (pauses, thinking) Let's see, South and Old Town. I believe more blacks was here with their families, was workin' at that sawmill and then <Williams> and different sawmills around here. I just believe there were more blacks visible then than they are here now because they stay here. We have some moved away from here to <Las Vegas>, <California>, <Phoenix>, <Tucson>. I just think it was at that particular time, back in the early fifty-five and sixties, and the early sixties and the seventies, I just believe there was more blacks was here, that passed through here, at that particular time in the early sixties and the fifties, than there are today. Because maybe the parents might live here, but the children done moved on to Vegas has some, <California>, and you know, <Phoenix>, <Tucson>, and some of 'em moved back to <Texas>, and some of 'em gone back to <Arkansas> and <Louisiana>, too. 

Maxwell: Why did they go? 

Brooks: Well, I think it's for various reasons. After they grew up, some of 'em went on to school and everything, and they had a better job. Now, you take my friend Joe's brother, Rob, he's an engineer. He moved to <Spokane>. He got his education right here from NAU and workin' for Santa Fe. Most of 'em go on for a place where they can make more money. That's basic. The trend, you go where you can get the best job and where you can make the best livin'. Money is the key of everything- that's what I think. I'm just hung up on havin' some to survive on. (laughs) And really, what little change I have, everybody talk about, "You'd better go get you a little savings out," that I been havin' different places, like I'll have a CD or somethin' like that, and they say, "You'd better move it and replace it. You're not gonna be able to...." You know, they might lose it and stuff like that. It's impossible, in my opinion. How could you lose somebody's account? You know, I don't believe that- unless they just want to rob you and take it. I don't see how you can say that the twenty-first century is gonna be so much different from the 1800s to the 1900s. I don't see where.... Maybe I'm ignorant to the facts. 

Maxwell: People get all worked up. 

Brooks: Yeah, yeah. So I just hope and pray, what religion I have inside of me, that this doesn't happen to nobody. I don't have that much money to worry about anyway. (laughs) If I lose $2,000 or $3,000, I haven't lost anything no way because where there's a will, there's gonna be a way. 

Maxwell: When you first came here, would you say there was a black community, or was it just a bunch of people? 

Brooks: It was kind of mixed. It wasn't considered in my opinion, called all a black community is because there were basically just like maybe you'd have a mixed neighborhood, and it was all mixed. It wasn't like you would have in the South, like where I grew up at, that you had black settlements. But here, it wasByou know, always the old sayin' was said, "Cross the tracks, that's where the blacks were." Well, you know, here, everybody- you know, it's a lot of different peoples across the tracks, as they call it. You know, that's in the South, they say, "You want to find a black settlement, you go across the track." And so here, people live north, south, east, and west of <Flagstaff>, anywhere where they could survive in and have a place to stay. 

Maxwell: Was it like that when you came? 

Brooks: Yeah, basically if you had the money, you could buy mighty near any piece of land you wanted for not what they's payin' for today. (laughter) I know a lot of times, right down here where the Redwood was bein' built, before they sold that for to have the forestry. I could have bought a lot of property up and down behind here for $300 and $400, and $500 an acre of ground. And I didn't. I could have bought enough property here that I'd be three times a millionaire- when I first came here and was workin' at the dam, 'cause you could buy an acre of ground here for $25, $25, $50, $75. And then it started goin' up to $200 and $300 a square foot, and oh brother! (laughter) Yeah, I coulda. 

Maxwell: That's an immense change. 

Brooks: Uh-huh. I coulda been a pretty big man if I'd have bought the land when I started workin' at Glen Canyon Dam. They was sellin' a lot of it. 

Maxwell: When did you meet your wife? Did you say '61? 

Brooks: Sixty-one. We got married July 22 in 1961. (pause) 

Maxwell: Did you ever see anything like the lynching here? 

Brooks: No, no, no. When I came west, that was the end of that. And not just only seeing that when I was really young and didn't understand it, near as I can recall, I was between seven to nine years old, as I can remember. We went to town to shop and those people, would begin to flies and things, and smell, you know, hangin' there. 

Maxwell: Were they all black? 

Brooks: Well, they said they were, but they had grass sacks over their heads, so I couldn't identify, but they said they was black guys hangin' there. 

Maxwell: They left them for a week. That's gross. 

Brooks: Yeah, for three to four days they left 'em there for us to see. 

Maxwell: That's a terrible thing to do to somone. 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: But not here? 

Brooks: No, I never seen anything like that in the state of <Arizona>, and I didn't live in <New Mexico>, but I've traveled across <New Mexico> a lot, and I've worked, since I've been here, in and out of <Nevada> and <Utah>, and even <Colorado>. I never.... I've been in places where I couldn't rent a motel room, workin'. But even out in smaller places, <St. George Utah>, when I worked on I-15 between Littlefield to <Mesquite Nevada>, I could get a room, and a lot of peoples would rent me trailers and things at places like that, around Zion and <St. Johns> and <Hurricane>, in there. I heard so much talk about peoples, that a black person would get in trouble. But the peoples up there that I worked up there the three or four years I worked in that area, I found 'em to be credible and good. I guess it's the way you approach people, what makes.... You know, if you're lookin' for trouble, you gonna find trouble. 

Maxwell: That's true. 

Brooks: And if your not, if you're friendly and got an open heart and warm towards people, people that listen to you will cry. That's my opinion about-you know, in my study and travelin'. I never did make trouble, I tried to be somebody's friend, and if I can help you in any way, I would do that. That's why I have just as many white friends and Spanish friends- any race of people that I ever met and talked to 'em, they will tell you that I'm the type of person for everybody, not for the trouble that I see that you pick up a paper and see all this junk about. So I've learned to get along with all races of people. Like Saddam Hussein, I believe I could make friends with his people. (chuckles) I wouldn't want to make, you know, friends with him, because I don't believe in what he believes in, you know. But I believe I can live with any person, any race of people, and enjoy livin' around 'em. And I think they would enjoy bein' around me. 

Maxwell: Yeah, it makes a difference, when you approach people that way. What were you going to say? 

Brooks: Well, that's about all. I'm gettin' tired now. I done run my mouth more than not. (laughter) 

Maxwell: No, you haven't! You've been great! 

Brooks: Okay. 

Maxwell: Let me just think now. 

Brooks: Oh! I signed your paper, didn't I? 

Maxwell: Yeah, you did. 

Brooks: Okay. 

Maxwell: We're okay with that. What did you do for fun when you first came here? 

Brooks: Well, I had my share of goin' to bars. I played pool, I played a little baseball here. And now, my son takes me down to the casinos every now and then. I play a little bit. I do that in past time, now, when I go down there with him. But basically, that's all I do. I used to go watch the little kids play basketball, like Joe's boy was playing Pop Warner football, and I had a son, Gregory, played it. I'd go watch them. But now, since I'm blind, I can't- you know, I have to go with somebody, like Joe used to come pick me up and take me to different games and things. He would referee, and I went to a lot of sports and stuff like that. I do love sports. 

Maxwell: How about back in the fifties? What was it like in the bars there. 

Brooks: It was basic, ordinary. I didn't drink that much. We'd go there with a friend. Maybe I'd have one beer. When I first married my wife, I think I'd only been drunk once or twice. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Brooks: Uh-huh, really drunk. 

Maxwell: So you weren't particularly a hard-drinking man? 

Brooks: No, no. I would keep it- I used to keep it like you see that twelve-pack sittin' down there on the floor, not in the frig, right over in that corner. And so we would always have a beer or something here, because my wife is a church person, and I'd have to put- I can't keep no beer in the cooler, cold, in the refrigerator. I'd have to get one of my coolers out of my shed and put it in. You don't set no beer in her fridge! (laughter) And so sometimes, you know, as the kids come back home, we have a get-together here like Labor Day, Memorial Day, and Thanksgivin'. They come up from <Phoenix> and <Tucson> to have Thanksgivin' dinner. I'll have my cooler out there and I have an umbrella that we put on the deck out there in the summer when they're here, and they set out there and drink their beer. Because they smoke, they can't smoke up in here. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: Was the church ever a very big thing in your life? 

Brooks: Well, it was in my early life, but you know, after I got disabled- see, I've been partially blind for eighteen years. 

Maxwell: Oh, long time. 

Brooks: Yeah, I got this way in '83, and '85, then I started gettin' money on disability and my pension started. Up until '83, I drove a vehicle, and I drove until '87. Then they took my license, which I'm glad they did. I had a Class "A" chauffeur's license, which is now called a CDL. And after that, I just gave up, after I couldn't see. 

Maxwell: Was it hard to get to church on Sundays? 

Brooks: Oh, my wife would take meBI just don't go. She reads to me and reads the Bible. 

Maxwell: Did you see a lot of people who were hard drinking men in the construction...? 

Brooks: Oh, yeah. Well, basically, construction is a type of.... You know, you go to the bar after work, and some of 'em'll set from five o'clock in the evening 'til eleven or twelve o'clock at night. They won't leave until they done got their load, and they get right up and go to work the next mornin' drunk, but they sober up and do their work. 

Maxwell: Do you need a drink of water? 

Brooks: No, I think I'll be alright. I'm lookin' for my inhaler. 

Maxwell: Let's stop this and get the inhaler. [END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

Maxwell: Oh yeah, I was going to ask you, the last project that I did, a number of the people, I told you it was drug addicts, a lot of them worked for construction, and they would smoke a little pot in the morning, take a little cocaine through the dayB this sort of thing. Did you see a lot of drug use among the people on construction? 

Brooks: Well, I know some guys that would smoke pot and stuff in the johns that we call 'em, on the job. You could smell it. But you know, I never did. I never was interested in drugs. I seen a lot of peoples use 'em, and really here, as soon as I came to <Arizona>. I was really surprised to go back home and see my nephews and cousin, back in <Texas>, use it. I have brothers, children and everything, like my son, and the kids that's thirty-five to twenty years old, seems like they're more into drugs than the children were.... There were drugs around when I was twenty, twenty-five years old, but not visible and prevalent to what you see today. So when I found out my son, Darren, had been in the military for fourteen years and turned out, you know, on drugs as bad as he wasBit just really hurt me because it was the reason I really got where I lost my sight, is because I worried, and the anger over him, tryin' to pull him through. Because I was hurt so bad that he had did so good in the military- he was an E-6, a sergeant-and had two beautiful girls and a wife, and he lose all of that. It really hurt me because he had a home up in <Oklahoma> there, in Fort Sill Oklahoma, which is <Lawton Oklahoma>. Seventy miles, between <Wichita Falls> and <Oklahoma City>. <Lawton Oklahoma> is where he had his house. They call it Fort Sill Oklahoma. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that must have hurt. 

Brooks: And I had to get him in 1965 [95?], so I sent him money earlier to come home on, and he delayed us for about five or six months after we had sent him a plane ticket to come home. And when he came, he came a day before Christmas, 1995Bthe year of 1996 comin' in. I had worried with him up until the day he wasn't in jail, tryin' to have him here and goin' through the.... You know, like the probation officer. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh, guidance center? 

Brooks: The guidance.... Well, mostly, like him, Muffet [phonetic spelling] and all of them that.... 

Maxwell: Oh, the probation. 

Brooks: Probation people. They would come and be lookin' for him, and they'd wake you up, come in here. Because he lived here, we got woke up three and four times a night. They would be knockin' on the window, and you'd be back there sleepin' and everything, and then somebody in the back yard would be lookin', tryin' to catch him still usin' drugs and stuff like that. It was awful. I told him it was best for him to just go get some treatment. So that's one of the last timesBI think you interviewed him. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Brooks: We told andgt;em he has to get help, 'cause he couldn't stay here, we was gettin' too old to have him here. He interrupted our life, 'cause I'm gettin' older and then I want to be comfortable and live in a quiet environment, because I've never been aroundBI drink, like I said, been only drunk two or three times, but not in front of them. I drink a beer or a half a beer to go to sleep sometimes when I ain't on this medicine. But I don't care for drinkin'. Never did care nothin' about the other prescription drugs. This is, as you can read this, you can see it, that's my prescription, the pills, I take two of them a day, which is a drug, but it.... 

Maxwell: It's for your asthma? 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: That's good stuff, isn't it? 

Brooks: Well, it helps, but I wish it where I didn't have to take anything. 

Maxwell: Yeah, but you need to. 

Brooks: Yeah, to control it. 

Maxwell: Yeah, you sure do. You've seen a lot of change in your years here. 

Brooks: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Some people have talked about the police being very prejudiced and hard on black folks here in the fifties. Did you ever have any experience with the police? 

Brooks: No. The only thing that I have to say about the police, the problem here is this never was a high pool of black cops to be here to pull from. So you can't compare a little town like <Flagstaff> to have a large pool of black policemen to choose from. So I never did have no trouble, like you hear a lot of people say that they got two black policemen, or they got one. Back in my day, they had Wolfe [phonetic spelling], they had one black policeman here. And they put him on the south side, which they called it, you know, a foot policeman, from NAU back, up and down 'Frisco to the tracks. I've heard that old sayin', and now they have Ivory Washington [phonetic spelling], a patrol policeman here, and he worked Butler in the south side area in his car. The only thing that I really have to say about the Flag P.D., I like that NAU, when James Cohen [phonetic spelling], when he was a sergeant for NAU over there, I think NAU had the best police department at that time when James Cohen was a sergeant over there. I think they produced a better system with the Flagstaff P.D. than the system they have here for the city today. 

Maxwell: Oh? Why was it better? 

Brooks: Well, I think they had more pool of peoples that was more qualified for the job, than what they have here, and that most police here, there's not too many born, raised guys that grew up here, really qualified for a black policeman here. Most of 'em here, they've got a record. So how can you hire someone that's got a record? How could I set an example for you, and I don't qualify, and I got a record? See? And so, there you are. And so let's face it, I believe in right, fairness, and everything. If you got kids growin' up here today that don't have that record, and they qualify for to be a policeman, I say give 'em a chance. But if you don't have it, and you got a bad record, you don't need to be no leader, in my opinion. 

Maxwell: That's sad but true. 

Brooks: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: When you first came here, very first, how did you get here? 

Brooks: I came by bus. 

Maxwell: What was that like? 

Brooks: I think it was somethin' like from <Pineland Texas>, to here. I believe I was at least a day-and-a-half or two days. 

Maxwell: Wow! 

Brooks: 'Cause I came to <Dallas>, and I think I rode the bus a night and a day-and-a-half, or a day and a night, somethin' like that. And when I got off the bus, it was 4:30 in the afternoon, and snow was waist deep. 

Maxwell: Oh! 

Brooks: It was waist deep! If you stepped out, and you know where it wasn't plowed or pushed. A friend of mine that I went to this house. It was cold and I seed so much white snow that- you know, I never was around no more than, never seed more than four inches of snow falled on the ground nowhere, and to see (laughs) that much snow, it was really amazing. I was bundled up. I knew it was a cold place before I came to stay. My sister, I believe I had $70, and during that time men wore undershirts with the sleeveless undershirt with the strap, and she had pinned $370 on the inside, and I had $20 to eat on, on the bus, and I almost ran out in the length of time [since] I left <Pineland Texas>, on the bus, eatin' in different places, because every state, like I liked hamburgers, cheeseburgers, or a bowl of red chile, you know, the places that I could get it. And it was different prices. I think I had forty cents when I had to go in the Flagstaff Trailways bus station where it is today. I got off right there and I went in and put my stuff in a locker, and I had found me a place to stay, and then I had a guy to come back that had a car here that I knew, that came back and picked me up. I come back to the locker and got my belongings. It wasn't very much, maybe three or four changes. (laughs) 

Maxwell: How'd you find a place to stay? 

Brooks: Well, we had knew some people that had left <Pineland Texas>, years before, that had been living here since 1946. 

Maxwell: Who was that? 

Brooks: Cleve Flemons [phonetic spelling]. He's passed away now, and his wife, Alice, works downtown. 

Maxwell: Oh, Miss Alice? 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: At Martan's, the cook? 

Brooks: Yeah. Yeah, she works downtown down there. 

Maxwell: That's Miss Alice? Oh, how great! 

Brooks: I stayed with him until I got a place to stay andgt;cause they was already established here. So they had been here since the early forties. I think they came hereBI don't know, they mighta came earlier. I know it was in the early forties, before the fifties, they moved. They was living in <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: I should go find them, too! 

Brooks: Well, he's dead, but Miss Alice, she's in her eighties-eighty-seven-or almost ninety years old. She still works downtown down there! 

Maxwell: Boy! 

Brooks: Down there in one of those sandwich shops down there-you know, the one by Joe's? 

Maxwell: Oh, I know right where it is. 

Brooks: You do?! 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. I've gone in there and talked to her, just to say hi and eat her food. 

Brooks: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: She's a good cook. 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So what did you think about all that snow? 

Brooks: Well, you know, by me coming from the South and never seed more than four inches, I said, "What did I come out here for?!" You know, as it left, you know, about six months later, I got used to it and I began to like it. Cold. You know, I found out that I did better in the cold climate than I did where I came from. It'd get cold down there, but this was warmer to me, after I got used to it, than the wet cold back in the South. And so I enjoyed being in the mountains. And after I worked at Glen Canyon Dam and the freeways and the Blue Ridge job that I had.... 

Maxwell: The reservoir out there? 

Brooks: Yeah, I worked down there on the tunnel down there that we tried to drill all the way from there to Payson, and got about two miles under that mountain, goin' down to Strawberry and Payson, from the Blue Ridge Mountains in there, and then they decided to sink a shaft and pipe it over the top, down into the Strawberry area. 

Maxwell: Two miles is a long way under a mountain before you change your mind! 

Brooks: Well, they couldn't. We had to drill six-foot bores to put this tunnel in there to pipe this water down there. And we run into a lot of different types of uranium, heat, in there, and they had to blow fans in there for us to breathe and everything. You sweated, just like if I turn the gas heater on behind you, and you stood right in front of it. That heater right there on that wall over there, you could put yourBif I'd run that heater like it's wide open, you could put your hand-I've had that wall over there would burn your hand, right behind that sofa. 

Maxwell: Wow! 

Brooks: Until I learned how to control this heat. And so that was the way we were in there. For eighteen months, I worked in this tunnel, tryin' to drill it through there. But they kept makin' shafts up through to the top of the ground, maybe 400 and 500 feet for they could bring fresh air in there to us. But they had fans in there, sucking. 

Maxwell: That sounds like a really tough job. Boy. So, let's see, what else did I want to talk to you about? 

Brooks: Well, I don't know. I'd be better for you to ask me... 

Maxwell: Did you hunt much? 

Brooks: No, I never was a hunter. 

Maxwell: Fish? 

Brooks: Fished a little bit, but not like these people here that fish in here today. I fished a lot before I came, and after-I never could use a rod and reel. Back in my day you'd get a cane pole and tie a hook on it, and run the line down it, put a cork on it and you set the depth you want to fish at, and that's the way I used a twenty-five-foot line and throw it out there with this cane pole. I never did get used to usin' a rod and reel how to fish. I never was interested in it. I bought a couple of reels, I threw 'em out there. I put so much lead on 'em I'd lose the hooks, and I got tired of tryin'. My friend Joe tried and tried to get me to learn how to cast. I never could! (chuckles) I was too strong. I'd pop the line off like that. (laughter) So I never wasBI just never was a fisherman-not out here. 

Maxwell: How about raising kids here? What was that like? 

Brooks: Well, you just have to be more, you know.... It was nice in a way, but it's just hard for any person that worked away from home, and their wife worked and everything. If you send your kids to school here, you can control 'em through middle school or elementary school. At that time it wasn't called middle school. And when they started high school, they was out of your control. andgt;Course now, through middle school, now they can be influenced a lot. But I had trouble with one child when this was called junior high or elementary school when it was Thunderbird, right across the street. Now it's called the middle school. I had one child there, the wife had to come off her job and visit to school quite frequently. And when they went to high school and everything, then it was pretty.... You know, I wasn't here like the wife were, with them, 'cause I worked out of town all the time. But I would say it was about, on average, it wasn't no harder than it would have been.... I think it would have been better than bringin' 'em up in a big city. 

Maxwell: Yeah. Did people help out with raising them, like neighbors and friends and stuff like that? 

Brooks: Yeah, basically. But you had a period to where that when I came up, you would have to where that this person would watch your children and everything. You could spank or tell some other person's child, "You're doin' wrong. I'm gonna tell your parents." You could even talk to other people's children. But today, you say somethin', and don't code it proper, you get sued! You'd better know what you're talkin' about, and then you might somebody liable to come visit you with a gun if you say somethin' about their kids. You know, used to, you could go and talk to some kids you seein' doin' wrong and ask them, you know, "Who is your parents? Why are you doin' stuff? Why are you actin' like you actin'?" and get away with it. Today, you'd better keep your mouth shut. 

Maxwell: That's a huge change. 

Brooks: Yeah. And I think basically, back when I was a kid, anybody who was older than you, you would seek and take advice from. But now.... Just like the kids, I watch 'em every day, sometimes when they leave the school here, they come, they get into my rock pile there, they chunk my rocks off. And I don't say anything. Sometimes the police will come down the street and chase 'em off. But I've had 'em, I'd be settin' up in here, like I'm talkin' to you, I've had 'em run across my porch, down in my flowers, and get 'em a handful of rocks and chunk 'em at other children in there. And one time, I can remember just vividly, that Joe happened to be in the neighborhood, and he knew all the kids. He was up in here one time, he had came to visit me, and they'd see him. He said one word, those kids went home because he was good with the children here because he knew everybody's children. He grew up with 'em. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that's neat. 

Brooks: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Well, I'm worried about tiring you out. 

Brooks: Well, I done give you all this stuff. We'd better wrap it up 'cause you got enough to work with there. 

Maxwell: All right. Anything else you want to say or put on the tape? 

Brooks: No, just I enjoy living in the <Flagstaff> area, and the people that I know, and the opportunity that I've had to live here, and the privilege. I just hope that- not using Rodney King's phrase- I just hope we all can live in this country and get along. That's about it for me and my family because I really think that <Flagstaff> is a beautiful place, and it's a place that peoples would appreciate living. I think that each and everybody here can make it better, if they just do their part, different things that they can help out in and do. Now, if I could see, I would enjoy workin' with underprivileged kids. But, you know, I would want to be where that I could do 'em some good. I don't want to lead nobody's children wrong. I really hate that we have a drug problem in Northern <Arizona>. I really hate it. It's not only because my kid got caught usin' it and everything. I just wish that we could live a drug-free society. But I understand that drugs makes a lot of things tick, but I just don't think it should be in our schools, I really don't. That's one thing I think that should be.... You know, if you got to do that, you should be in a controlled environment doin' it, if you just got to use it. That's about all I have to say. 

Maxwell: Okay. Thank you.



