FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Mr. Myron Aubineau

Interview number NAU.OH.28.47



Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview 



Myron Aubineau, who was born in <Flagstaff> in 1893. His father, Julius Aubineau, was major of <Flagstaff> at one time. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on September 6 and 8, 1976 



Tape 1, Side 1



Born in <Flagstaff>, 1893 



Parents 



Father, Julius Aubineau, <France> 



Mother, Marie Obermosser, <France> 



Parents came to <Flagstaff> in late 1880’s 



Father’s work 



Sawmill 



Mercantile business 



Degree in engineering and law 



Father first worked in <Canada> before coming to <Flagstaff> for Hudson Bay Co. 



Came to <Flagstaff> because of his health 



Brothers 



Paul, Jules, Gaston 



Father’s position as mayor 



1890’s 



Developed city water system 



<Aubineau Springs> 



Water piped from <Aubineau Springs> to reservoir 



Schooling 



Emerson 



Hollywood High School, <California> 



University of Texas



Emerson School 



Teachers and classmates 



Marlene Francis, Gussie Treat, Eva Lamport, Charlie Dunton, Moqui Travis, Freeman Pulliam, Allin Greenlaw 



Daily chores 



Worked in store 



Arizona Lumber and Timber box factory 



Worked during summer vacations, started when 10 years old 



Parents expectations toward schooling 



Father’s death and its effect on family 



Living with Babbitts 



World War I 



Worked in developing airmail services 



Jobs held 



Father’s building on corner of Leroux and Santa Fe 



Downtown area described in detail 



Front Street 



Shooting between two Mexicans and Texas ranger 



Sandy Donahue 



Signing up people in town for sewer system 



Paul Aubineau playing pool



 



Tape 1, Side 2



Famous personalities who visited <Flagstaff> 



Zane Grey 



Al Doyle 



Jimmie Swinnerton 



Weatherford Hotel 



Swinnerton and fudge story 



Evans School in <Mesa Arizona> 



Story about students 



Jokes played on students by local people, Snipe hunting 



Social life of community 



Anozira Club (<Arizona> spelled backwards) 



Dances at McMillan hall 



Girls at Normal School 



Marriage and family 



Wife, Fay Smith 



Came to high school from <California> to <Flagstaff> because parents didn’t want her to attempt to become a movie star 



Churches 



Episcopal Church 



Parents Catholic, but sent children to Methodist Sunday School 



Ashurst Family 



Sunday School with Maude 



Residences 



Other ethnic groups 



Mexican and Spanish 



Indians and cattle rustling 



Blacks 



Walter Garrison, Johnny Love 



First meeting with Theodore Roosevelt 



<Grand Canyon> dedication of El Tovar Hotel



 



Tape 2, Side 1



El Tovar dedication, continued 



Sat on Roosevelt’s knee and talked with him 



Story about father’s moustache catching fire 



Roosevelt at Hopi Snake Dance at <Oraibi> in 1912 



Pneumatic mattress story 



Pinchott and tree conservation program 



Father Vabre brings up cattle vs sheep issue to Roosevelt 



Photographers at Snake Dance 



Emerson School 



Rough students 



Teacher Mina Jones seated on radiator by students 



Types of discipline, Principal Russell 



Percival Lowell 



Men went to for advice when boy and young man 



T.A. Riordan, Charlie Babbitt, Tom Pollack (his guardian after father died), Sam Finley



This is an interview with Mr. Myron Aubineau who was born in <Flagstaff> in 1893. His father, Julius Aubineau, was mayor of <Flagstaff> at one time. The interview is being conducted on September 6, 1976, at The Northern Arizona Pioneers' Historical Museum, and on September 8, 1976, at Northern Arizona University Library, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [An unidentified man, maybe narrator's nephew, (Dan Aubineau?) is also present and makes a few comments. (Tr.)]





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, Mr. Aubineau, when and where were you born? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I was born June 2, 1893, in <Flagstaff>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, and who were your parents? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: My parents were Julius and Marie Aubineau. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was your mother's maiden name, just for the record? Do you remember? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Her maiden name was Obermosser, O-B-E-R-M-O-S-S-E-R. I'm sorry to say that was it, a germanized French name. She was born in Alsace-Lorraine, and I've forgotten her French name, but then she was, like all other residents of Alsace-Lorraine, when it was taken over by the Germans, had to take on some sort of a German name, and that was it. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was your father from <France> then originally? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: My father was born in <France>, but not in Alsace-Lorraine, no. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, when did your parents come to <Flagstaff>? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: My father came to <Flagstaff> in the late 1880s. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What type of work did he do? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, he worked, as I recall, in the sawmill, cutting ties for the railroad. And then he later got into the mercantile business. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Wasn't he an engineer, Myron? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: My father had a degree in engineering, and also a degree in water (?) law. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, my goodness! Where did he get his degrees? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: In <France>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: When he first came to the <United States> - I didn't ask you this - did he come directly to <Flagstaff>? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, he came to <Canada>, was with the Hudson Bay Company. I've forgotten the other name of it. It's Hudson Bay Company. They were primarily fur traders up in northern <Canada>. He was with them a while, and then he went to <San Francisco>. The doctors in <San Francisco> said he should go to a dry climate in <Arizona>, being somewhere around <Flagstaff>, because he suffered from what they called rheumatism in those days. They generalized any ache or pain that you had in your body as rheumatism. So that's how he happened to come to <Flagstaff>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: How many brothers and sisters did you have? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No sisters, but three brothers. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: And what were their names? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: They're all deceased. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: What were their names, Myron? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Paul, he was the next one to me in age. I'm the oldest. Then Paul and Jules, and then Gaston. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was your father at one time mayor of <Flagstaff>? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: My father was mayor of <Flagstaff> in the late nineties. He was the projector and originator of the modern water system of <Flagstaff>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Is there a spring named after your family? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: <Aubineau Springs> is named after him, and also Aubineau Peak of the <San Francisco Peaks> complex is named after him. It's the fourth-highest peak of the four <San Francisco Peaks>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did they receive their names when he was mayor then? Or when was that? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, I would say shortly after, more or less honoring him, I suppose. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember anything about that early water system? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, what did it consist of? Just a pipe? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: The water was piped from what is known now as <Aubineau Springs> to a reservoir that is north of the McMillan Ranch, in that area. That was the first reservoir and the first impounding water for the <Flagstaff> water system. And he was the projector of all of that. And his engineering training, undoubtedly had something to do with it, coupled up with - which was more important - his very deep civic-mindedness. He was quite a civic-minded man. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did you receive your schooling then in <Flagstaff>? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I went to Emerson Grade School in <Flagstaff>, graduated from it, so to speak, grade school. Then I went to Hollywood High School, and then I went and studied at the University of Texas. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you remember any of your classmates at Emerson that went to the grade school? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yes. Marlene Francis - they're all gone now I guess. Marlene Francis was a sister of Lenore Francis. I think she's still alive, lives down around Cottonwood someplace. Gussie Treat - Augusta Treat. Everybody called her Gussie, though. Edith Lamport, Charlie Dunton. They're all dead now. I don't know whether this means anything to you or not. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, no, it's kind of good to know who was going through the school about that time. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Then a chap who's well-known, everybody loved him. He came from sort of a ordinary family. They called him Moqui Travis, M O Q U I. His right name was Ferrol, F-E, double "R," O-L, but everybody knew him as Moqui Travis. He became a telegraph operator, and he was a good one. And Freeman Pulliam, Clarence Pulliam's older brother. Allin Greenlaw, A L L I N Greenlaw. There were many more. Oh, there were many more ____. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, that's fine. Now, the Pulliam family was here for a long time. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yes. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you imagine the parents came about the same time that your parents came to the area? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I would say so. The Greenlaw girls were here today, but they were.... The only reason I don't mention them, they were considerably younger than I was. These that I'm mentioning now were either contemporaries of mine, or were a year older or a year younger - not much different from that. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh, very close in age then. Let's see, do you remember any special chores or anything that you had to do as a child? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Worked in the store. Oh, yes! I'll tell ya'. I wanted to do something different and not depend on my parents, so I wanted to work in the box factory of the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company. I got a job there at a dollar a day. I don't know how old I was - I couldn't have been more than ten years old, something like that, because my father died before I was twelve, or about the time I was twelve. I remember his taking me to the boss and saying.... Now, the boss was Vince Marino. "You give him a job where he won't get his fingers cut off or his arm cut off." Because there were many accidents like that in the sawmill. I can tell you a number that had their arms cut off, or hands. "He wants to work, and it's all right with me, providing you get him a job that's not dangerous." So I got a job in the box factory. Went to work at seven o'clock in the morning, and took off fifty minutes' time for lunch, from twelve o'clock to twelve-fifty - ten minutes to one - six days a week, so that ten minutes a day, six days, we made up sixty minutes, that was one hour. So we quit on Saturday at five o'clock, instead of at six. That was the way they worked - everybody, not only me, but anybody that worked for the lumber company. Seven in the morning, 'til six at night, with fifty minutes off for lunch. Imagine a kid, ten, eleven, twelve years old working hard like that! 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Then you had stopped going to school when you started working? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, no, that was during vacation. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just during vacation, uh-huh. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: My father wouldn't let me quit school to go to work. No. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That wasn't much fun for the summer, though. Well, let me see. Well, your parents had pretty high expectations for your schooling then? You did go on? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I'm sure if my father had lived, I would have been prompted to get more schooling. My father, having died, and my mother a widow, and then marrying a man who didn't know anything about merchandising - was an engineer, too - she depended, like my father did, on the four boys succeeding him, coming along in the business. They had a pretty good business - small business compared with Babbitts' business, of course, but we were good friends with Babbitts and a friendly competitor, but a very small competitor. My father was associated with the Babbitts in several enterprises and they were very good friends. My father was desperately ill and was sent to <California> to a hospital, and my mother and I went over to be with him. The boys were all farmed out to the Babbitt brothers. One of 'em stayed with Charlie Babbitt, another one with George Babbitt, another one with the Dave Babbitt family. In other words, those Babbitts came to my mother and volunteered and wanted to take the boys while she was gone. I mention that as a sidelight to give you our association.



My mother was eager that we boys come into the business, which was my father's plan. But World War I came along, and my next-to-me-in-age brother, Paul, and I both enlisted. We either had to enlist or were drafted. So we went into World War I and he went into first officers' training camp and I was accepted for it, but I transferred and went into the Air Service as one of the first air pilots. I took training as an aviator. And his father, [visitor in room during interview] much to my regret, was nominated candidate for the Naval Academy. According to his story, he had flat feet and they rejected him. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: [visitor] No, it was his eye. He was an athlete. He played baseball here, and he was hit in the eye with a baseball. He didn't have vision.... I saw his medical thing. The vision in his left eye wasn't sufficient to pass the physical. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: That was too bad. And then my next-to-youngest brother, he went to which was Teachers' College then. His father [indicating unidentified man present] went there, too, for that matter. And then I was a dropout at the University of Texas to come back and go in the mercantile business. And then the war came along, as I told you. And after the war we all went our separate ways then. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: He omitted part of HIS history. He was a pilot, and he was one of the pioneers in the airmail service, finding routes for the airmail. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: My gosh! 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, I was a pioneer in this respect: I was ASKED, after the Armistice was signed, along with a number of others who had a pretty good record in the Air Service, to go out under the directions of the director of military aeronautics and the postmaster general and inspect certain sites in the country, and either propose them or reject them for airmail. So I did that for a few months, and then went back into civilian life. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: And then you did get into your own business? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No. The business was sold then, because we didn't manifest enough interest. We all had a financial interest that our father left us. The business was sold then, and the property, which is down here on Birch and Santa Fe [he must have this wrong as there is no corner of Birch and Santa Fe, they run parallel], the corner there, it was cut up eventually into several stores. It's still in the family, the ownership of several store buildings. For a long time there was a drugstore on the corner, now there's a book store - book store, savings and loan, real estate office, and so on and so on. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, let me ask you some more things. Do you remember what the downtown area was like when you were a child - the <Flagstaff> downtown area? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yes. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, can you describe it just briefly, if you can remember it? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, downtown <Flagstaff> at that time was practically no more than the area now that is bounded by Railroad Avenue, San Francisco Street, I guess it is, Leroux, and Aspen Avenue - that one block - with this exception: Across the street on Aspen Avenue was the Babbitt Store, and all in that street was a bank that's not there anymore. Really, going before that, there was a Methodist church there, and then later became the Arizona Central Bank, which previously was housed in the McMillan Building. You know where the McMillan Building is? Well, they moved from there into their own building over there on the corner, and it's not there anymore because the Arizona Central Bank was taken over by, I guess the Valley Bank. But that's all that made up downtown <Flagstaff>, was that block, and across the street from their respective streets. In other words, across the street from Leroux there was the Bank Hotel, and Dr. Raymond's office was in there. That'd be north of the Bank Hotel. And then north of that was the Weatherford Hotel, so that takes up across the street. And across the street on Aspen Avenue was a church and later the bank, and an ice plant, and then the Babbitt building, Babbitts' Store. And on San Francisco Street, across the street, was the drugstore, which was owned then by Mr. Breen. I've forgotten who it was owned by first. Then next to that was a saloon. I'm going up by south now. And a clothing store, and so on. And then on the corner was.... Oh, I can't think of his name now. An Assyrian fellah had a store there. Well, that takes up everything across that street. Then of course across Railroad Avenue, there wasn't anything across the street except the railroad tracks. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was Front Street like when you were young? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: That's Railroad Avenue, that's Front Street. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it a pretty rough area when you were growing up? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: It was very rough around on the corner of San Francisco Street, which is Railroad Avenue or Front Street. That saloon is still there, for that matter. I was telling Danny today, I saw a killing at that saloon. I was probably about eighteen years old, and this chap and I were at the Commercial Hotel. You know where the Commercial Hotel was? It burned here about a little over a year ago. Well, we happened to be standing there, chewing the rag as young fellahs will, and we heard shooting down on the corner around in the area of that saloon. So instead of going (laughter) the other direction, we went down there to see what the shooting was all about! When we got closer, we saw what it was all about.



Now let's skip back a little bit. The railroad had been having trouble with pillaging, stealing, from the depot and from the freight depot and so on - not only in <Flagstaff>, but all along the Santa Fe Railroad. So they employed at <Flagstaff> a Texas Ranger, a fellah by the name of Ed Johnson - I think his first name was Ed. Anyway, his name was Johnson, a Texas Ranger, and he was a dead shot, like all the Texas Rangers were. He was walking over toward that corner, where the saloon is. The depot was over catty-corner from the saloon on the other side of the tracks, if you can visualize what I'm talkin' about. The passenger depot now, unless it's been closed, is a block… 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: It's a freight depot now, I think. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah, is a block west. All right, the passenger depot was over there. So Ed Johnson was walking over across the street toward that saloon - catty-corner across the street - by the time we got up there. And there were two Mexicans. There was a Mexican in front of the saloon, and a Mexican in the doorway of the BACK of the saloon. There was a restaurant then at the time that was owned by a Chinaman, and later on was owned by a fellah by the name of Bender, Joseph Bender. And this Mexican on the corner of the saloon was shooting down San Francisco Street at the Mexican who was standing in the doorway where the restaurant is. And Ed Johnson was coming over the street, and he told 'em, "STOP! Stop shooting." Forgotten what he said, hollered "cease fire" or whatever it was, and that's where they made a terrible mistake. Instead of shooting at each other, they shot at HIM! (laughter) And that was the end of two Mexicans - two shots, there were two dead Mexicans. I saw that with my own eyes. I'm not kidding at all about that. That was very _____.



But the only reason I'm telling you that is you were saying how rough it was there, and it was a pretty tough corridor. That wasn't the only killing, there have been several others. There were two or three saloons along the street there, and they were pretty bad. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you know Sandy Donahue at all? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Very well. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of person was he? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: He was a fine man. He was a saloon man, but he was a gentleman. I visited with him very much, and I'll tell you a story about Sandy Donahue - I almost told it a while ago. Sandy Donahue was on the committee - I don't know whether my father appointed him on a committee or who it was - to solicit signers for the sewer system - they didn't have any sewer system in <Flagstaff> - to go around and knock on doors and get people to sign up to be a party to the expense of putting in the sewer system - either go on their tax bill or whatever it was - and explain the sewer system. Sandy told me this himself. He said, "Myron, your father and I were on that committee. I finally told your father one day, 'Julius, I can't do that. I can't go to a home. It'd be embarrassing to me to talk to ladies about hooking up a sewer system. YOU do that! Would you do that for me?'" (laughter) My father already had his assignments, too, to do. But anyway, that was Sandy Donahue. He was all right. He made a lot of money, but a very charitable man. Well, he was an alcoholic, that's all. And later on, booze killed him. That was the end of him. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was he ever married, that you know of? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I don't think so. I'm not sure. I would say, if I were to guess, I'd say if he were ever married, it was of very short duration. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: (laughs) Well, he was real good with kids, wasn't he? Didn't he seem to like children a lot? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah. There was Sandy Donahue and one other man in town, an exceptional soft touch for kids, was a man named Francis, partners with Hugh Campbell - Campbell and Francis Sheep Company. And Mr. Francis was a very soft touch. Always had a nickel or dime to give kids. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Was there a pool hall in the Weatherford Hotel? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Were you familiar with that pool table? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: With a pool table? No. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: You didn't play in there? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I didn't play very much pool. My brother played a lot. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Paul? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: He was a VERY fine pool player. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Paul was the one who was the good pool player. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah, he was tops. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: He used to meet some of the top pool players of the time who would come in on the trains, didn't he?, and make a little money now and then? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: He played mostly at a pool hall on Railroad Avenue there about two or three doors east of our building. I think it was owned by Andy Jones at the time - a fellah named Andy Jones or Bill Hickler. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: I think your building is on this picture up here. I don't want to interrupt…



 



[END TAPE I, SIDE 1; BEGIN SIDE 2] 





MYRON AUBINEAU: This picture was taken before the new depot was built there. I don't even see the old depot (?). 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right over here. 



 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: It's panorama. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, it's curved. Do you ever remember Zane Grey coming into town? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yes. (pause) What was the name of that - I was trying to think of that author today. Harold Bell Wright is what I was tryin' to think about. Well, Zane Grey.... (pause) Right next door to where we lived, a family by the name of Doyle lived there - Al Doyle built that home. He was one of the famous guides in the old days when I was just a shaver. And he was a guide to Zane Grey. His son - I don't know that he himself was, he might have been - but his son I know was a guide to Harold Bell Wright, who used to come here. A number of those famous authors that wrote about the West, and they liked to get out among the Indians. The most famous character, I think ______________. One of the most famous that used to come to <Flagstaff>, or DID come to <Flagstaff>, was Jimmie Swinnerton, the famous desert scene painter, and formerly a cartoonist. He drew "Little Jimmie." I don't think he drew the "Katzenjammer Kids." Well, anyway, those very early comic strips. And he was a cartoonist for William Randolph Hearst, the father of the current William Randolph Hearst. And he developed tuberculosis of the lungs, and Hearst sent him to <Flagstaff> from <New York> - he was in <New York>. Came to <Flagstaff>, he lived at the Weatherford Hotel for a while, and then he went out in the desert. That's where he was supposed to go, where it was dry and no humidity and so on. He loved life among the Indians. He then became interested in oil painting, and he developed into a great painter of desert scenes, and was a fine, fine man - and just died a year ago last January, about ninety years old. Died down at <Palm Springs>, I think. I have one of his paintings at home, but I knew him as a kid. 



 



There was a man by the name of White who was the manager of that Weatherford Hotel at the time, and he had a niece named Buena Hildie [phonetic spelling] about my age or a little younger. It was quite a social gathering at the Weatherford Hotel, because of those young people who where there.



Swinnerton became quite ill. I've forgotten what he had, but anyway he went up and Buena Hildie made some fudge for him and sent it up to him. And he (laughs) drew a comic strip of how he became ill and got worse and worse - each one of these little panels, you know. And then finally this good-lookin' girl brought him up some fudge. That put him back on his feet. (laughter) He was funny.



 



Another thing about the Weatherford Hotel, too, there was an interesting crowd of older people around - all older than I am. A man by the name of George Colton [phonetic spelling] and a fellah.... I can't think of his name now. He was a shoemaker in town. Colton worked for Babbitts' up in the curio department. And another one, and they were great practical jokers. A lot of eastern people used to come out here then. Did you ever hear of the Evans School? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, there was a Dr. Evans of Harvard University, established a school down in <Phoenix> – It was really at Mesa - called the Evans School. In the wintertime they had school down there, and in the summertime came to <Flagstaff> out near the Fort Valley area somewhere. Maybe it wasn't out that far. It was around where Dr. Colton's ranch is. Well, those young fellahs, their fathers were Harvard men, and they wanted their sons to graduate from Harvard and they had a hard time keepin' 'em in Harvard in the East because they were kind of wild and pretty hard to control. When this Evans got ahold of 'em, he just had that magnetic charm and he gave 'em the outdoor living. Each one had a horse or two. They lived like pseudo-cowboys and studied and they got their education. 



These fellahs, this shoemaker in town, and George, holds no relation to the Colton Museum out there - they used to get these, as they called 'em, "tenderfoots," and play jokes on 'em, you know. And some of the jokes were really pitiful - awful, awful. But they were these spoiled kids and they really made men out of 'em. One of the jokes they played on 'em was snipe hunting. Did you ever hear of snipe hunting? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, each one would be equipped with a lantern, and they would go out in the evening, and then they would give this victim a bag, a big sack. And then each one of them carried a stick, and then they'd go out a few miles out of town and then they'd station him at a certain place, and then they'd all scatter out, so many to the east, west, north, and so on. At a certain time, they were going to drive those snipes in, and then they'd drive 'em in the sack, catch 'em in the sack. Of course they never showed up. He was left.... I think that's where that expression came [from], "holding the bag." (laughter) He was left there. That was one of the tricks they played. 



 



They had some famous boys there. They had Harriman's son, a couple of the Roosevelts, Teddy Roosevelt's boy. Fleischman and Fleischman East. Oh, I don't know, any number of 'em. And then the Normal School at the time, ___________. Once in a while they'd permit those fellahs to go up to school there, to a dance or a party. Of course the girls were just crazy to have 'em come up there. A date for the evening, see. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: So that's part of the urban history. <Flagstaff> is a very, very interesting place, then, as far as tourism is concerned - is NOW, for that matter, but it's on a different plane entirely. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, you've kind of touched a little bit on the social life of the community. Can you remember anything else about the social life? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: We had a dancing club here, the Anozira Club - <Arizona> spelled backwards - and that was the tops in social activity, to be a member of that. They used to have their dances at McMillan Hall over there. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was that at the Bank Hotel, McMillan Hall? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, that was an older group than your age group? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, I was a member of that. I guess probably half of 'em were older than I, but I belonged to that. Now they're all dead. Earl Slipher of the observatory up there, he was a member of it. Of course he's older than I. And the Babbitt boys were members. (pause) There's Joe Wilson who was a cashier at the bank, married one of the Manning girls. Tom Manning was a member. Oh, any number of 'em. And that was a very nice group. And of course they drew on the girls, too, up at the school - would come there and be their dates. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it difficult getting a date with a girl then? Did you have to be very careful and courteous the way you asked her out? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Oh, I think so. I THINK, when I look back, they were pretty strict up there, the matrons, or the women in charge of a hall - they only had two or three at the time, and they only had ONE in the beginning - were very cautious as to who they permitted to date those girls up there. My wife, of course, went to school up there. She's a graduate of the teachers' college. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What's her name? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Fay, F-A-Y. Fay Smith. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You were married here in <Flagstaff>? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, we were married at St. Paul's Cathedral in <Los Angeles> in 1920, soon after I returned from the service. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was she from <Los Angeles> then? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, she was from <Redlands>. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, I have family [there]. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Her mother (pause) I was telling somebody else this I guess. Did I tell you how she happened to come to....? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, her mother was a widow and had a very dear friend who also had daughters or nieces, I guess, so she knew a little something about the problems of raising a daughter, like I learned after we had ours. About that time, when she was in high school, the movie craze hit the west coast. Most girls with any talent at all, and any looks, figure, was crazy to get into the movies. And of course there were some up-and-up solicitors for that talent, and some not so up-and-up. But anyway, my wife got the bug like a lot of the girls did, and she was just about to make up her mind that that was where she was going to go. She was going to get into the movies by hook, crook, or some way. And her mother consulted with this very good friend of hers who had daughters, too, and they both made up their minds if there was one place to fix her, send her Nans over <Flagstaff>, get her clear out of that <California>, <Hollywood> environment. So that's how she happened to come over here. Her mother had her over here because they were supposed to be rather strict in their discipline and removal of ideas that a girl might have of becoming a movie star. So that's how she came. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's interesting. Did your family belong to any of the churches in <Flagstaff>? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I belong to the Discipline Church, that's.... (chuckles) That's good, isn't it? I can't even remember the name of it now. What is the name of the Discipline Church. Not Trinity. What is it? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm not sure. Maybe Episcopal. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, isn't that dandy! Yes, I was a member of that church ever since it started in <Flagstaff>. 



 



I'll tell you an interesting sidelight on church. My father, of course, was a Roman Catholic, and so was my mother. My father sent me to Methodist Sunday school, and got away with it. In other words, I don't know of any Roman Catholic that ever dared do anything like that and wasn't excommunicated from church. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he have a special reason why he wanted you to go? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, he just wanted me to get that broadening experience, I guess. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it the Federated church then? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, the church was down on the corner of.... I don't know what's on that corner now. It was on the northeast corner of Birch and Aspen Avenue. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Leroux and Aspen, right there where the bank later.... 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah, that's right. The Methodist church was there. So we lived right close to the Catholic church on the south side. There was a big Catholic church, and that was the only Catholic church here. There's a nice picture of it in the museum here, anyway. 



 



Maude Ashurst, the sister of Henry Ashurst, who was the first senator in <Arizona>, and I, went to Sunday school together. In other words, my father and the Ashurst family were very friendly, so Maude and I went to Sunday school together at the Methodist church for several years. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Good. Now, the Ashurst home, was that that little brick house on Aspen, and is it Park? Is that the Ashurst home? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No, the Ashurst home was across the track, right near to where the Devine home, Andy Devine's parents - they lived over there, and the Ashursts lived over there. In other words, just within a couple of blocks of where WE lived. So I'd meet with Maude and we'd walk to church. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay, the house I was thinking of, it used to be the weather bureau, I think. You remember that? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: That was.... That's right, later on a man by the name of Hackett lived there, and he was a photographer and he was the man who'd handle the weather bureau. And Henry Ashursts lived there, that is right. And his wife, she had been married to a man named Reno - same as the city in <Nevada> - and she had a son named John, Johnny Reno. And Henry Ashurst married Mrs. Reno and they lived in that brick house, that's right. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Ah, okay, but it wasn't for a real long time. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: But I'm talkin' about Henry Ashurst's mother and father. And Maude Ashurst was Henry Ashurst's sister, you see. THEY are the ones that lived on the other side of the tracks, near where we lived and near where Devines lived. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's good! I'm glad we got it straightened out. Yeah, I wasn't sure. Okay, that's good. Well, let me see, do you remember much about any of the other ethnic groups in town? You know, how the Mexican families intermingled with the white families - or did they? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I never thought they did, but then maybe they do. I'm very partial to the Mexican people, and being of French descent, I like the Spanish language much better than the French language. My father spoke four languages: spoke French, English, German, and Spanish. I studied Spanish and I used to speak fairly well. 



 



Indians? I can't say that I'm very crazy about the Indians. They're so unpredictable, to me - the Indians in THIS area. I had a bad experience when I was a child over here, living where I was born. A big Indian walked into the yard one day, and my father had just given me a little ax - hatchet or ax - taught me how to cut kindling. It's a wonder I didn't cut my finger off! Anyway, that was it, I had this ax and I was cutting out in the yard, and this big Indian - who I can see RIGHT NOW - I couldn't have been more than six years old, had this blanket over him, walking like this; blanket, and had a big black hat on. Walked over to me and he reached over and he kicked the hatchet right out of my hands like that. I began to cry, I guess, and my mother _____________ she peeked out the curtains, you know. But she was afraid to come out and say anything. He just walked out of the yard with my ax. That's the last I saw of it. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, there weren't many Indians IN town, were there, when you were little? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: They used to have a lot of trouble with the Indians cattle stealing. A friend of ours I remember getting shot out on a posse after a bunch of Indian cattle thieves, and got shot. Oh yes, two or three times they had serious uprisings close by, and they threatened to come in and sack the town, because probably an Indian or two was in jail that they wanted to get out. Outside of that little incident I was telling you about, about the cattle stealing and shoot-outs they had there, I never [saw] any in town. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: There weren't many black families in town, were there? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: No. We had one customer in our store named Garrison - one of the finest men that I knew. His name was Walter Garrison. He had a good job at the sawmill. I think he was a filer, which is a good job, but I'm not positive of that. But he ran an account with us. They used to buy all their groceries and hardware and things that we had to sell. They were fine people. 



There was old Indian Joe. You've probably heard about Indian Joe. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just a little bit. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: He was a famous Indian in town. He used to do housework, house cleaning. He was a nice old Indian fellah. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you know Johnny Love? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yeah, he used to do housework. Yeah, I knew Johnny real well. Did you know him? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, just.... 





MYRON AUBINEAU: He never walked, he always trotted along. He was just so quick and fast. As your history will tell you, the Republican Party, Lincoln's party, of course made up - most of the blacks belonged to the Republicans, then, naturally, because Lincoln freed the slaves. When Roosevelt came along as president, and he developed all these give-away programs, and blacks came into so much welfare and so on, they deserted the Republicans and became Democrats. But anyway, Johnny Love used to see my father, and my father was a prominent Republican, he used to say to my father, "Hello, you black 'Publican!" Black Republican! And my father'd say, "Johnny, which weighs the most, a pound of feathers or a pound of lead?" And Johnny'd say, "Well, you fool, a pound of lead!" (laughs) 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You were here, then, during the flu epidemic, weren't you? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I was in the service. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's right. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I had it. They thought I was gonna die. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, boy. Well, a lot of people DID. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yes, that was awful. Well, I can't think of anything else to specifically ask you. We've covered a lot. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Did I talk too much? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: No, you did a fine job. (tape turned off and on) 





MYRON AUBINEAU: ____________ that. If you'd be interested, here is a scratch list of members that I could think of. You probably recognize some of those names on there. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, yes, uh-huh. Well, that's good to know. Yeah, I'll keep it right in that. Now, you … 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Oh, see… written on the back there _____________. 



UNIDENTIFIED MAN: (inaudible) 





MYRON AUBINEAU: That's pretty good, isn't it? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's okay. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I want you to notice, too, that all the dances were formal, and for the men it was white tie only. They didn't - no black tie, no tuxedo. In other words, tails. So it was real formal. 



 



Now what do we want to.... 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: You had told me you knew something about when Theodore Roosevelt.... 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Oh, yeah, all right. __________. You want me to proceed on that? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Sure. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: All right. Well, the dedication of the <Grand Canyon>… that was not the dedication of the <Grand Canyon>, but of the El Tovar Hotel, and the completion of the Santa Fe spur from <Williams> to the <Grand Canyon>, circa, I would say, around 1902 - something like that. That can be easily verified or checked, because my father died in 1903, and he was there, as I'll later mention. 



 



President Theodore Roosevelt was the honored guest and the special speaker on.... 



 



[END TAPE I, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE II, SIDE 1] 





MYRON AUBINEAU: ... coach or on the train that ran from <Flagstaff> over there. And I was quite young at the time, probably nine years old - something like that. Well, anyway, there was a committee that went over from <Flagstaff> to present President Roosevelt with the largest Navajo blanket that had been made up to that time. It was the gift from the citizens of <Flagstaff> or from <Coconino County>. So following that presentation, why, the people were invited to shake hands with the president in his private car, or at least in some car that was there. I remember very distinctly his sitting there as the people filed through the car and shook hands with him. I came by, a little shaver, probably the youngest one that was there, and he took me by the arm and asked me to sit on his knee momentarily and talk with him, which I did. On the trip back from the canyon, my father, at <Williams> at the station where the train stopped for a while to let people off, raised the window. Of course there wasn't any air conditioning then. Raised the window of the car in which we were seated to talk with some people at the station on the ground there, or on the platform. And while he was doing that, some sparks flew from the smokestack of this engine, and one spark or two lit in his moustache. He had a very large moustache. You'll see pictures in the museum, you'll notice that. And anyway, he wasn't burned or anything like that, but his moustache was ruined. And after we got back to <Flagstaff> he shaved off his moustache, and our dog bit him - didn't know him! (laughter) I guess that was the reason. 



 



So the next occasion that I think is worth mentioning in connection with President Roosevelt was some, oh, I would say ten or twelve years later - probably around 1912, something like that. It might have been 1911, or it might have been 1913, but anyway, it was in that period. He wasn't president then, but former President Roosevelt attended, with many others, the Hopi snake dance. You've heard of that, of course. This time it was at <Oraibi>. Two young chaps and I went out there. One of these boys, I know he's dead now - in fact, both of 'em are. One was Joe Waldhaus [phonetic spelling]. You remember Joe Waldhaus? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I'm not really sure. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: I think in later years he had a garage in <Flagstaff>. And the other chap was Ernie Wheat. He was married to Catherine Orman [phonetic spelling] from <Phoenix>, and he was an officer or executive at one of the lumber companies. Well anyway, Ernie Wheat and Joe and I drove out there in Joe's car and the campsite that they allocated to us - of course there weren't any motels or anyplace to stay - was comfortable, as any of 'em could be. We didn't have sleeping bags at that time. We used bedrolls, as they were called. Our neighbor on one side of us was Mr. J.C. Adams and his wife - J.C. Adams who owned the Adams Hotel in <Phoenix>. And on the other side of us was former President Roosevelt and his two sons and their party. They had just completed a hunting trip in <Grand Canyon>, so they had a number of horses with them there. He was, of course, the center of attraction, naturally - a great westerner, as everybody knows, and one who was loved by anybody who lived in the West. And he visited with everybody, and he pitched in and worked around the camp just like anybody else. He wouldn't let others wait on him, he’d wait on himself. 



 



We'd been there a few hours after we made camp when some man, some stranger, came along with a pneumatic mattress. None of those were known - at least not to me or any of us at the time - but it would be very comfortable having one of those things to sleep on, of course. We were sleeping on the sand or on the hard ground in these bedrolls. So this fellah, accompanied with two other men - if I remember, there were three of them - made a little presentation to former President Roosevelt of this pneumatic mattress. And Teddy Roosevelt looked at him and he said, "Well, now, have you some others?" And this man said, "No, sorry, this is for YOU." "Well, I couldn't accept it unless we can make plans for others in my party to have one, because I don't want to have any more comforts than any of the rest of 'em have. Thank you very much." Something to that nature. That was the kind of man he was. 



 



At that time, there was considerable agitation over the range area in Northern Arizona - and all over the West for that matter - because the cattlemen and sheepmen roamed all over - they had open range, they could go anywhere, practically, they wanted, I guess. And the lumber people could cut down trees any place, practically, they wanted to, and the stumpage was quite high. They would leave a stump maybe three feet, up to five feet high, or something like that. So at that time there was a man by the name of [Gifford] Pinchot who I think had been governor of the State of <Pennsylvania> [1923-27] that was appointed, I believe, the first secretary of Interior. They started a conservation program to eliminate all this and to allocate only certain amounts of range to the cattlemen and sheepmen and to prevent the lumber people from going in pell-mell and cutting down trees wherever they wanted to, and have stumpage so high and waste a lot of timber. So the lumbermen and the cattlemen and sheepmen didn't like him very well because of that. He was cramping their style, in other words. 



 



And there was a Catholic priest in <Flagstaff> at that time by the name of Father Vabre. You've probably heard of him, a very prominent priest. And he was visiting with Teddy Roosevelt and they were talking about Pinchot. Father Vabre was more or less siding to some extent with the cattlemen, sheepmen, and lumbermen from this area as against the secretary of Interior; siding against him. Theodore Roosevelt was backing Pinchot. And every time Mr. Roosevelt would say "Pinchot," (chuckles) it was very fascinating to me as a kid as I stood there watching him and hearing him talk, because he had very prominent front teeth. And he would almost spit out those front teeth when he would say "Pinchot," 



 



Well, that covers more or less Mr. Roosevelt. There were several other incidents there. They didn't permit any picture-taking of the snake dance. They were trying to discourage the snake dance. Maybe they do so yet, I don't know. They felt it was sort of a barbaric custom. And there was a Pathe’ [phonetic spelling] newsreel man was there. The Pathe’ News was quite a thing at that time. And he was sneaking pictures of Mr. Roosevelt and the party. Then he beat it and some of the authorities chased him. I think they caught him way over in <New Mexico>, somewhere or other, and took all those films away from him. 



 



Also present was Governor Hunt, who was governor of the State of <Arizona> at the time. That tied-in, more or less, with the period....  You asked me something about Emerson School. I could tell you many things about that. I would rather not, because some of the people are still alive that would be involved. But anyway, it was pretty rough and tough then. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, it was? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: With the people there, because there was so many that were getting their education late, because there hadn't been any school system in this area, very much before MY time. So it wasn't uncustomary to see some big fellah there in the sixth or seventh or eighth grade that had quite a beard, and he shaved of course. Nevertheless, he was quite a man to be going to grade school. 



 



There was one incident involving quite a prominent family in town here. They had a son that was pretty hard to handle in school. He was in my grade for a while. He was suspended and expelled I don't know how many times. But one time he picked up our teacher, Mina Jones - a very well-known family - and carried her over and sat her on the hot radiator. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, my God! 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Then he jumped out the window. I can't mention his name, because as I say, I wouldn't want the family to know about that, know that I'd been talking about him, ________. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: What did they do to him? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Oh, they expelled him. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just expelling, that's all they could do? 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Yes. And later on, his father brought him back and the principal of the school, I think it was Mr. Russell, brought him into the classroom of Mina Jones. So [his] father apologized for him, apologized to the class, and made quite a plea to Miss Jones to permit him to come back to school. I think she relented and so he came back to school. 



 



And this man, Professor Russell, who was a big man, a powerful man, and he had, one arm was a little stiff, something like the [kaiser's?] arm, but he was strong. And I remember he would stand at the [marst?] and tap the bell with his arm that way. During an assembly period when we were all assembled in what they called the assembly room, there were a couple of boys that were whispering and cutting up, and they were admonished two or three times to be quiet, but they wouldn't. So he walked in the row behind them. They were sitting, like you and I are sitting here. He walked in the row behind them and he took one boy by the scruff of the neck, by the collar there, and he took the other boy by his collar, and he lifted them clear off the seats like this, and turned around and walked down, and they squirmed and they yelled, and he cracked their heads like this. 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: Oh, gee! 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Walked out the door there. Bop him on the head_____________. But that's the kind of school it was. _____________. 



Another thing that may be of interest is that Dr. Percival Lowell and my father were good friends, and I heard my father say a couple of times that Dr. Lowell resented, as far as my father was concerned, my father called him "Doctor." He said, "Now, Julius, please don't call me "Doctor," call me "Percival." That's another little incident there. And I, for the loss of my father as I say in 1903, and subsequent years as I grew up and was mixed up in business and one thing and another, as long as they lived, I would call on - even after I left here, left as a volunteer to go in World War I and be trained as an aviator and flying instructor - I would come here and I thought a great deal of Mr. T.A. Riordan, "Tim" Riordan, as they called him. He was very kind to me. He always had some words of wisdom - at least I thought they were at the time - that a young man would enjoy hearing. He'd invite me to his office and visit with me, which I appreciated very much. So would C.J. "Charlie" Babbitt, the same thing. Dave Babbitt, who was a very good friend of my brother's, _____________. Joe Babbitt, [I] visited with him, but he didn't have that knack of counseling a young man that his older brother, David, or Charlie Babbitt had, which I enjoyed. And also Mr. Tom Pollock, who you've probably heard of. Tom Pollock, incidentally, was my guardian after my father died, and I enjoyed listening to his words of wisdom. So those I always thought were outstanding men. And one other male, he was an odd character in <Flagstaff>, but an interesting character. He may have been living in YOUR time. That's Sam Finley, S.L. Finley. You remember who he is? 





KRISTINE PRENNACE: I've heard a lot about him, and I've met his son, I believe. 





MYRON AUBINEAU: Well, [he] ran his ads as "Sunny Jim," I think. He had a sort of a second-hand store over on San Francisco Street where the Switzer's Store is today. That was Finley property there. And he was a very interesting fellow - not an educated man, but nevertheless had the inherent knowledge that you really enjoy. And so he said to me one day, "I want to ask you, Myron, a question. If you were in my position and a young man came to me seeking advice, or want me to do something for him, what would you tell him?" I said, "Well, Mr. Finley, I don't know, but I'd tell him, I think, if I were in that position, that the best thing that I could do for a young man would be, if they didn't have a job, to try and find a job for him." So he liked that. We had several nice visits. 



I could go on all day, but that covers.... 



