JOHN W. AND JOHN D. KENNEDY INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.31

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. It's December 16, 1998, and we're here with John W. and John D. Kennedy in their home. Also present are Brad Cole with Northern Arizona University, and Lew Steiger, who's operating the camera. We're here today to talk about the Indian trade. 

Underhill: John, we always like to begin at the beginning. Can you tell us when and where you were born? 

John W.: My father was operating a general store at <Guam>, which is just opposite the present ______ refinery this side of <Gallup>. <Guam> was quite a trading center back in 1909 and 1910. That was the end of the railroad, and the logging trains came out to <Zuni Mountain> to hit the main line there, so there was a good deal of train activity. My mother came in on the train to <Albuquerque New Mexico>, when I was born. As I tell people, there are two great things that happened in 1912: statehood and I arrived. (laughter) From <Guam>, the store had been owned by Hans Neumann who later had the Gallup Mercantile Company in <Gallup>. Hans sold the store to the A. B. McGaffey Company, which was the parent company that my father was working for, the logging company in the <Zuni Mountain>s. Hans backed him on a project to go into the Navajo country. So in the spring of 1913, he took wagonloads of building materials and hauled 'em out to <Salina>, which was about thirty-five miles from <Ganado>, and built the Salina Trading Post. He operated the store for two years, 1913 through 1915. He then sold the store to the two Boardman brothers, Harry and Horace Boardman who were brothers-in-law to Hans Newman. Dad bought the store at <Chinle>--Chinle Trading Post there at the mouth of the canyon. He bought it from a fellow by the name of McAdams. Now, there's a little confusion there. There was a J. H. McAdams, who originally came to the territory and worked with the Richardsons out at Blue Canyon, in that country. But I think this was a George McAdams that he bought the store from--that I'm not sure of--but there was a George McAdams that owned a store at <Lukachukai>, and then later owned Chinle. See, that store was built around 1902, I think. At one time the Cousins family worked it. They were working it for one of the suppliers. Then my dad sold it to Cozy McSparron in January 1919. And I remember we crossed the mountain in buckboards. A buckboard is a seat with four wheels pulled by two horses. There was about eighteen inches of snow across the mountain. We got into the old sawmill late at night. The next morning they spent hours trying to get an old Republic truck started. They pulled it all over the flat with six horses, finally got it started, and we got down to <Fort Defiance> and stayed with Louie Sabin [phonetic spelling] that night. Then the next day we went on into <Gallup>. So we had a three-day trip. Today you can do it in about an hour and twenty minutes, so time has changed quite a bit.

My father then bought a store over on the north side of <Gallup> on Third Street, but he didn't like <Gallup> town trading and had a chance to buy the Rock Springs store which was three-quarters of a mile off the old Fort Defiance Road. It's now about three miles south of the Window Rock Road. He bought the store from a fellow by the name of George Samson. George had had several stores: I think one at Lupton or Houck, and then another one--I think <Tohatchi> on [Highway] 666 someplace. My dad operated this store 'til 1935. Later he lost it during the Great Depression of the thirties, because he had been in an agreement with the Gallup Mercantile that he would handle all their livestock because we had about a township of land there across from him. All the lambs coming off the central reservation came through our place. We had a sheep dip for that final dipping before they loaded 'em on the cars. But the Depression was a deadly thing. No one had any money, and for our medium debt, why, he had to give up his trading post. Today it would be an easy thing to handle.

He then went to <Atarque> to run the Atarque Sheep Company for some people out of <Dallas>. And then later moved into <Gallup> in the wholesale gasoline business. But that's kind of the background on our trading activities.

He established Kennedy Oil and was servicing a good part of the central reservation stores because he knew all those traders and they knew him. It was an independent oil agency. He developed a fine following, and the older brother, George, came in with him in due time, and later on the younger brother. After my father retired, the two brothers ran the oil company then until they sold it to Malco [phonetic spelling] out of <Roswell>, a few years ago.

Now, if there's any questions on any of the stores running any direction ________ whether it be <Flagstaff> north or <Winslow> north, but I can tell you where most of 'em were and who was there. 

Underhill: We're gonna start with <Guam>. What brought your dad to the Southwest, or was he born out here? 

John W.: He was born near <Brookfield Missouri>, and he had an older brother who was a special agent for the Santa Fe Railroad here at <Albuquerque>. And like all young fellows, he went west. For a while he was a streetcar conductor here in <Albuquerque>, and then McGaffey offered him a job running a commissary up at <Sawyer New Mexico>, a little lumber camp on Oso Ridge out south of <Bluewater>. And then from there he moved down to <Guam> to run the big store, and then eventually on out into the Navajo country.

When he acquired the Rock Springs Store, out from <Gallup>, he still had these old Indian stockmen that he had dealt with at <Salina> and <Chinle>, that still came to him every year with their wool and their lambs. A lot of them never made a deal without consulting him first. He had a very fine relationship with the Indians and spoke the language well. He could sit and talk to 'em two hours at a time in their language. I always remember one time there was Al Leggy [phonetic spelling] and Lou Sabin and my dad were talking across from his store, and talkin' about the Navajo language. One of 'em had heard a new word that week. That's how well they knew the language. 

Underhill: And what did the Navajo call your dad? 

John W.: Hosteen Sa-lun, for <Salina> Springs. Of course it's called <Salina>, S-A-L-I-N-A, but it's an anglicized version, because the Navajo word "tsé" is "rock." (In Navajo) is "between the rocks," because the store was between two high bluffs, see. But you see many variations of this, like <Sanostee>, S-A-N. It's actually _______________. That's "rocks in a circle," see. Sabinito, that's "beautiful rocks." Or, some of 'em say it was named for Louie Sabin when he moved over from <Fort Defiance>. But you see the word tsé is used many, many ways. Like the buttes north of <Winslow>, ___________. That means "the rock slide on the face of one of those buttes." ________ is "white," tsé is "rock." But they call it S- A, see, say, _____________. Instead of T-S-E, which is "rock." (laughter) So, you see, many, many places I've often wondered if it wasn't a word that gave the Spanish trouble when they were talking about <Canyon de Chelly>, because actually the Indian name, tsé.... They called the town Ch’íníl_. We call it <Chinle>, but then it was called Ch’íníl_. The name of the canyon river meant, "the water coming out of an opening." Well, the Spanish had trouble with this. Instead of tsé, they said "de," de Chelly, see? I think that's where it came from, I may be wrong. 

Underhill: Now, who was your mother? 

John W.: My mother was Mary Jeanette Eidson, E-I-D-S-O-N. She was born in Brookfield Arkansas, a suburb of <Jonesboro> in northeast <Arkansas>, and she came to <Albuquerque> in 1905, lived with the Hammond and the Emmons [phonetic spelling] family. You recall that Glenn Emmons was later Indian commissioner under Eisenhower, and she lived with them when she first came to <Albuquerque>. She got into schoolteaching and met my father here in <Albuquerque> and they were married in 1909 and went up to Sawyer, the lumber camp where he was running the commissary for A. B. McGaffey Company. 

Underhill: What are your early memories of being at the post at <Salina>? You were out there, you were fairly small then. 

John W.: Yeah. I don't have any memories of <Salina>. I've gone back there many times. I do have early memories of <Chinle>. My mother refers to a place, an incident in her book. The three of us boys, the older brother and younger brother, we'd walk up the canyon and there was a place where as the winds blew, the sand sifted over the rim of the canyon. There was quite a large sand dune, and we used to go in there to play. This one day we came out of the canyon, and shortly thereafter, there was a massive flood came out. The waves were six foot high, and it was just a streak of luck that we were able to get out of there. Someone had their arm around us. Those floods used to occur because they didn't have the Wheatfields and Tsalie dams that they have now. So if there was a thunderburst up in the mountains, a couple of hours later there'd be this huge flood coming out of that canyon. I can remember vividly the hogan logs and dead burros and all the debris that washed down. The water came, swept into that curve there by the store, and we had taken all the rugs off of the floor because the water was beginning to come in on the floor of the house. We didn't have to move out, it subsided shortly after that.

Trading at <Chinle> was kind of an isolated thing at the time. If you made a trip to town, it was an all- day trip. We'd leave at four in the morning and drive all day long by way of <Ganado> and St. Michael's, get into town about dark. They just had the two-track road, a wagon road, to follow across that country at the time. There were no graded roads at all. 

Underhill: And "town" was <Gallup>? 

John W.: Yeah, that was the main trade center for all of the central reservation. <Farmington> was the trade center for the northeast traders, and <Flagstaff> was the trade center for the western traders. 

Underhill: What were living conditions like at <Chinle> when you were young? 

John W.: Well, it's changed a great deal. Whenever a salesman came by, or someone touring the country, and they had to stay overnight, why, they stayed at our house, and we boys slept on the counter over at the store. There were no facilities of any kind in <Chinle> at that time. Later, Cozy built several cottages. When I was selling for the wholesale house in the early forties, I always stayed there. I'd go out and work all the way to <Ganado> one day, and down to <Chinle> the next, and then back to <Ganado> and out to Sunrise and Dilkon and White Cone the next day. 

Underhill: So when you went to visit, you didn't sleep on the counter, huh? 

John W.: (chuckles) Things have changed. <Chinle> now has three large motels, they have almost 300 rooms, I think, now, for guests. 

Underhill: What do you remember about the Navajo customers as a child? 

John W.: Well, we had some great characters that they traded with: the sheepman from <Tselani> that used to come by Rock Springs and bring his lambs and wool in every year. And then we had another Indian by the name of Ash. That's the Navajo word for "salt." He lived up near the summit above St. Michael's. He always came in and traded with my dad. There was an unusual event happened there one year. He had lost several sheep to poison weed. ___________ he thought the herd had been bewitched. So nothing would do but what he sold the whole herd of sheep. And I happened to be at Chambers the day Al Tietjen unloaded all those sheep. And then a few days later, they came to get my dad, and Ed Vanderwagen [phonetic spelling] was driving in the government experimental herd from Mexican Springs. It had been sold. Ash©©h met him out there in the sagebrush near China Springs and they sat there and dickered for that herd of sheep. My dad always talked about the time Ash©©h’s wife would keep reaching in her shirt and bring out another wad of money. She was carryin' about $15,000 in cash in her blouse. Those old people relied on him pretty heavily for advice when they were making a transaction of any kind, so he had to be a part of that particular transaction-- witness the event, you know.

Another interesting incident: in 1921, we'd just gone out to Rock Springs for the summer, and one of my cousins from <Missouri> was helping my father in the store, but this Indian family came down and said that a member had died, and would my father bury them? 'cause the Navajos, up until World War II had a belief they didn't want anything to do with dead people. In the flu epidemic of 1918, if they died in a hogan, they just caved the roof of the hogan in and abandoned it. This particular day, we drove up and they had dug a deep grave. We took two Arbuckle's coffee boxes and nailed 'em together to make a coffin. He was rolled in blankets. We had to set him in the coffin, lower it in the ground, and cover it with earth, and then they had a lot of logs and big rocks to put on the grave, because they didn't want coyotes or anything to bother it. After the grave was covered, we had to lead his saddle horse, which was a mare, over by the grave, and shoot it so he'd have his horse on his next trip, his next journey. Had to let the colt run free. He had a saddle and a silver bridle and personal belongings in the hogan. We had to burn the hogan down, per the instructions of the family. I was about nine at the time, but I've always remembered that. That was my first funeral service, I think. 

Underhill: Do you speak Navajo? 

John W.: Yeah, I have trading Navajo--all the names of items, prices and things, and can deal with 'em fairly well. I can follow their stories. I can't carry on a diverse conversation, but I can handle the trading end of it. And of course I went to the Zuni in 1943, took a partnership in a store down there, and all the old-time stockmen spoke good Navajo. They spoke Spanish, Navajo, and some Laguna. So I was making my deals with stockmen in Navajo--whether it was for wool or lambs or calves--so my Navajo came in pretty handy there. And then during the war when we were so short of help, I had to take over all the jewelry buying, and I immediately had to learn the names of items--silver, turquoise--and the prices, and what I wanted 'em to make next. In the four years there, I got to where I could handle Zuni fairly well also. 

Underhill: Now, when you were a child, what kind of chores did you have? Would you help in the store, or did you help with wool season or lamb season? 

John W.: Well, that all came at Rock Springs. I was too young at <Chinle>. We always sacked up the wool as it came in every year. We had a rack for our wool sacks, and one of my jobs was to sack wool all the time. And as we bought sheep, we'd start buying pairs in July when we knew--we had rain and there were some water holes--[we'd] start buying pairs. So while we were developing a bunch, my younger brother and I had to take care of these sheep each day--take 'em out and graze 'em all day, and come in at night. And then once they got a good-sized herd, he hired a herder.

Then because of government regulations, when shipping sheep from the <Navajo Reservation>, for years they had to have two dippings to qualify, 'cause the sheep were badly infested with scabies. So these dippings had to occur about ten days apart, and there was a dip at <Kayenta> and one at <Ganado> and one at <Chinle> and one north of <Tohatchi>, and then we built one there at Rock Springs, so that most of the sheep coming off of the central reservation came by our place there in October-November. I can remember we'd have as high as 17,000 head of sheep there at one time. We dipped every day. We'd have to go down, haul loads of wood, and heated the water for the dip, and had a crew running these sheep through the dip and so forth. I usually was right at the head of the dip where if they threw them in or they jumped in, you got splashed real well. So I was covered with Black Leaf 40 dip and bath water all day long. I was wearing bib overalls. It was a tough job, lots of hard work, but it was all right. But it was a part of the livestock industry at the time. It's no longer required now. It added up to lots of activity at that store we had, 'cause that was the last stop before the railroad. 

Underhill: Did you witness John Collier's livestock reduction? 

John W.: Yeah. Let's see, where was I when that happened? (laughs) It's something the Navajos still resent. It's still high on their priorities of things they dislike from Washington. (laughter) I know when so many of 'em were highly incensed, because Navajos measured their wealth in the amount of livestock they had, whether it's horses or sheep or cattle. When they were told to reduce to 200 head, if they had 800 or 900, it was a devastating blow to them. I know I worked for the Atarque Sheep Company south of Zuni Reservation in the spring of 1931. They had had to kill hundreds of sheep. Over behind one ridge, there was a mountain of old sheep carcasses and bones. It just made a regular hill of 'em. They killed thousands of 'em, under that livestock reduction program. 

Underhill: And what was the impact on the people? 

John W.: Oh, it was serious because they were so dependent on their sheep that when you took away 60 or 80 percent of their income, it was a real blow to them, and they never did quite recover. Of course when you look back on the history of <New Mexico>, see, the early traders that came out of <Missouri> and into <Las Vegas> and <Taos> and <Santa Fe>, traded merchandise for livestock. And over a period of time then, they began to issue livestock to a lot of these Spanish land grant people on a partedo basis. And by the early 1900s you had about 2 million sheep in the state of <New Mexico>. Now there's just a handful left. It's no longer a sizeable industry here. But the Navajos acquired their sheep originally by raiding the Rio Grande villages. They built up a pretty heavy sheep count. I can't remember the amount of wool we used to ship. I was with the Gallup Mercantile all through the thirties, and we shipped millions of pounds of wool. Everything went through <Lawrence Massachusetts> for [scouring?], and then on to the wool brokers in <Boston> for selling, 'cause the wool trade in America was centered in <Boston>. That has also disappeared. The wool now goes directly to the cloth manufacturers that moved from New England into the South, and that changed that activity in America. 

Underhill: From your own observations of grazing conditions in the early thirties, do you think that livestock reduction was necessary? Was there overgrazing, or was that Washington's opinion? 

John W.: It was partially necessary, because some areas were badly overgrazed, and yet the Navajos could manage their livestock well enough that they always could get 'em into the hills where there was extra grazing when there was snow on the ground. They could manage to keep livestock alive. There were just a few places that were overgrazed, but I think the thinking was at the time that there were memories that there used to be grass up to a horse's belly as you rode from <Tohatchi> to <Shiprock> and that was all gone, so they had to bring that back. The livestock program was really too severe. It had an awful impact on the Navajo Tribe. Of course since then they have been heavily subsistent on what Washington sends out. It's a big factor in their lives now. 

Steiger: Did the grass ever come back? 

John W.: Not the way they thought it would. In some areas it looks good. They got into places like up there at Chee Dodge's, up toward Crystal. They ripped out the sagebrush and reseeded large areas which now have a good heavy sod for grazing. They improved the range quite a bit in that manner. 

Underhill: During the Depression you mentioned your dad lost the store because of a debt to Gallup Mercantile. (

John W.: Yeah.) What impact did the Depression have on ___________? 

John W.: Well, he had had a working arrangement with the ranch. He would process all the livestock prior to shipping out of <Gallup>. And they had an arrangement where he'd take half the profits or half the losses. Well, as a big company, they weathered the storm, but when the Depression hit, it was too much for an individual. His share of the losses was too great, and it took the ranch, is what it amounted to. They had a fine facility with the dip and the lakes and the waterholes--almost a township of land--why, he could handle a lot of livestock.

And another facet of that stock reduction was when they got rid of all the horses. I can remember they trailed horses in by the thousands from all across the reservation. They had a reduction plant at Coal Basin, just over the hill from Wal-Mart there in <Gallup>. I forget what the capacity was. They could kill several hundred a day. We handled all those horses on our land there at that time, where they drove them for days with a minimum of feed. There were dead horses all over that ranch. I got the benefit of that, because I was doin' a lot of coyote trapping, and the coyotes would follow the horses in. I had a pretty good crop of coyotes to chose from. (chuckles) 

Underhill: And what were you doing with the coyote? 

John W.: That was the way I got my pocket money during high school, was to trap. I trapped coyote, bobcat, badgers, fox, some weasels. I remember in my last two years I saved my money, and then I had a summer job at the ice plant, and enrolled at New Mexico State that fall, and my mother would send me forty dollars a month. My board and room was $32.50 and I had $7.50 to cover all other expenses. Things have changed there also. (laughter) 

Underhill: What did you study at New Mexico State? 

John W.: Well, I went into general education. It's much the same as it is now. Your first two years are to try to see if you're a college student or not. (laughter) 

Underhill: When you were growing up, did your mother serve as your teacher? 

John W.: At Rock Springs we were at the old road. We were ten miles from <Gallup>, so in 1923, we'd sold the house in <Gallup> and moved the family out to Rock Springs. They hired a teacher to come and live with us. It was a May Childers from up near Smith's Lake, on the <Crownpoint> Road. Her dad had a big ranch out there. So May lived with us and taught all three of us daily. We corresponded with her up until about a year ago. She had moved to <Oregon> and she was ninety-some when she passed away. The second year they brought a young woman out of <Kentucky>, a Miss Linear, and she taught us the second year, and eventually married Con Shillenberg [phonetic spelling] that had the Rough Rock Trading Post northwest of <Chinle>. And then after that, we drove back and forth.... Well, we spent two years of boarding in town and going to school and going home on the weekends. Then we started driving back and forth to school. So for six years we drove in daily and back. We never missed a day of school. In those days, I think there were about three cars at the school, and one of 'em was ours. There were times when we walked in without the car, but we never missed a day of school in six years. Of course school buses were unheard of at the time. We were doin' our own busing. (laughter) 

Underhill: You mentioned witnessing a burial when you were nine, and that your dad also served as an advisor of sorts to folks. What other kinds of duties did traders perform in that era? 

John W.: The old traders were called on for everything that the Indians didn't understand. If he got a letter from some branch of the government, the trader had to interpret that letter for him and give him the guidelines. They handled sickness. If there was a time of need, they had to help the family out. I remember a trader at Copper Mine told me one year, "I'll never be a rich man because the Navajos know me too well." When a Navajo comes to you and says, "Ad shonii," you can't turn 'em down, you gotta take care of 'em. So the trader did all of that for 'em.

An interesting incident like that was Earl Kennedy up at <Lukachukai>. He and his wife worked as a team and traded there for twenty-eight years, I think. This one councilman was interested in Earl's methods. Earl didn't like the councilman at all. So Earl was telling me his problems one day, and eventually a fact-finding board, which called for two members of the tribal council, a member from the Indian commissioner's office in Washington, and a member to represent the traders, and the four of us would meet to name a fifth who served as chairman. Well, they had this trial on Earl at <Gallup>. I know the second day he went through these long interpretations that can only happen in a prolonged Navajo meeting. This one Navajo was testifying that they had had a meeting and forty-eight had voted that Earl had to leave, and five abstained. I told the lawyer running the meeting, "I want to ask a question." He said, "How's that?" I said, "I want to know if that represents all the votes in that chapter district." Well, another Indian testified they'd had another meeting and 212 had asked Earl to stay. And that broke up the meeting. I saw the lawyer that night, and he said, "You just pulled the rug right out from under us. We thought we had a case." Earl and his wife had been up there all those years, and they'd done everything the Indians wanted--answered their mail and helped 'em through sickness and one thing and another. So the fact-finding board stated that Earl should be given his license without prejudice. That's when these twenty-five-year licenses came into effect.

So I think it was five years later I stopped by to see Earl one day, and he didn't say "hello" or "go to hell" or anything. He went over and got a letter and handed it to me, and it was a letter from <Window Rock> stating that they could no longer accept the rent from him because he didn't have a valid trader's license. He said, "Now what am I gonna do?!" I said, "Give that to me." And I went down to see the trading supervisor at <Window Rock> and I said, "Now, Bill, you know Earl real well. You know he and his wife aren't gonna leave. They're out there takin' care of the Indians, and they're not gonna come down here and sit for a half- a-day waitin' for someone to see 'em for fifteen minutes. Why don't you straighten this out?" He said, "What'll I do?" I said, "Get a license agreement and go up there and ask him if he'd mind signing it." So Bill made the trip up there and presented the license, Earl signed it, and that resolved it. But that was five years after he was granted permission to have a license. And that's the way it works in the Indian country! (laughs) 

Underhill: Now, who initiated that investigation? Was it tribal council, or was it BIA? 

John W.: The tribal council felt that this one member made such an issue of it, they felt they had to have a hearing. So they called for a hearing and there was a fellow from Indian Wells--he was an Indian preacher. And then Howard Gorman from <Ganado>. Tom Reed [phonetic spelling] from the Indian commissioner's office. Tom Reed's dad had been a lawyer for the Santa Fe Railroad here. And I was named to represent the traders. We named Bob Allen [phonetic spelling], the banker, as the chairman of the meeting. And that was the rule when they set these twenty-five-year leases, that they would have a fact-finding board to resolve any serious difficulties between the Indians and traders. That's how that came about then, but they only had one or two fact-finding board meetings there. It never worked out very well. 

Underhill: Do you remember what year that was? 

John W.: Let me see.... It was in the early fifties. I can't remember exactly when it was. 

Underhill: That's fine. What kind of man was Earl? 

John W.: Earl was.... Most of those guys were fairly conservative, except the younger one--he was a wild one. Earl had some of everything that he ever bought in the years he was at <Lukachukai>. One year a fellow who was traveling the reservation and picking up rugs for me and selling jewelry, came in and said, "Earl has a bunch of piñons." I had been shipping quantities of piñons for years. I had an outlet in <New York> that took millions of pounds. So we arranged to go out there with him in February or March--cold, miserable day, the snow was blowing. We weighed Earl's piñons, and I gave him a check for 'em and told him I'd have a truck pick 'em up in a few days. We were havin' coffee in his kitchen, and I said, "Earl, where are all your rugs?" I was just probing. He said, "Well, you saw the stack in there by the flour in the wareroom." I said, "That's your dogs. Where are your rugs?" After a while he got a key off the kitchen wall and we went out and opened up a pumphouse in the back yard and it was stacked solid with Navajo rugs--years and years of supply. It was a pumphouse as large as this room here. So we set an orange crate out in the back yard, put on our mackinaws, put an adding machine on the orange crate. He'd pull a rug out. "How much, Earl?" "Sixteen or fourteen or eighteen," whatever it was. He had his code on there, "H.O." We would kid him, "Earl, last time, 'H.O.' was fourteen. How come it's sixteen now?" (laughter) Finally he said, "I think I've sold enough stuff today," and the adding machine said $7,000 plus, and I was wondering what I was gonna use for money. So I arranged to have a wholesale truck pick the rugs up a few days later. But there was a shortage of rugs at the time, and I let word out there in <Gallup> that I had these rugs, and within a week's time, Kirk Brothers and Woodard and Mercantile took the whole works. So in December that year, Earl was in <Gallup> and he told my friend, "You and John come out again. I'll have the coffee ready." So we went out and weighed rugs again, and it took three trips to clean him out before we got all the rugs out of that. I wish now--today you'd have a field day with those rugs, 'cause a lot of marvelous old designs.

But Earl.... One time my friend wanted some wedding baskets, which all the medicine men used, you know. And he said, "Earl, I've gotta have a few wedding baskets." And Earl said, "I don't know whether I can let you have any or not." But they went out to one of the barns, and he must have had 2,000 in there! (laughter) But he was that way. He saved a lot.

I think of the time.... I used to get a lot of rugs from Russell Foutz when I had the wholesale house, and Russell liked to lead the parade with those traders up there. He said, "I've gotta have a new Cadillac." So I told the Cadillac dealer in <Gallup>, "I've got the rugs, and as I sell 'em, I'll just send the checks to you every month if you want to give him a Cadillac." So Russell got a Cadillac. So the next time I saw [this one particular trader], he said, "Goddamn it, I want a Cadillac!" I said, "Well, what have you got, Walter?" We went in his vault, and he had all these shoe boxes of the dead pawn of every year he'd been there, twenty-some years. So I looked and I said, "Well, we can make a deal." So I'd get a box and look at it. "Oh, I can't let that go!" The next one, "I can't let that go!" I said, "Walter, for godsake, you wanted a Cadillac. Stop right here." And that ended the deal! (laughter)

Another time John and I were out pickin' up rugs. I told him we'd have some fun there at <Dennehotso>, so we drove down and [the same trader] said, "What the hell you doin' out here?" We told him that we came to help him with the new road, there'd be a lot of tourists. He really exploded because he said, "I don't want those people in here. They'll argue with you five minutes over a can of Vienna sausages!" So after a while we were havin' coffee in the kitchen, he said, "Aren't you gonna look at my rugs?" So we went back and I said, "Go on, take care of your trade." And I sorted these rugs in two stacks. He come back later and he said, "Now, what's this?" I said, "Well, I've got a bunch of jewelry out in the car, and if it looks as bad as this stack, I'll trade ya'. And this other stack, if your luck holds out, you'll eventually get paid for them." He looks at 'em, "Well, I guess that's all right. Bring your jewelry in." We brought the jewelry in, and he traded out all the rugs for jewelry!" (laughter) He used to sell a lot of fine Zuni clusters to all those stockmen out there. The women prized those Zuni pins like American women do diamonds--big cluster bracelets, the pins, and the big belts and so forth. But he had that pawn he'd collected for twenty-six years, I think it was. He had the store for many years after that, but he started pickin' out the top of that pawn. I said, "You wanted a Cadillac, so let's stop here." (chuckles) 

John D.: You know, I remember one of the things about Earl, when we made those early trips, and he just had that little stack of rugs, and some tourists came in and said, "Do you have any Navajo rugs?" He said, "No." And there's the stack sittin' over there, so they're standin' around. After a while they said, "Well, what about those?" He said, "Oh, those are prayer rugs." "Really?!" They were god-awful rugs. Like Dad said, they were the dog rugs. And so pretty soon they're rootin' through 'em and everything else. They walked out, and I remember we said "Earl, what the hell's a prayer rug?" He says, "Those are rugs I'm just prayin' somebody'll come by and buy." (laughter) From then on, anytime anybody ever said, "I've got a prayer rug...." (laughter) 

Underhill: Now, was this attitude toward tourists pervasive among traders? 

John W.: Well, so many of the traders, you know, they worked all day long. It was hard work: they opened up in the morning and it was a crash program until they could finally close their doors sometime after dark. So they were always behind in their work, whether it was stocking shelves or getting stuff out of the wareroom or whatever. Well, when a tourist come along, they took up a lot of time, asking questions and wanting to see everything. And while you're talking to one tourist, you could wait on three or four Navajos. A lot of 'em, they held back a lot when they were dealing with outsiders. Later on, as the roads improved, they all got to where they'd like to have a tourist come along and look at the rugs, but it took a few years to break 'em down. 

Underhill: How frequently did you get tourists when you were still living with your mom and dad at the different places? 

John W.: Well, at <Chinle>, you rarely ever got anyone. I can remember when Herman Schwietzer [phonetic spelling] with Fred Harvey Company used to come by. He'd bring a suitcase of coral and he was out pickin' up rugs. He would stay with us overnight and pick up rugs the next morning and then go on to the next trading post. That was kind of the extent of the travel.

Well, in 1917, the Smithsonian was excavating the ruins in the canyon, and a lot of their crew camped there at the store. The old boy that had the Fernandez Ranch out here at <San Mateo>.... God, I know his name as well as I know my own. But he was a college student at the university, workin' out there in the summertime. So he always came in, in the evening, just to visit with us and help my mother with the dishes and so forth. That was about the extent of outside travel in those days. The roads were nonexistent. You had an awful time just finding <Chinle>. 

Cole: What was Schwietzer like, do you remember? 

John W.: Yeah, he was a shrewd trader. They had developed this line of hotels along the Santa Fe, and they found a great interest in Indian product, and they developed a tremendous business. They had the wholesale base here in <Albuquerque> and distributed to the other branches. But Herman was real selective in his buying, and then later on he was succeeded by Bob Boyd. I did a lot of business with Boyd in the fifties. When I had a place there in <Gallup>, he would come by and get a lot of rugs from me--quite often a lot of Zuni jewelry. But they were a big factor in those days--in fact, they were about the number one outlet for Indian arts and crafts in the early days. 

Underhill: Got Chinle and Rock Point. Did your dad work with local weavers in the creation of rugs? 

John W.: Yes. Of course all traders usually took everything an Indian brought 'em, because they didn't want that Indian goin' to some other store. So they bought all the rugs and all the hides and pelts and the wool and the lambs. But on the first ceremonial in 1922, he was one of the rug judges at the Gallup Ceremonial. The little exhibition hall was just a galvanized building that you could bake bread in, in August, and you just wandered in the door and made a loop around to look at the various rug displays, and that was the size of it. Yeah, nearly all traders-- progressive traders always tried to figure out how to build up their Indians. That was their main chore, because if the Indian prospered, they prospered.

Yeah, the traders were basically--in most areas they were a great help to the Indian, and the Indian realized it. You did have that conflict that went back to the establishment of <Fort Defiance> in the 1880s where you had the great triangle: the Indian, the government official, and the trader. Two were always played against one. 

Underhill: What did you think of government officials over the years? 

John W.: Well, some of their programs were unrealistic as far as the Indians were concerned. I think in the early days, the territorial days of <New Mexico>, nearly all the Indian agents were just political friends that were given a job and sent out to the country, and they served their time, a year-and-a- half, two years, and then went back and a new agent appeared. So there wasn't a very healthy program to develop the welfare of the Indians. That did change in later years when big money became involved. The annual appropriation was a sizeable thing.

I think of Pete MacDonald--you've heard of him. Pete and I used to have lunch about once a month before he ran the first time. I told him, "Pete, you're going to be elected. There's a couple things I wish you'd consider. One is that you develop a better relationship between <Window Rock> and the traders. Break down this competitive feeling and antagonistic feeling and work together. And the other is, I wish you'd work closer with the border towns: <Flagstaff>, <Winslow>, <Gallup>, and <Farmington>. Maybe have a three- man committee that'll meet at <Window Rock> one week for lunch, and the next week meet in <Gallup>. Just exchange ideas and not fight your battles through the newspapers." Oh, he thought that was a great idea. He got elected, and it went just the reverse. I remember he ran this one story about the drunkenness in <Gallup> one year. I said, "Pete, that was an awful blow to the town of <Gallup>. Why in the world did you do that?!" "Oh," he said, "when you have a chance to get on national television, you'd better take it." And that was a bad experience. 

John D.: Two of the things that we really saw that the others have probably told you, is when the government restricted the trading and the pawn activity. That really started the demise of trading on the reservation. 

Underhill: And you were running a wholesale shop at the time of the FTC hearings? 

John W.: Yeah. See, I had a wholesale house in <Gallup> from 1952 until 1979. We bought rugs from just about every trader, and I had a sale force covering-- the main area was western America, but we did have customers from <New York> and <Chicago> and so forth. The big effort was here in the Southwest. We were moving lots of merchandise. One time we led the pack in the wholesale business. So we turned a lot of product, and here always you try to improve the product and come up with innovations that will help the producer better his situation. That was the main play, because you can always buy rugs, but how many good rugs can you buy? Yeah, the trader has a very definite spot in the economy of the reservation. 

Underhill: In the 1970s was the DNA and then FTC hearings. How did that impact your wholesale operation when the traders were pulling out? 

John W.: We weren't having any real problems, 'cause we were buying jewelry from, oh, probably 500 Zuni and Navajo families, and we had a good production crew there in the house in <Gallup>. So our operation was strictly a wholesale merchandising operation, and we abided by the OSHA rules or any other regulation that came along. A lot of traders were affected adversely. And like he mentioned the pawn business. Every trader used to keep pawn, and it was merely a guarantee against credit that they advanced. An Indian would leave a necklace with a trader, and periodically come in and get a few more groceries against that necklace and pay on it at wool season, and then redeem it with livestock in the fall. And this was the guarantee the trader had that his credit was okay. Well then the government put an end to that kind of trading, and now you have these operators in <Farmington> and <Shiprock> and <Gallup> and Gamerco that handle mass quantities of pawn. I mean, it's big business. And they changed their rule here in <New Mexico>, the state law--actually, the only law this Navajo tribal legislator had submitted that one year, so they had to give him his bill--where they could only 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

John W.: make 4 percent a month, I think it is. I'm not real clear on the rules, 'cause I haven't handled any of it. They had to keep it six months, and then one month's notification before they could sell it. But if an Indian brought in quite a quantity of pawn 'cause he's gonna buy a new pickup or something, they broke it up into a lot of small packages, so they were making a percentage on all of it, and then they changed the interest every month, see. So actually, the old pawn deal was better for the Indians than the one they have now. 

Underhill: Do you think the Navajo recognized that? 

John W.: I've been away from it too long to really make a judgement on that, but I'm sure they have, because the old-time traders just about disappeared from the reservation, and the only thing that saved the Indians is that they're very mobile these days--they all have pickups and we have zone areas that produce certain types of rugs. Well, these rugs will show up anywhere now, because they'll drive 200 miles to sell a rug. The same with their livestock. They keep hauling in livestock every time there's a pickup payment due. So you got places like <Gamerco> and <Thoreau> and <Shiprock> where they buy a lot of stock year-round. There's no longer this gathering and selling a whole lot of livestock in a set period of days in October, and then having so many days to get 'em off of the reservation. That all changed. 

John D.: You know, I think a lot of that--going back to what you said--there became some distrust because a lot of the Indians thought it was the traders that were putting that on 'em. You know, the Truth in Lending Act and things like this. And all they wanted was twenty dollars to go to town. Before, they used to just come in and put a bracelet down, get twenty dollars, and go to town. All of a sudden it became very long and drawn-out. I think a lot of 'em thought it was the trader's fault--and it was the government that was imposing that on the trader. (original tape changed) 

Underhill: This is Karen Underhill with John Kennedy. It's December 16, 1998, and also in the room are John's son, John, and Brad Cole of Northern Arizona University, Lew Steiger, and "Pepper." (laughter) And it's Pepper snoring, it's not any of us. I want you to know that. (laughter)

Let's do talk about some of the older traders now. First of all, were you a member of the United Indian Traders Association? 

John W.: Yeah. When I was in Zuni we had a trader's number. I was a partner with C. G. Wallace from 1943 to 1947. The Traders Association was formed to further the sale of authentic Indian arts and crafts, and there was a fellow by the name of Bertram Staples that had come to the Southwest and was located at Coolidge, which formerly was known as <Guam>. And Staples was the driving force in organizing these traders to form this association. In due time, the recognized dealers all had a number which they could put on, stamp their product, "U.S." with an arrowhead, "I.A." U.S. Indian Traders Association. The last few years there in <Gallup>, I think M. L. Woodard was the secretary, and then at the very last, Carl Hine was the secretary. Carl had been the manager of Gross Kelly [phonetic spelling] Company there in <Gallup>. The reason the Traders Association went into quite a change at that time, during the World War II, they were able to get a commitment from Washington to get so much silver for the Indians to produce jewelry, because that was one of the few means of employment the Indians had. Well, after World War II, this became quite a business, and the Indian Traders being a nonprofit organization suddenly found out they were handling quantities of precious metal. So they divorced themselves from that business. They sold it to Carl Hine, and then he sold it to a fellow by the name of Brazier [phonetic spelling] and then Brazier sold it to Woodards. But the need then for the Indian Traders no longer existed because there were other associations working. The sales volume had expanded greatly. The Association just existed in name the last twenty years. I think Don Reeves in <Farmington> was secretary and Walter Kennedy was the director, I think, and some other fellow (

John D.: Russell) 

John W.: was there. They finally decided to liquidate, and that's where you folks come into the act. 

Underhill: Yes, we're final liquidation. (laughter) I like that. 

John D.: You know, in the sixties, they became more and more involved with changes in regulations and stuff like that, and became strictly a reservation group, where before they used to handle a lot of.... There were a lot of people on the periphery that were in the Association, but after a while, that was their sole function, was to basically combat the government over regulations on the reservation. 

Underhill: You mentioned that you had a number with C. G. Wallace. Do you remember what your number was? 

John W.: Yeah, I can research and find that out. I don't remember it for sure right now. But I know Wallace had a number, and Drolet had a number at <Naschitti> and Mike Kirk [phonetic spelling] had a number at <Manuelita>. Harold Prewitt had a number down there at <Prewitt New Mexico>. John Kirk had a number there in <Gallup>. But any of 'em that were producing any amount of arts and crafts--well, the Foutzes had numbers 'cause they were in the rug business heavily. Hubbells had a number. Cozy had a number down at <Chinle>. 

John D.: A while back Don Reeves told me what your number was, and I can't remember. 

Underhill: If either of you ever run across a list, or even a partial list, we've never found one. 

John D.: I thought Don had one. 

Underhill: ______________. 

John W.: I think he has. He should know. 

John D.: I saw him a couple of months back, and we were talkin' and I thought he told me that he had a partial list. He didn't have the whole list, and he wanted to know if we knew any of the names and numbers. 

Underhill: Right. 

John W.: Yeah, I know over the last fifteen years I've had I don't know how many inquiries wanting to know if I knew who all had numbers. 

John D.: But I seem to remember Don saying "your number was...." He probably had the best knowledge. 

Underhill: _____________. In terms of these early members, we'll just run a list here. (laughs) L. L. Sabin. 

John W.: Yeah, it's interesting how some of these traders came into the picture, 'cause Louie Sabin and Charlie Newcomb came from <Iowa> and worked for the store at <Guam> that my father had managed. After he left to build Salina Trading Post, they came in and clerked at that store, which McGaffey Lumber Company had bought from Newman. Then when Sabin left there, he went to <Fort Defiance>, and it seems to me that C. C. Manning in <Gallup> had the store at <Fort Defiance>, and he hired Louie to run it, and then eventually Louie bought the store. Charlie Newcomb worked for Manning for a while in <Gallup>, and then I think Manning had <Naschitti> at that time, and Charlie went out there, and then later acquired Crystal across the mountain, and he was there until the fifties. Then he sold Crystal and moved back to Coolidge. That was his last store. 

Underhill: What was Mr. Sabin like? 

John W.: Louie was a very jovial fellow, very neighborly. I know whenever we were in that area, he always expected you to stop and say hi. In later years when I was with the wholesale company, he was a nice fellow to deal with. He eventually sold the store to Ray Dunn [phonetic spelling] who had--he called it Dunn Mercantile. He had the trading post at Navajo Mountain, and he bought Louie Sabin's store, and then Louie came on over to Sabinita and operated for a while. He had bought that land and was selling off lots in it, so his trading activity wasn't much after he left <Fort Defiance>. Let's see, some of the other.... 

Underhill: C. G. Wallace? 

John W.: Take Ramon Hubbell. See, when we were at <Salina>, a stopping point in coming to <Gallup>, we'd travel by buckboard. You'd either stay at <Ganado> or Cross Canyon the first night, and then on into <Gallup> the next, or vice versa on the return trip. So we got to know Hubbell very well. He had trading operations at piñon and <Marble Canyon> and Black Falls, down at <Chinle>. See, when we were at <Chinle>, he'd come in there and with the store he had Camillo Garcia when he built a huge adobe building, a two-story building--and I think it still stands--but Camillo Garcia was his trader, and Camillo had been operating a store at Cornfields west of <Ganado>. Eventually Camillo bought the old Stag Store, which was on the east side of Chinle Village, and he operated that until his death. He had that and the Chinle Valley Store which he had Felix Martinez running. It was unfortunate when Camillo and his son were killed in that plane crash, 'cause it changed the whole order of things with that family. The son was the only male heir. There were three daughters, and of course with Spanish families the son was supposed to acquire the business. Camillo had been a very successful trader: he had a big interest in the motel at Chambers, and a big interest in the Shalimar at <Gallup>, and one of the banks at <Gallup>, and his two country trading posts. He was a good operator.

And let's see, some of the others are.... Ramon, when I was with the wholesale house in <Gallup> in the forties, I took a sheep buyer out there, a fellow from <Muleshoe Texas>. Ramon had his sheep between <Ganado> and <Klagetoh>, and we drove out and looked at 'em about sundown, and then came back and stayed there at night. I remember Ramon went out on the back porch and cut chunks of meat off a hindquarter of beef that was hanging there and came in and just threw 'em in the live coals in the fireplace, and we had broiled steaks.

An interesting experience years later, when I was operating the wholesale house, my own company there in <Gallup>, I stopped to see Dorothy Hubbell one day, and she was talking about the problem she was having with Washington concerning Hubbell Trading Post. So I wrote a rather strong letter about everything that was there in the inventory of 1961 was still there, and if there's any question about it, it could be solved real easily. I wrote Goldwater, and I got back a stinging letter from him about if I knew so much about Hubbell's, why was there so much Hubbell pawn showing up all over the country? And I wrote back in the same tone, 'cause he made me mad, I said, "If you'll check further, you'll find that that pawn came from the Hubbell wholesale house in <Winslow>, and not from the Hubbell Trading at <Ganado>." After the second go-round-- the first time they applied for the Park Service to take over the place, some <Kansas> or <Nebraska> farmer wanted to know why they had to bail out a busted Indian trader, so the thing was stopped. But as the second go- around, after I wrote those letters in, they approved it and they made it a national historical site, and Dorothy always thanked me for my effort in that.

We knew Lorenzo Jr. when he had Oraibi. We went to the snake dance in 1924 at Walpi, and I remember we stopped at Oraibi Trading Post to get gas, and he had fifty or sixty of those steel drums of gas out in front. And here were all these people, hoping to get out of the Indian country, lining up to get gas. They'd pump one barrel dry and then roll another one over and pump it dry. Lorenzo was a well-liked trader. Well, both Lorenzos, Senior and Junior. Ramon was not the businessman that they were, and eventually some of his ventures got into trouble and they lost a lot of their holdings. 

Underhill: C. G. Wallace, your partner? 

John W.: Well, he came to me while I was workin' for the Gallup Mercantile and offered me a half- interest in his store at Zuni if I'd go down and run it. We spent several months negotiating, 'cause I wasn't sure I wanted to make that deal. I moved my family to Zuni, and for four years we worked it night and day. We had a retail outlet in <Gallup>. In that time we bought the store at Cedar Point from H. W. Gibson, and so we had the three places to worry about. We parted ways in 1957, and it was one of the worst business deals I ever encountered. It probably was a real education at the time. 

Underhill: Why did that become a bad business deal for you? 

John W.: Just Wallace, the character that he was, and his business methods and so forth. We clashed and I got out of the system. 

Underhill: What were some of Wallace's characteristics?--at least those that you can put on an interview? 

John W.: Well, some of the things, like I say, I don't know whether you want on tape or not. (laughter) 

Underhill: Anything you're willing to tell us! 

Steiger: It's whether you want 'em on tape! 

Underhill: Yes! (laughter) 

John W.: He was a successful businessman. He had that trading operation and a ranch over near Sanders. We bought the Gibson store, and then he had the De Anza Motor Lodge here in <Albuquerque>, but most of his activities are based on greed. That greed supported women friends all over the country. So it led to problems. 

Underhill: And you mentioned--and we're going to some of these other older traders--that you had your family with you at Zuni. (

John W.: Yeah.) When did you marry and who did you marry? 

John W.: Well, I had worked at the Mercantile there a good many years all through the thirties until 1943. The Gallup Mercantile was a branch of Charles Ilfeld Company, which had wholesale branches in <Trinidad>, <Raton>, <Las Vegas>, <Santa Fe>, <Albuquerque>, <Santa Rosa>, Pasteur, <Magdalena>, <Gallup>, <Farmington>, and <Durango>. That was quite an experience. I worked up through the ranks, I started on the warehouse gang, and then was receiving clerk, then shipping clerk, then cost clerk, then grocery buyer, and then salesman. While we were at the Merc, a fellow I had run around with for years was going with Mrs. Kennedy's sister, and they announced their plans for a wedding. I was the best man and she was bridesmaid, and that's where we met. That was in 1938. We were married in 1940. Fifty- eight years later, we're still here. (laughter) But that's how that started. When we went to Zuni--see, we were married in 1940--John was born in 1941. In fact, the day before yesterday was his birthday. 

Underhill: So was mine! 

John W.: When we moved to Zuni, we had a son and daughter, and then later another son arrived while we were there. And then when I left, we came into <Gallup>. And of course that was a real trial for Mrs. Kennedy, because she was expecting the fourth. It was necessary that I have a spinal operation, and I came into <Albuquerque> and I had two strips taken out of a shin, and a derrick built under my lower back. They fused four vertebrae together, and this was when they were first experimenting with these operations, so for several months then I had a hospital bed in the house at <Gallup>, and here she was with four youngsters and me to take care of. So that was a bad year in her life. But we came through all that all right. 

Underhill: Lloyd Ambrose? 

John W.: Lloyd Ambrose, again, was a part of that Newman-Boardman complex. He was married to one of the Boardman girls, so he was a brother-in-law of the Boardmans, as well as a brother-in-law of Hans Neumannalso. Let's see, Lloyd operated a store at <Thoreau> at one time. And then let's see where else did he operate? He came into the trading business late, and after.... Oh, they had the store at <Crownpoint>, and when they sold <Crownpoint> they built the motel there in <Gallup>, in partnership with Mrs. Neumannand her second husband. That's how that lodge on the east side of <Gallup> developed. 

John D.: El Rancho? 

John W.: No, wait, it was this side of El Rancho. One of the motels there by the arroyo. I can't think of the name of it now. 

John D.: It must have been the Lariat or the Blue Spruce? 

John W.: No, it was on east of there. 

John D.: Hacienda? 

John W.: It was where you turned to go up to the high school, just west of there they had that motel. 

John D.: Oh, yeah. It was Coronado. 

John W.: Uh-huh. But Lloyd wasn't in the trading business that much. It was mainly <Thoreau> and <Crownpoint>, through his connection with the Newman and Boardman families. 

Underhill: What do you recall about Lloyd Ambrose's personality? 

John W.: Lloyd was a friendly fellow. He and his wife were very friendly and neighborly folks. We visited with 'em some at <Crownpoint>. Usually we were around 'em in <Gallup> at various gatherings and so forth. They were good neighborly people. 

Underhill: Does J. M. Drolet ring a bell? 

John W.: Marshall Drolet. I forget where Marshall came from. It seems to me like he came from <New York City>. He operated the Drolet Naschitti Trading Post, which was called Drolet's Trading Post. All the years I was at <Gallup>, he bought supplies there at the Gallup Mercantile, and then later on I had occasion to call on those stores. Marshall developed quite a Jewelry business there at Naschitti, as Harold Prewitt developed one at Prewitt. And then Mike Kirk had developed a jewelry business out there at <Manuelita>. And all three of 'em funnelled a lot of jewelry into the Gallup Mercantile when they had the Gallup Indian Jewelry Company as a wholesale outlet. 

Underhill: Bruce Bernard [phonetic spelling]? 

John W.: Bruce had the store on the hill at <Shiprock>. He was a successful--he'd been a rancher, and he was successful in livestock activities. He always promoted better sheep activities and better sheep production with the Navajos. I had occasion to ship his wool a few times when we would buy us a little there at <Gallup>. But he was a good businessman and very well-liked in that area. His former store is now occupied by Bill Foutz. Bill Foutz has his trading operation there. 

John D.: Did Marshall go to <Shonto>, or his son? 

John W.: No, Sam Drolet was a brother of Marshall's. Sam ran the store over on the Cuba Highway, where you turn off to <Chaco Canyon>. His son married into the Carson family and managed (

John D.: <Shonto>.) <Shonto> for quite a while. He abandoned that about four years ago, had to go back to the university to get his degree. I think he's teaching somewhere now. And Shonto sold this last year to Eddie Foutz's son has Shiprock Trading. I think they bought it as a source for saddle blankets and baskets. 

Underhill: You've mentioned Mike Kirk a couple of times. 

John W.: Mike and his brother John. John had a wholesale house in the northern part of <Gallup>. Mike was quite a showman. He was really the fellow that started the ceremonial. He got Horace Moses, who was the superintendent of Gamerco Coal Mine to promote this summer show, and it was mainly for the entertainment of the miners and the people of the trade territory. Mike knew trading very well, but he had been involved in various show activities. After a couple of years with the Gallup Ceremonial, he came over to <Albuquerque> and they tried to start an Indian show here, but it never did take hold. After Mike died, his wife ran Manuelita Trading Post for years. Her son, Dean, then opened another store a couple of miles from <Manuelita> and worked a lot of silversmiths for several years. 

Underhill: What was Mike Kirk like? 

John W.: Mike? Well, let's see, was he a cousin of Cozy McSparron or not? But he and Cozy were very similar individuals. They were interesting characters and good showmen. 

John D.: Cantankerous, too. (laughter) 

John W.: Independent individuals, yeah. 

Underhill: What would you say that the early traders had in common in the way of characteristics? What did it take to be a good trader then? 

John W.: Well, the main thing, most of 'em became good neighbors, because there weren't any neighbors in the trading business. So the next trader was your friend and neighbor, and not a competitor. And in later years, they all became very competitive. But in the early days, we were at <Chinle> and Sunday we were even down at the valley visiting the Fraziers, or they would come up to <Chinle> visiting us. We visited back and forth. Later, they left <Chinle> and moved to St. Michael's, and they visited with us a lot at Rock Springs. We stayed very close to their family for many years. That was the condition with all the old traders. If they started for <Gallup>, they stopped and visited with every trader on the way in, just comparing notes and ideas. 

Underhill: Now there were some, of course, that came and stayed for many, many years. And there were others that came and left quickly. What do you think made a good trader? Someone who could be reasonable at business and stay? 

John W.: Yeah, it was those that liked what they were doing, like Tom Keams at <Keams Canyon>. He was quite a force there. And the Hopi county, he actually acted as their agent for about twenty years. He sold out to a fellow by the name of Slim Alderman [phonetic spelling]. Alderman was a very successful trader and later built a store down there at Indian Wells, which has since been abandoned. Had a big stone building. But you never had many traders that retired wealthy. They gave their life to the trading business, and that was it.

Certain individuals had a strong influence on the Indians: Lorenzo Hubbell, Sr., Slim Alderman at Hopi at Keams. Camillo of Garcia was good at <Chinle>. You had the Foutzes up in the San Juan Valley running out to Teec Nos Pos and that area. They all had a great influence on the Indians and Indian thinking and the Indian activities and so forth. 

John D.: They all liked 'em. If they didn't like 'em, they couldn't survive. 

John W.: That's right. Yeah, they got shot. (laughter) 

Underhill: And how were you treated? First as an Anglo kid, and then later as a trader yourself? 

John W.: I'm eighty-six and I'm still here! (laughter) 

Underhill: You didn't get shot! 

John W.: I always think of the incident.... We were at Rock Springs and Cassidy had the store that Kennedy had at <Lukachukai>. The Indians didn't like him at all, and one night someone fired a shot through the window. They were sitting at a table reading, and they packed up and left the next day and moved down to <Chambers Arizona>. But that happened a lot. They killed old Sloppy Jack at China Springs there, just out of <Gamerco>. We were at Rock Springs at the time. And I was telling John a while back about the conditions at <Salina>. The first winter we were there, we were there six months without seeing another white person. There was a family down the draw known as.... 

John D.: The Left Hands. 

John W.: Left Hand Many Goats outfit. One day they sent word up to my dad that they were comin' up to kill him. And he sent word back that he guessed today was as good as any, to come on, he had his .12 gauge ready. And from then on they got on fine, they never had another bad day. He traded with 'em for years and associated with 'em later. Years later Howard Wilson was sheriff at <Gallup>, and he had traded at Shoshibito [phonetic spelling] and Frazier's and Tosicai [phonetic spelling] and was active in railroad hiring and the Manuelita uranium leases and oil leases and so forth. I was in <Ganado> with the manager of the mercantile, and they were out contracting wool. We ran into Howard, and he said, "I want you to go with me over to <Salina>. I've got to go get one of the Left Hand fellows," 'cause they were filming a picture there west of <Gallup>, Ace in the Hole, and they wanted a character Navajo. So we went out there and got hold of the Indian, and two of 'em decided to ride with us. So the three of us were riding in the front, and the two Indians in the back seat, and they kept talkin' to Howard in Navajo. I never indicated I knew anything about what they were saying. Finally one of 'em asked Howard who the other two fellows were. Howard said, "Well, you had a problem with this one fellow's dad years ago, and it's something he wants to get straightened out." It really floored 'em! (laughter) I was running a grocery store in <Gallup> and whenever they were in <Gallup> after that, they would come by to see me. Yeah, they thought that was quite a story. 

Underhill: Why did they want to kill your dad? 

John W.: Well, that brings up an ongoing story. Down through the years, these characters that Hillerman wrote about, they were prevalent in that area, the ghost people were prevalent in that area. Dave Murry's son was operating the store here in the seventies, I guess, and one day a fellow walked in, the store was wide open. They found Dave's son dead in the store, someone had killed him. And to this day, they don't have any idea who it was. Then Dave got rid of the store. The next fellow that was there, he was a questionable character, and he got to dealing with some characters out of <California> and suddenly he disappeared. It was a total mystery of what had happened to him, 'cause the place was abandoned. Well, they got to investigating later on, and they found out that the seat in the two-holer outside had been removed and his body had been dumped down in there and then covered with newspapers. They thought the fellows that had been coming from <California> probably did it, but there was no proof. And today that store stands there abandoned. It's ch’©©dii. The Indians won't stop, and it's just decaying, sitting there, and this is the store my father built in 1913. There's been two unsolved murders there. There could have been three, if they had carried out their deal with my dad. That's just a side story. 

John D.: It's interesting that that store, it's abandoned--but [un]like all the other trading posts [where] windows are gone, everything that's useable is gone--that store is still intact. The windows aren't even broken out of it. 

John W.: The sand has blown against the front door, you can't open it. 

Underhill: No one will touch it, huh? 

John D.: Yeah, uh-huh. 

John W.: Yeah. 

Underhill: Amazing. 

John W.: There are countless stories across that reservation. I can tell you stories, but they are.... (laughs) 

Underhill: Tell us a couple of your favorites. 

John W.: Well, another sideline is the piñon business. The Ilfeld Company had a deal with a <New York> concern that handled edible nuts. Whenever there was a piñon crop, they would ship them to <New York City>, and they were consumed down there in the Lower East Side where the immigrant villages were--you know, tens of thousands of immigrants leaning out of the window, drinking cheap wine, and eating piñons. I saw in the Ilfeld book where they shipped a carload out of <Las Vegas> in 1906 at six cents a pound. Well, in later years all of eastern <New Mexico> would pick piñons for their own use, but not commercially. So it developed that whenever there was a crop, you only got production if it was where the Navajos could work. So every year we'd make a survey, and it would take about six weeks to cover all the southwest producing areas to see if there was a chance for a crop. In 1936, I was with the wholesale house and <New York> asked the manager if we'd make a survey. So the manager took me along and we were at <Keams Canyon> the first night, and we stayed at Cameron the next night. It was a four-day trip. I estimated maybe there'd be maybe 4 million pounds that year. So they formed this corporation in <New York> with the nut house, we'll say, and they borrowed a half- million dollars of call money, which was money you could get in at 2.0 or 2.25 percent. And we started buying piñons at twelve cents a pound, because they figured 4 million pounds, twelve cents, plus the freight, they could handle that. When the dust settled the next spring, there were 8 million pounds. And these piñons were stored in <Santa Fe> and <Las Vegas>, Magdalena, the wool warehouse here in <Albuquerque>, <Gallup>, and <Flagstaff>. And I went to <Flagstaff> four years later and shipped the last of those piñons. It took four years to clean up the crop, 'cause in those days, <New York> was the market. But after World War II, there were thousands of young fellows that spent their time in the Southwest and acquired a liking for pi??on. So today if there's a crop, it takes over a million pounds just to satisfy the demand in the Southwest. That's how the piñon business evolved. We used to ship millions of pounds. And after the Gallup Mercantile ceased, the <New York> people made me their agent out here, and I bought and shipped cargo for them. One year there was a big crop at the Grand Canyon. I went out and looked it over and figured I'd better get busy. So I went to Babbitt Brothers and said, "I'm an agent in the piñon business. This is what I can do." They figured I was infringing on their territory, and they said they weren't interested. So I hired a customer of mine who had a summer stand on Highway 89 in the pines out north of <Flagstaff>. He had a trailer house and a little warehouse building and telephone and water and so forth. So he wanted to sell that, and I traded him rugs for it. I said, "Just leave it intact, I want to use it where it is." So I hired Hugh Lee, and he got on the radio as "piñon Charlie" and announced that he was buyin' piñons at that stand. We shipped fourteen carloads out of <Flagstaff>. I went out every Thursday and shipped a 60,000-pound car. I could see that the market was getting out of hand so I went to him one day and said, "Shut this thing down," because I made the trip and I figured there were 3,000 Indians pickin' twenty pounds a day out there. So we shut it down, and I still had to go into storage with three carloads, which is dynamite, because they shrink in weight. The market is uncertain. But I finally sold 'em the next spring and got out from under it without taking a loss. But I've had every lesson in piñons __________. (laughter) 

Underhill: We've been told it's a very volatile market. 

John D.: You know, he's pretty modest in what he did, because nobody in the piñon business did anything without checking with him first--nobody--the traders, the buyers. He could drive along at sixty miles an hour and tell you what the crop was. 

John W.: You'd see the cones glistening on the tree, and then you'd stop and see if they were gonna blight, or if they were gonna mature properly. There are certain areas that are very good. Grand Canyon is a marvelous area. <Shonto> is another big area. Pietown- Guemado is another huge area. This year they had a rather general crop. I've been out of touch with it for several years now, but they apparently had piñons at <Thoreau> and that area, and then down south at Pietown and Mt. Taylor, and up in the Tierra Amarilla and <Cuba>--up in that country they had a big crop. 

John D.: There was also a system he developed where the traders could call in every Monday and get a price that would last for a week, and they were protected, because of the volatility of the market, you know. So he would protect them for a week. He said, "Okay, I will guarantee you this price." Then I would take off in a truck on Monday, and every day--there were a lot of days I would load 20,000 pounds, come home, unload 20,000 pounds, get up in the morning, go do the same thing. And when we showed up, the traders knew they were protected on the price, because they had been given a price. And if the price dropped, we took the loss. And so we had to hurry and buy, hurry and load, hurry and unload, hurry and ship. Everything was hurry, hurry, hurry, because they were shrinking 10 percent in six weeks. 

John W.: The thing that ruined the business, though, was that guarantee, because in scarce years when there was a limited crop, the trader knew his guarantee, but the first guy along that offered another penny, bought the piñons. So you'd send your truck out to pick up your piñons, and no, they didn't have any. So your guarantee cost you money in the bad years. That's when I got out of the piñon business, because traders with piñons are like Klondike gold-seekers. They get a gold fever and they become changed individuals. They will change their tactics and their ethics, all over the price of a damned sack of piñons! (laughs) 

John D.: It was one of the later years, I remember we were debating on whether or not to get in it, so we were sitting there talking and Mom said, "You know, you guys...." The thing we were debating was first of all the amount of energy it takes to do it, and especially loading and unloading 20,000 pounds a day by myself. So that's 40,000 pounds in a day, you know. And we're sitting there talking about all the work it is and everything else, and Mom said, "You know, you guys are like the firehouse dog. When the bell rings, you're gonna run." (laughter) And we did. 

Steiger: What increments would they come in? 

John D.: They'd come anywhere from five pounds to a hundred pounds. They'd bring 'em in flour sacks _________. 

John W.: That was another thing I was always critical of. I would buy recleaned bean bags, and I would furnish the traders with bags, because if you didn't furnish 'em bags, and you went out, they would have 'em in cornflake boxes or oat sacks that the piñons would spill out of. Here they're buyin' a valuable crop, and they treated 'em like pinto beans. They didn't care if they were on the floor or Indian corn. They mishandled 'em to perfection. I called on Tuba Trading one year. Vans there, they were buyin' piñons for me. And I went up there and they had everything in Kleenex boxes. I loaded the van with these huge boxes of piñons that weigh over a hundred pounds. And if you just made a mistake, you split the box and spilled piñons everywhere. But the traders would never prepare for a crop. I would go in and say, "Well, you'd better get ready, you're gonna have piñons this year." "Oh, is that right?!" They never had any idea that there were piñons, until an Indian walked in with a coffee can lot and asked what the price was. You always kept 'em in position, but they always kept me out of position. (laughs) I got out of the business because it was so unethical and so volatile. 

John D.: Last year when we went into the mall--I had a retail store in the mall, in <Gallup>, the Rio West Mall. I went to the mall people and said, "Look, if you'll give me a space to buy piñons...." And they didn't know what piñons were. So anyway, we went ahead and did it, and we knew the crop was over by <Flagstaff>, so we got on the Harry Billy [phonetic spelling] Show in Holbrook and said, "Bring your piñons to the Rio West Mall in <Gallup>." And they brought us about a quarter of a million pounds, and the mall people were just.... And all the shopping carts in the mall were lined up, all these people with all their flour sacks. Then we put 'em into another place, and on Sunday we'd have an eighteen-wheeler come in, and we'd haul 'em out. It was all cash business. It was a great thing for the mall that year, because as soon as they got the money, they went to all the stores in the mall. It was a great, great thing for the economy anytime there was a good piñon crop. 

John W.: That stirs up a lot of activity, because the Indians spend all that money. It's manna from heaven, is what it is. It's a great day for them. They'd quit a good job to go pick piñons. It's just a part of their way of life.

But speaking of piñons being a cash crop, the basis for Indian trading from the 1880s until World War II was basically credit given by the wholesale houses to the country traders. The trader made his first payment in the spring with wool, and then cleared his account with livestock in the fall. And that was the basis of all the Indian trading to start with. That went on 'til World War II, and then supermarkets came in and direct sales to stores. And then the last development was Thriftway buying up all the trading posts and making cash service stores out of every location. But the basis of all the trading was wool and sheep trading. That was the basis of credit for all of the trading. 

Underhill: In your experience, in the thirties or just before the war, how much credit would a typical wholesale house extend? 

John W.: Oh, goodness, I think there at the Gallup Mercantile in the thirties, I think our accounts receivable in the spring were $300,000-$400,000. 

Underhill: Oh, my. And I have to back up for just a second and ask you how did you learn about piñons? How did you learn to drive at sixty and tell what the crop was gonna be? 

John W.: Well, it started with that trip in 1936 when we made the survey. From then on I was heavily involved every time there was a piñon crop. I had to go out and make these surveys, or I had to warehouse the piñons. I got an education in warehousing, because when you have to store piñons for four years.... Now, this is a crop that can mildew and spoil. We learned that you stack them in loose stacks so that there's air coming through, and periodically you restack them, so that where the bags come together they don't mildew. And you learn that the hard way. You learn it because you get some mildew. We had a competitor one year that told all the traders that they would buy piñons because the mercantile was not gonna buy, because they had the warehouses full. And so this competitor figured, "Well, we'll buy, and Ilfeld's gonna hafta buy 'em from us to protect their supply." They had these traders bringin' 'em in, and they loaded up this warehouse there in <Gallup>, just had stacks, just piles of piñons. They weren't stacked in any orderly manner. Finally, the day of reckoning came by, and they were ready to liquidate. Well, over half the piñons were mildewed. And my job was to go over with one of these sticks that you put in a grain bag and you can twist the handle and get samples out of each section of the bag--sample every bag, pour it out on a paper and estimate what the mildew was, and settle on that basis. And the competitor lost over $200,000 on those piñons. I tasted a lot of mildewed piñons, let's put it that way. Between that, the warehousing and the shipping and the surveying, I got to where I could write a book about the piñon business. I knew all the angles of it. It was an interesting experience. 

John D.: One of the things he's always said about anything in this business is "you don't learn anything until you spend time and money." (laughter) It's kinda like goin' to college. (laughs) 

John W.: People asked me how I learned about turquoise, 'cause I got to where I could look at turquoise and tell you what mine it came from. They said, "How in the world do you develop this knowledge?" I said, "It's just like goin' to school. You spend twenty years and your money and you get an education!" (laughter) 

Underhill: Well, now your own wholesale business. How did you get into that and when? We'll start there. 

John W.: It was interesting. After I left Zuni, I got into the grocery business, bought two small stores, one in <Gallup> and one in <Grants>. Well then a little later, a couple of Italian fellows there had been customers of mine at the Mercantile. Each had a small store. We could see that small stores were coming to an end, so we pooled our efforts and built the first California Market there on the corner of Fourth and Coal in <Gallup>. That got underway real well and they said, "How are we going to attract the Indian trade?" So we cut a hole in the floor of that market. I sold off the little store. Just inside of the front door of the supermarket, we cut a hole in the floor and [had] a stairway down into the basement and into a vault under the parking lot, and announced that we were buying Indian arts and crafts. The first thing you know--the mercantile at that time was making tens of thousands of beaded belts, and they couldn't get enough bead strips. So I said, "Well, tell me what you want." And I got on the radio and told the Indians what I was buying, and would buy an egg crate full of bead strips every Saturday. We had traffic lined up all the way up that stairway. Then the Zunis got to bringin' in their jewelry, and the Navajos got to bringin' in their jewelry. Well, then we moved across the street to have a larger facility where we could work some silversmiths and buffers. Shortly after that, the Ilfeld was selling out their wholesale houses to Kimball. And they didn't want the Indian business, so a group of us took on--or my group took on the wholesale department of the Gallup Mercantile. It was the <Gallup> Indian Jewelry Company. We took their corporate structure and just changed the name of "Jewelry" to "Trading," and kept the corporate books and stock certificates and so forth. They moved over to the old John Kirk Building on North Fourth Street. Then Bernie Vanderwagen had a little trading operation in that building, 'cause he and his brother had bought the building from the Kirk estate. So we absorbed his trading deal, and then later brought Larry Lee in to operate a trading post in the back of the building and take pawn. So we consolidated my business and Bernie's deal, and near the end, the Gallup Indian Jewelry. Eventually, we built a second supermarket on the east side of <Gallup>. The business got so darned active, one partner took one store, another took the other, and I got the Indian business. So over a period of time, I bought out the rest of the stockholders and had moved to the south side in West <Gallup> on West 66. I had full-time salesmen working in eleven western states, and part- time salesmen working other areas of America. At one time we had ten representatives out. One of my old salesmen reminded me here a couple of years ago that I was the first fellow to take the Indian arts and crafts business and put it on an expanded merchandising program. Most traders ran "ma and pa" operations. If someone came by, they sold a rug or some jewelry or pawn or whatever it was. But I was carrying a big inventory and taking big delivery stocks out to the trade, and big delivery stocks to all the wholesale shows like <Los Angeles>, <San Francisco>, <Dallas>, <Phoenix>, and <Denver>. So that evolved into the biggest element in the Indian jewelry business there in the seventies. Then I retired from that in 1979 and came over here. And the business has eventually liquidated. Now Tobe Turpen's in the process of liquidating his business. I see he's running regular ads in the Journal that everything's for sale. 

John D.: Really?! I haven't seen one. 

John W.: Yeah, they ran a lot of ads during the summer that they were just gonna operate a pawn business. 

John D.: Yeah, okay, I knew that. 

John W.: Well, they're advertising that all the inventory's for sale. 

Underhill: With your first groceries, did you offer credit to folks, or was it strictly a cash basis when people were coming downstairs and selling bead strips? 

John W.: In the little stores, all small stores had their set customers that they gave thirty-day credit to. And of course the unfortunate thing, when I bought the store in <Grants>, we had a lot of lumber mill workers trading there, and my manager gave them credit, but the mill never did open up, and a lot of 'em owed hundreds of dollars, and then they left town. So that store was a catastrophe. We finally liquidated it.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

John W.: And today, credit is a bygone thing in most grocery stores. They'll still take your credit card, but.... (laughter) 

John D.: The nice thing you did, though, in the basement was you had trade slips, where they could go upstairs and buy groceries. 

John W.: Yeah, see, the Indians would come in and we'd settle with 'em. We furnished the silver and turquoise and we'd deduct that from the finished work, figure out what they had coming, and give 'em a trade slip for half and cash half. Well, they went upstairs and traded out that trade, and it developed a large volume for that supermarket. 

Underhill: Did you run into any problems with state government in terms of trade slips for your own store? 

John W.: At Zuni I had to quit trade slips because we were giving all the workers trade slips. Usually in the late afternoon, the women all come into the store to get things for the evening meal, and they'd bring a few rings or bracelets or pins, and want to trade to get merchandise. So you'd give 'em a trade slip, so they'd go out front and trade it out. Well, the government said this was wrong, that you had to pay 'em cash. Well, that didn't work very well with reservation stores. And they had the same situation with trade coins that so many of the traders had for years, you know. Hubbells had 'em, Sabin had 'em, Kirks had them, and Prewitt. They were a common thing. The Indian would bring in merchandise, and if he didn't trade it all out while he was there, the trader gave him these trade coins which he could use on a later trip. It was just like cash, and some traders got to where they would honor each other's coins, so that gave the Indian a little flexibility. But the government put a stop to that, too. So there's very little volume down on the Indian country now. Sheep, wool, cattle, and pawn is all done off the reservation because of the change in credit policies. 

Underhill: With your store, when you ultimately moved into the Indian arts and crafts business, how did you find your silversmiths, and how many did you have working for you? 

John W.: Well, at Zuni we financed most of the production when I had the partnership there. Of course I got to know practically all the Indians in the village. We had Navajos between Zuni and the railroad that did silverwork for us. So when I opened up in <Gallup>, a lot of 'em come running in. I'd start giving 'em special orders, what I wanted made up next. And that's what they like. They always like to know that the next job is sold. See, you check 'em in today and say, "Well, now I want you to make this kind of bracelet." Well, then they know that that order is sold, too. If you had a good silversmith, you'd rotate him, rings to bracelets to pins to earrings to necklaces. Then he's ready for rings again. So you could take his output and keep him employed all the time. So I had a lot of Indians that worked with me very closely, and with the large house, I brought in some inlay cutters from Zuni, and some silversmiths from west of <Gallup> that worked right in the place, and then some other Indians that buffed the jewelry. Everything was in the raw state and we had to polish everything. Now, everybody in the business just buys finished jewelry. The Indian has to do his own polishing. They all bought motors and polishing wheels and so forth. 

John D.: I carried the same system into Zuni, and I started dealing with second and third generations, from the same system that he started. A lot of times the grandmother would come in and say, "Now, I remember...." And then that was it, we had business. (original tape changed) 

Underhill: This is Tape 3, an interview with John Kennedy. Also present in the room are John's son, John, and Brad Cole of Northern Arizona University, and Karen Underhill of Northern Arizona University, Lew Steiger, and Pepper is being just a splendid dog. She's a great dog.

Before we go back to wholesaling, you were talking about <Canyon de Chelly> and "taking the road less traveled," which I would guess is indicative of your personality. (laughter) 

John W.: One spring a buyer had come down from Utah Parks Company at <Cedar City Utah>. They were the concessionaire/supplier for all the Union Pacific outlets at North Rim and Cedar Breaks and <Bryce Canyon>. 

John D.: And Zion. 

John W.: So I said, "Well, if you've got time on your hands, I'll take you to <Chinle>." So my wife and I took the two of 'em out and when we got to <Chinle>, we just drove up the canyon and it was March and there was lots of water comin' out of the canyon. Pretty soon we met this ranger and he wanted to know what we were doin', and I told him, and he said, "Well, we changed the rules. You're not allowed in the canyon without a guide." I said, "Oh, I didn't know that, I'll go back." So we went back to the visitors center and he came out laughing. He said, "My boss tells me you know more about the canyon than I do!" (laughter) And the superintendent then was Marvin Gillette [phonetic spelling]. His dad had been an old horse trader out of Mancos that used to come to Rock Springs. So Meredith gave me a guide permit, and I carried that for years. That permitted me to go up the canyon anytime. I never abused my privilege, and when he transferred, I turned in my card because I didn't want to be an embarrassment to the next superintendent. (chuckles) But that was quite an experience. 

John D.: We had that great trip that year. It was in 1964 when the Chamber of Commerce called down to the store and wanted to know if either one of us were going out on the rez, because the secretary of state from <Belgium> was in town. And I was going out, so they said, "Can you go?" and I said, "Sure." So we were out making our rounds, rugs and stuff like that, and I said, "I'll take you to <Canyon de Chelly>." I was driving a 1963 Impala and I stopped at the ranger station to tell them I was going into the canyon, and you have to drive about forty, fifty miles an hour, or you're just gonna sink in the sand. And they said, "Well, you know, it's rainin' up in the Chuskas, so you'd better be careful, 'cause a wall of water may come. We take off into the canyon and we're flyin', and pretty soon he's bouncin' around like a marble in a coffee can, and water's coming all over the place. We get up to White House Ruin and then up to Spider Rock, and then we turn and we high-tail it out. I tell him we gotta beat the flood water. And pretty soon he says, "Oh, man, you Americans! You really know how to live!" (laughter) They later came back with a film crew for about three months and they filmed all over the reservation for <Belgium> television. We got back, I was drivin' about a hundred miles an hour to get him back. In those days, if you were gonna be late for your plane, you could call and say, "I'm comin'!" They'd say, "Okay, we'll wait." And there were all these people sittin' around, "Where is he?!" And we're flying in, and we've got a carload of rugs, and it's so heavy that every time we hit a bump, sparks fly up from the bottom of the car and he was just havin' the time of his life. We get there, and they're holding up the plane, so we wheel into the parking lot.

We used to go in there all the time, and the backside, when you go down from <Sawmill>, is where Grandmother tells her story of spending the night when their car broke down. And we probably broke down there seven or eight times on that same stretch of road. We'd always get stuck, burn up a transmission. Sometimes we'd leave the car there. 

John W.: Fluid had dropped flat _______ clay. 

John D.: One night we left the car there, and there was Mom and a friend of mine, and we had a carload of rugs, and we burned up the transmission. It was in the winter, so pretty soon a stake truck came with a bunch of guys that had been cuttin' wood and drinkin' wine all day. And so we get on this load of wood to go down to La Font's to get a vehicle, and we left the gals in the car with the rugs. Pretty soon, we're riding on each side, figuring this truck's gonna roll over and one of us, we gotta jump off this truck. (laughter) We got down and got La Font's van and went back and picked up the gals and came home, and then went back and got the vehicle a couple of days later. But we did that four or five times on that same stretch. 

Underhill: You're jinxed! 

John D.: Yeah. And the thing that was remarkable was you could leave your vehicle there, everything in it, and go back in a day or two and get it, and everything was fine. Nowadays, in half an hour it'd be stripped. 

Underhill: How have you seen Navajo culture change over time? 

John W.: The main thing with the change in business was the credit situation, because the old-timers were gilt-edged--you didn't need a contract or anything. If they said they'd do something, they did it. Their word was good. But you've now gotten into the second and third generations of young fellows that tear up a pickup a week, and they just take the livestock and go get another, and the end result is that they broke most of the main stockmen. They just put 'em out of business, because they won't deny their kids anything. See, they just.... They say, "I've gotta have this," they give it to 'em. It had an awful impact. Now, they're highly dependent on government jobs and tribal jobs, because, see, when we were at Rock Springs in the twenties, the force at <Window Rock> was the agent, his secretary, and the chief of police. That was the staff at <Fort Defiance>. And now the tribal staff probably runs to 8,000 or 10,000 people. So that changes their economics a lot.

Then you have service industries like the Thriftway stations went in, and they hired Indian personnel everywhere, trained them in how to manage a store and handle the gas and the cash and so forth. They employed hundreds of people.

The tourist business has built up, too. It's a real factor when you consider <Canyon de Chelly> and <Monument Valley>--they're big drawing cards, tens of thousands of tourists. This has led to the motel business. There's now three big motels at <Chinle>. There's two at <Kayenta>, there's more at <Blanding>, and <Mexican Hat>. <Cameron>, of course, was always a trade center out there north of <Flagstaff>. There is still a big trade center. 

John D.: One of the big things, too, is when the DNA came in, in the sixties, and began to make people aware of the fact that they didn't have to keep their deals. And up to that point, a deal was a deal, you dealt with people, and all of a sudden the DNA came in and started saying, "You don't have to do this. Without a contract ..." and all the legalese that came in. And all of a sudden they can no longer come to town and buy a pickup on their good name like everybody else. They had to come in with 30 to 50 percent down, because the dealer couldn't go repossess on the reservation. And so the DNA put, in my opinion, a lot of things into their head about "you don't have to keep your deal." And up to that point, everybody kept their deal. 

Underhill: Where do you see the Navajo economy headed? 

John D.: They're dependent on the government. 

John W.: I told Peter MacDonald that he should make every effort to get into other interests, rather than government, because if anything ever happened to the money out of Washington, there'd be a total disaster for the Navajos. But they have gone the other route. Every time something comes up, they call Washington, they need some more money. They're so highly dependent on Washington funding, that it would be a real disaster if that was changed. 

John D.: In a lot of respects, a lot of 'em might have become agents for professional ball players. (chuckles) "I don't like this deal, so let's make another one." And they're constantly changing the deals, because of the government involvement in mineral rights and all this. Just like a ball player, they sign a long-term contract and a year later they want to renegotiate it. And I think it's all this outside influence that comes in and says, "Somebody's taking advantage," or something. It's really unfortunate, because they have become total wards of the state. 

Underhill: And how does Social Security income or welfare income play into all of this? 

John W.: That's quite a factor, because there's still a lot of 'em get railroad retirement checks--the people that work on the railroad part-time. Then there are some gas royalty checks from up in the <Kutz Canyon> area and around <Farmington>, <Shiprock>.

Then they had their welfare checks, and that got to be a big factor--women with a lot of children and no man in the house. So that money flow is a big factor in the Indian country. 

John D.: That's what got Peter MacDonald in office, 'cause he was the head of the Office of Navajo Economic Opportunity, and his name was on the check. Really! People didn't know Peter MacDonald except he signed that ONEO check, and the next thing you know, he's chairman, because everybody knew who Peter MacDonald was. It was a government program that got him into office. Everybody got an ONEO check. 

Underhill: And what do you think of the Navajo political system as it stands? 

John W.: They've had their problems. The Indian way is.... Well, they even exaggerate Clinton's activity. They take care of their own. They can't help it, you know. Well, it goes back to the large family working with an Indian trader. They constantly come in wanting something for other members of the family. If one of their workers is away working, if it's a railroad worker, or they're working for a store someplace, the rest of the family just hounds 'em to death for help. They've gotta have money or they've gotta have groceries or something. This is very prevalent in all of their thinking. I had it with the Zuni. We had a young woman that worked for my wife for fourteen years, and she was just like one of the family, and she thought the world of Mrs. Kennedy. And one time when one of the medicine men, one of the hataa»iis, got after [her], said, "You're gettin' too close to the white people, you've gotta leave." And she cried and said she had to go back to the village, and we didn't see her then for another fourteen years. She stayed clear away. The Indians are that way. They put the finger on anyone that's doing well. 

John D.: I have an interesting situation. When Albert Hale was Peterson Zah's aide, they knew that something had been going on with the Navajo Arts and Crafts Enterprise through MacDonald. And so I was retained to go in and basically audit the inventory. They were very concerned about the ethics of everything, and I've known Albert for years, and the next thing you know, it's his turn. It just keeps repeating itself. I would have bet anything that Albert would have been the great savior for the Navajo people. 

John W.: They take care of their own. The elders force 'em into this situation. 

Underhill: How many Navajo employees have you had over the years? 

John W.: Oh, how many sheepherders are on the reservation? (laughter) Well, basically we financed hundreds of 'em in production. We would advance 'em the silver and turquoise and materials to make jewelry, and then they would pay with the finished product. The difference was theirs for their labor. So they weren't on an employee's schedule. There at <Gallup> at one time we had about forty people there at the store at one time. 

John D.: We had eighty-two. 

John W.: About a third white, a third Zuni, and a third Navajo--something like that. Down through the years, with a lot of projects that come along, you always called on some of the Indians with the know-how to do the job, whether it's carpentry work or building work or one thing and another. 

John D.: You know, there's also a part of 'em that I trace back to the mythology of the coyote stealing the fire from the fire god. For necessity, theft is acceptable. And that's another problem, is that if it's for necessity, for the family, theft is not a problem, because that's how the world was lit, because the coyote stole the fire. 

John W.: The crime is in being caught. 

Underhill: Is the same true of telling a lie? It's not a problem unless you're caught? 

John W.: We hear a lot about that these days. (laughter) 

Underhill: Bill [Clinton] must be more Navajo than we know, huh? (laughter) 

John D.: Dad used to say that you're sitting there and you're doing your work and everything else, and somebody comes in the store--and I think this is something you picked up from Granddad--somebody'll come into the store and they'll hang around for hours, just sitting there. And they're waiting 'til you're at the very busiest, and then they come up with a proposal that they've been thinking about for a month, and you have to make a decision in about two seconds. (laughter) That's very characteristic. 

John W.: You talk about stealing. I think of the time there at Rock Springs. Let's see, no, wait, it was the fellow that had the trading post up at Top of the World. His brother was a big rancher out there in the Seven Lakes district. What the dickens was their name? Anyhow, he had a case of Del Monte raisins--they come in fifteen-ounce packages, but in the summertime they get buggy in the warm climate. So he had put these raisins back in the warehouse and was gonna turn 'em back to the wholesaler to see if he could get credit, 'cause the wholesaler used to take labels and take 'em back to the supplier, get credit. He put the raisins in the warehouse, but he had a lot of women coming in that were weaving, and he had weaving wool back there. So they would go back and fill their sack with wool and stuff a package of raisins in the sack and come out. Of course they had to weigh the wool to determine the price, so he ended up selling all of these stolen raisins. (laughter) 

Underhill: How would you describe the Navajo sense of humor? 

John W.: Oh, I think all the Indian people like to have fun and joke. I know when I was working with them, whether it was dipping sheep or building a dam or trading, they all liked to have fun and joke and try to make you the brunt of their stories and jokes, you know. They liked to be around happy people. Zunis and Navajos won't stay around anyone that's gruff or ill- mannered very long. They just won't have anything to do with 'em. They like to be with people that are fun- loving and friendly and so forth. 

John D.: You know, one of the things he taught me early on is that most of our successful business dealings are always with the women--primarily because their role has never changed. They're not hunters, they don't have ceremonies, they've got to take care of the family, and don't ever deal with them without giving them a moment of laughter, because that may be the only laughter they get all day. That was something that we both--I mean, I learned it from him, and you always give 'em a chance to laugh sometime when you're dealing with 'em. 

Underhill: And in the posts, were women primarily doing the buying when people would come in for supplies? 

John W.: Well, they bring in their wool and determine what they have coming after clearing their account. And then they tell the women to start ordering things. Of course that's when all the work was done over a counter, and they'd point to a can of peaches, and then they want to go to buy some velveteen, and then they want to buy some hardware or something. It was after the women filled their lists, then the men might buy something they needed--some barbed wire or a rope or a bridle or something like that. And see, basically the women owned the stock. The man is the head of the family, but the women owned the stock, and they had the final say-so on sales of stock, wool, and sheep and so forth. 

Underhill: Did women ever have a separate account for, for instance, a rug or something that they had made? 

John W.: We did that at Zuni and in <Gallup> in later years, 'cause we dealt with a lot of 'em as individuals, and had separate accounts for all of 'em. In fact, we probably had more women's accounts than we had men's accounts. The main thing you learn about the Indians, the women are the workers. (laughter) 

Underhill: Now, why do you think <Gallup> was such a mecca for Indian trade, as opposed to other border towns? 

John W.: Geographically, it came about with the building of the railroad. That was 1884, <Gallup>. <Fort Defiance> I think was built in 1881. <Fort Wingate> prior to that. And it was the Army traffic, Wingate to <Fort Defiance>, to control the activities of the Indians. And this was all by the way of <Gallup>. And incidentally, at Rock Springs there was a big bluff there at the springs, and there were all kinds of calvary inscriptions on that bluff. The oldest one was 1858, I think. But the calvary from Wingate would make that a stop, because of this spring, on their way to <Fort Defiance>, 'cause it was a two-day ride, Wingate to Rock Springs, Rock Springs to <Fort Defiance>. And the thing to remember in all the activity in the Southwest, everything is built around a waterhole, a supply of water--either a stream or a wash or a well or a spring-- and that's how all of the posts were located throughout the Indian country. They first had to find water, and then they'd develop a post. The same way with the settling of all the communities in <New Mexico> and <Arizona>. It was all dependent on water. 

John D.: You know, also <Gallup> didn't have--you know, <Farmington> had gas and oil--<Gallup> just had the Indian trade. People in <Gallup> always have appreciated the Indian business, unlike a lot of other border towns. They'll talk it down and stuff like this, but <Gallup> is built around the Indian trade. 

John W.: And the main wholesale business was out of <Gallup>--the Ilfeld Company and Gross Kelly. They did have A. B. Schuster, Holbrook, and Babbitt Brothers in <Flagstaff>. But <Gallup> was the main supply point. Even in the thirties we would sell a lot of hardware out there at <Gray Mountain> and <Cameron>, clear up to <Shonto> and that country, because we had the inventory for it. But the main road into the Indian country was the road by way of <Fort Defiance> and <St. Michaels> and on to <Ganado> and down to <Chinle>. So all that traffic was funnelled into <Gallup>. And in the early days, when <Fort Defiance> was established, all the freighting was done from <Manuelita>, west of <Gallup>, because they went up <Manuelita> Canyon--the <Fort Defiance> area was a shorter haul than working from <Gallup>. But <Gallup> later became established because of the supply and the facilities and one thing and another. And then the coal mines, with the fuel supply for the railroad--that created that activity. But it was a trade center for the heart of the Indian country. Even people down at Fort Apache, White River Arizona, used to come into <Gallup> and trade with us. They bought their hardware and dry goods there. I know one year I delivered several loads of canned goods to the Indian agency at White River on a government bid. So it was quite a distribution point. 

Underhill: What would you see as the differences between the country trader, having lived that life, and then the folks who were based in <Gallup>? 

John W.: Well, the country trader had to be or have access to everything the Indian wanted. If the Indian come in and said he had to have a singletree for his wagon, if the trader didn't have it, he got it from his wholesaler. The city merchants are more or less specialized. They trade groceries and trade dry goods. They're just trading for rugs or jewelry. The town stores aren't active in livestock or pelts at all. See, the pelt business used to be a big factor. When I was at the Gallup Mercantile, I had charge of the hide and pelt department. I would periodically send 20,000- pound loads of sheep pelts to a wool puller in <Los Angeles>. And about once a year I'd sell a carload of goat skins to leather people in <Philadelphia>. And then you always accumulate a lot of cow hides, and they went wherever the play was--to <Texas> or back East, wherever they wanted the leather. But at one time, I kept a man out full-time with a truck pickin' up hides and pelts all over the reservation. It was just a separate business. 

John D.: There was also a big change in the seventies when the Indian jewelry boom came, and suddenly anybody who handled Indian jewelry was an Indian trader. (laughter) And so everything totally changed. Now everybody's an Indian trader because they handle Indian jewelry. Before, that was somebody that was working with the Indians. Now, if you handle jewelry, you're considered an Indian trader. 

Underhill: And what caused that jewelry boom? 

John D.: Fashion. 

John W.: Yeah, just a pent-up demand that started with World War II when all domestic production was funnelled into war production. But the Indians were granted a silver allotment, so they could make jewelry. So suddenly every department store in the East was out west buying jewelry, because they couldn't buy jewelry in <Europe> or anyplace else. So that changed the whole traffic on Indian product. Since then, it built up a demand. There are a lot of people collecting name jewelry, name rugs, name pottery, name baskets. A lot of major collections which later went into great auctions or into museum collections, and that became quite a fad for people to collect stuff, see. Yeah, at times you wonder if anything is ever sold, if it all just goes into collections! (laughter) We've had occasion the last two years to liquidate about five different collections. People suddenly realize at this stage of their life they'd better sell stuff. They'll bring it down here and I send word out to my outlets and as they buy things then I remit to the owner and take a fee for selling it. 

Underhill: What do you think the future of Indian arts and crafts is at the moment, with the influx of Asian forgeries? 

John W.: It really got hurt the last two years, badly wounded. Some of those <Gallup> wholesalers that were doing $6 million a year are doing $1.5 million now. 

John D.: If that. 

John W.: Yeah, terribly. It just destroyed the business. And a lot of it was that Arab influence that came into <Gallup>. Then they brought in Philippine jewelry and mingled everything together. Nobody knows whether they're buying anything authentic or not, and the end result is--well, I think you had the fellow on the noon show.... 

John D.: Paul Harvey. 

John W.: Paul Harvey. He made an announcement two or three years ago that Indian arts and crafts were no longer a sound investment. And see, at one time, there were periodic articles in the Wall Street Journal that "you'd better buy rugs," or "you'd better buy good silverwork," or this or that. So it had all America buying anything of quality. And suddenly they all got a chill the last two years. To go out and sell Indian goods today is walking in mud. It's a real chore because people are just buying what necessities they have to have to maintain a working inventory. 

John D.: The other thing that is really significant is in the eighties, our disposable income was about 12 percent, and now it's down below 2 percent. And so there's only so much to go around, so of course we're going more in debt. There's a society on plastic. For example, Yellowstone, for years I used to--I always knew there was only gonna be 3 million people that come. You can't increase your business by having 4 million people come, because all they can handle is 3 million. So you have to sell 3 million people more stuff. And so for years our goal was to increase our average unit sale. Over a period of time, we went from $11 to $23 average unit sale. When disposable income began to drop, so did the unit sale. And suddenly.... I think that's been the biggest impact. By the time we pay for our taxes and our services, and everything else, there just isn't a lot of money left--fun money. I think that's had the biggest impact on the business, is disposable income. 

Cole: How does one find somebody that doesn't know anything about Indian art, wants to buy an authentic piece of Indian art or a rug? How do they go about it? 

John W.: It depends on the selling job that a few of us do. (laughter) We've always handled the authentic product, and that's all we stay with. Consequently, we have quite a few people refer other people to us. I had a woman up from <Mississippi> recently, and she had a chief rug to sell. Now, you can imagine a chief rug in <Mississippi>. Well, she was an antique furniture dealer, and buying an estate collection, she had acquired this rug. She had no idea what it was or what it was worth, but people told her she'd better bring it to me and find out. Someone had told her it was worth $1,200. Well, we sold it recently for $2,750. I just got the check yesterday, and I've got to send her word for Christmas. (laughter) 

John D.: That also was the premise for starting the Indian Arts and Crafts Association, was to develop a network where people could go and know that they would have honest representation. 

Cole: When they were using the UI.A.stamps, did they actually--did you insist that they be used on every piece of jewelry, or was it the early work? 

John W.: That was one of the handicaps. They tried to. They could put it on the back of a naja on a necklace, or on a big pin, or on a bracelet, but you couldn't put it in a ring, unless it was a massive man's ring or something like that. That was the big headache with that stamp, was to be able to apply it. A lot of times the producer didn't have the stamp, and once you set turquoise in jewelry, you can't very well stamp that thing with a chisel stamp later on. There were several weaknesses to the system. 

John D.: When we founded the Indian Arts and Crafts Association, there was a big move for hallmarking, and that still comes up a lot, we should hallmark. And the position that I took all through the founding was that the other people should hallmark, because it's an inconvenience, it's an expense, and who wants to hallmark that stuff? Where the authentic, it would be desirable to hallmark it. I can take a sweatshop in downtown L.A.[<Los Angeles>] and hallmark stuff, and so it didn't do any good. I always remember Sam Begay. For years we used to say--Sam was one of the best Navajo silversmiths ever, and he worked in our shop. He made this beautiful cast jewelry, and [we'd say], "Sam, this stuff needs a hallmark." Of course he spoke very little English, and he never understood, never understood. After about ten years, Sam finally comes up with a stamp and it was quarter-inch letters that said "S.B." (laughter) And boy, I mean, he would just get there, and he'd go wham! and he'd hit that thing. He said, "Okay, you want a hallmark? There's a hallmark." And that was a real lesson in hallmarking. 

John W.: See, this Indian Arts and Crafts Association, John had been with General Foods for five years and he wanted to come back to the Indian business and to the Southwest. So he came into the business at <Gallup> and he spent two years calling all these customers and dealers we had, and explaining why an association would work. And he finally got about sixty or a hundred of 'em and they formed this association, and he served as president the first two years. And here twenty-seven years later, the youngest daughter is president. The whole deal was to promote the sale of authentic arts and crafts, and proper selling technique, not handin' people a string of B.S. like a car dealer would (chuckles) but to sell on an authentic basis. 

John D.: You know, it also came about because of the lack of organization _______ from UI.A. A lot of people said, "Well, let's just use the Indian Traders Association." But then there was the problem of registering and the fact that the Traders Association had gotten out of the arts and crafts business, and had become in later years just a social organization, after they got done fighting the regulations. 

John W.: The reservation traders were sheep, wool, and [plunket?] traders. 

John D.: And they weren't interested in arts and crafts, so we had to change everything around and look at it from a whole different perspective, and take all the different facets of the business. It was very difficult, because the business is very "jaundiced," if you will, in that, "Well, you know, this is a great idea, but if he's in it, I'm not, 'cause he's a crook." (laughter) It's like Dad said, everybody used to be neighbors. And I remember in <Gallup> in the late sixties, when there were twelve people in the Yellow Pages in the wholesale Indian business, and in 1972, there were 400, and everybody was competitors. Before that, there was a very definite standard. There were certain price breaks, everybody took the basic markup, and then it just became totally bastardized--changed it forever. 

Cole: You mentioned the social aspect of UI.A. Were you ever involved? What were their annual meetings like? 

John W.: They would have an annual meeting at <Farmington> or <Flagstaff> or <Gallup>. It was a big bash, a dinner meeting with a dance afterwards. It was some good associations, and then there were always a few of those traders that had been out there dry for a long time that tried to drink it all in one session. (laughter) They had good meetings. 

Cole: We've heard a story that we've never been able to verify that occasionally a trader would lose a trading post in a poker game in <Gallup>. Is there any validity to that? 

John W.: Well, I heard of one. You know Larry Lee liked to play poker, and he played with those fellows down at <Holbrook>--Armond Ortega and the fellow that has the highway stores. 

John D.: Geronimo. 

John W.: Hampton is his name? 

John D.: No, has Geronimo. 

John W.: Yeah. Several of those fellows. They had Larry in a game one night and he kept losing, and finally he bet the <Klagetoh> store and lost. Of course his older brother, Lester Lee, had Steamboat Trading, and he had an interest in <Klagetoh>. He got in the car the next day and went to those fellows and said, "Well, look, I'll pay you so much, and that's it. You don't get <Klagetoh>." (laughter) 

John D.: In <Gallup> there's a lot of places that have been shuffled around in poker games. Not trading posts, but restaurants and night clubs and stuff. There's one in <Gallup> that used to change hands about every two months--on Saturday. (laughter) And sometimes about three months later it'd come back to the original guy. There's big-time poker in <Gallup>. There's guys over there that make their livin' playin' poker. You don't see that a lot, except in Vegas and stuff, or Gardenia [phonetic spelling] or somethin', but in <Gallup> there's guys playin' poker for a livin'. 

Underhill: Now when you had your wholesale business, who among your salesmen stand out in your mind? Any salesmen that worked for you that you were particularly fond of? 

John W.: We had Walt and Chris Monroe. These were a man and wife team. He was headquartered in <Englewood Colorado>, and handled <Montana>, <Wyoming>, <Colorado>, eastern <Utah>, and northern <New Mexico>. As he came to <Gallup> for supply, he could call on the stores here--<Raton> and on up the line. Walt worked for us for twenty-six years, a very loyal salesman. He had been selling knickknacks when I hired him. A cousin of mine from <Denver>--I was looking for a salesman, and he recommended Walt. We had to educate him totally, 'cause he had no idea about Indian goods. His wife was a real sincere woman, and they got to where they established a fine relationship with all their accounts. They kept track of the birthdays and anniversaries and so forth. They were very effective and had a good healthy territory.

The couple that had <Arizona>, he was an old-time retail operator, and knew a lot of the people in the business, and was just an affable personality. He got along very well out in the <Arizona>-<California> territory.

Then I hired a fellow that had been in the insurance business for several years, and he came to me and he said, "I've seen insurance tear up countless young fellows, and I want to get into this Indian business." So I started him out up in the northwest, which is a sure way to starve a fellow to death, but he was a poker player, so whenever he couldn't make any money selling Indian goods, he'd go get a poker game. Then eventually we sent him east, and then he developed-- after he left us--he developed quite a clientele with all the major museums in the East, in their gift shops. He passed away two or three years ago, but his widow took a full load of pottery back last month to Peabody Museum in <Boston>, and she came over here and said, "They need name pottery from the forties and fifties." So I gave her a load of stuff, and she did very well with it. She called me the day before yesterday. She's back now and wants to come over and settle. But he was in the insurance business, he'd learned to sell, and he knew every trick a salesman could know, I think-- how to get next to people and how to open 'em up and how to finally get a program started. He was very effective. He was a good one. 

Underhill: And what was his name? 

John W.: Wayne Bailey. Big fellow, weighed about 280 pounds. 

John D.: He also spent a year in <Reno>, waiting to get a divorce, so he lived in <Reno> so he could establish residence. When that year was up, he probably knew more about all Indians than anybody I ever met in my life. He just read constantly for a year, and he knew everything there was to know about virtually every tribe in North America. 

John W.: He became very effective in judging baskets--the Washoe and the Pomo and the northwest baskets. He became expert at that, and got to dealing in 'em very effectively, too.

But those were the key salesmen. Most of the others were part-time people that had other businesses, or they might be in a business where they were on the road and they would take our jewelry on a supplemental basis.

Another interesting experience that evolved from the Indian business, a fellow in the.... Oh.... In the Sioux deal. 

John D.: Up in <Montana>? 

John W.: Our detective. 

John D.: Oh, yeah, yeah, Nando. 

John W.: Nando! He had been with the Wildlife Service and they were trying to find out what happened to all the goods that were stolen at Wounded Knee. So I gave him a case of jewelry and a lot of our letterheads and order forms and he was working under an alias, but the idea was if anyone called in and said, "Does this man work for you?" he said, "Yeah, he's one of our salesmen." Well, he uncovered most of the stuff that was taken. He would get to dealing with these Indian dealers that had beadwork or leatherwork, and gain their confidence, and finally they'd take him in the back room to show him this new merchandise they had.

Then the next deal he got into was in <Alaska>. The natives were goin' along in kayaks and killing these walruses to get their tusks for ivory. They'd kill twenty-five or thirty at a time, and just leave the carcasses to waste. So I gave one of their agents a case of fetishes, and got him calling up there to locate ivory or carvers that could do this kind of work. They ended up indicting twenty-some people in that deal. They used our jewelry as a front. 

John D.: That's when they were taking chain saws, they'd just cut the head off the walrus.

