FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Katharine Bartlett

Interview number NAU.OH.28.50

 

Katharine Bartlett, who has worked with the Museum of Northern Arizona since 1930. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on June 2 and 3, 1976. Transcribed April 1, 1997. Transcriber: Nancy Warden.

 

KRISTINE PENNANCE: This is an interview with Katharine Bartlett, who is the Museum, a librarian at the Museum of Northern Arizona. She joined the Museum staff in 1930. The interview is being conducted on June 2, 1976 at the Museum's library by Kristine Prennace, representing the Flagstaff City/Coconino County Public Library. Transcribed April 1, 1997. Transcriber: Nancy Warden.

(First part did not record, it is as follows:



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Where were you born?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: In <Denver>… )



KATHARINE BARTLETT: ... Parents had come there to live just three or four years before I was born. My father was the president of the Victor-American Fuel Company there, a coal company. And, my mother, who had visited an uncle in <Denver>, came from <Milwaukee>. This doesn't make very good sense.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Oh, you're fine. What were there names?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: My father's name was George Frederick Bartlett, and my mother's name was Louise, “Leidien” (?).



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Where did you go to school, for your grammar school?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: I went to a public school, called Steven's School in <Denver>. This was about ten blocks away from our home.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Where was your home, the address?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh! 830 Vine Street and it was just very close to Cheeseman (?) Park, which was a large and beautiful park, nowadays. I remember that my father said that when our house was built, that from the east edge of Cheeseman (?) Park, all the way to <Nebraska> was just prairie. There was strictly nothing there at all, and just a few streets were just beginning to be developed with houses. And ah, it's quite astonishing when you see it now, because there are probably five or ten miles of houses, half way to <Nebraska>. (Both laugh). After I left the Steven's School, I went to Junior High School. And, ah, I can't even remember the name of the junior high at the moment. But then, the following year, I went to Maury (?) Junior High School, which was built as a junior high school. And, it had a swimming pool in it, and I think it was probably the first school in <Denver> with a swimming pool. And, ah, that was really a great luxury. Everybody was very proud of it. And we did learn to swim, too. And after that, I went to the East Denver High School, which was a very large and very ancient building. It really… in the downtown section of <Denver> and the year that I graduated was the last year that that school was used. It was torn down, and the new post office was built on that property.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Did you have any brothers or sisters?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes. I had one sister, Mary Louise. And, she went to the same schools and all. And, she married and had lived in the east ever since, principally in <New Jersey>.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Is she older or younger?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: She's younger. She’s four years younger.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Well…



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Go ahead.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Now, I was just going to ask you what the expectations of your parents were for your schooling, the early schooling.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Hmm.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Was there a lot of pressure put on you to do well, or…?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: No, I don't think so, but I think that they expected us to do our best. Ah, no fooling around the school, you know. And, I think we both did fairly well. Not anything world shattering, but, oh, well enough. Well, after graduating from high school, or perhaps about the time that I graduated from high school, my father had some financial problems. And, they had always planned that I should go to college in the East, but, because of the financial reverses, I went to the University of Denver. And, my sister did, too. And, we lived at home, and commuted to the college, which was then really quite a long way from our home. We usually went on the streetcar. They had streetcars in those days. And, it was rather interesting, because many of the university students worked on the streetcars as conductors and motormen and all that, so…. We commuted every day back and forth. It was really grim when we had eight o'clock classes, and we had to leave home by at least seven o'clock to get there, especially bad in wintertime, I think. I don't remember that with pleasure.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Were you always interested in anthropology, when you started?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Ah, no, I wasn't. When I first went to the University, I was going to major in Latin. And, so I took Latin the first year I was there, after having had it in high school, I guess for four years. And, I thought, "my goodness, this is a terribly dull and ancient subject, why am I getting involved in this"? And, it was becoming more and more difficult, too, because we were reading poetry and all sorts of things of that nature which is really hard in a foreign language. So, I gave it up at that point. And, I majored in history and French and anthropology. And, so, I really had three majors.

 

I became interested in anthropology through the study of French, curiously enough. The professor of French, he wasn't the only professor, but one of a few, I should say. He was a Frenchman, and had come to this country, oh some time before World War I, and he had also become very interested in anthropology and had studied a great deal in <Europe>, the Paleolithic cultures in <France> and in England, particularly. And, I think that he was an extremely good teacher. He inspired students to, so that they really wanted to go out and do something great, you know, in anthropology or even in French. (Both laugh). But, very gradually, he gave up teaching French and devoted his energies entirely to various phases of anthropology. I don't believe that he was, perhaps, such a great researcher himself, but really such an excellent teacher. So, I took all the courses in anthropology that were available all the time that I was in college. And, the last year I was there, when I was a senior, I was his assistant.

 

And then the following year, I got a master’s degree, and I continued the assistantship through that year, too. And, that was very interesting, and I was quite well acquainted with him, of course, and with his research, and met people that he knew, and went to some scientific meetings. Well that was a lot of fun, really.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: What was the emphasis in Anthropology, at that time?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, he really gave courses in just about every phase of anthropology that you could think of. I mean, American Indian, present day Indians, and the archeology of North and <South America>, and <Europe> and <Asia> and <Africa>. And, political anthropology, in which I was really quite interested. He didn't teach linguistics as it is taught today, I'm sure, in spite of the fact that he was quite a good linguist, himself. I guess he taught a great many courses on modern people; I mean peoples of <Africa> and <South America> and <North America>, probably not in the detail that's given at the present time.

Well, why don't we just stop this for a minute?

 

I think I was partly inspired to go into the field of archeology, because one winter a series of lectures was given in <Denver>, to which we went, on excavations in Yucatan. Dr. Sirvanus Morley, who was the Mayan authority, came to <Denver> and gave several lectures showing their explorations at <Chichen Itza> in Yucatan, and the life of the camp and the various ruins that they were excavating. This was financed by the Carnegie Institution, I believe, at that time. And, it was so elegant, that I remember that we laughed, because they even had their own china for their camp, and that seemed to me so luxurious. I'd never seen another excavation that had its own china. Apache (?) didn't have china at all. It probably just had tin cups and tin plates, you know.

 

So, after I graduated, or, well, during the last two or three years that I was going to the University of <Denver>, Dr. Reynault (?) was quite active in the Colorado-Wyoming Academy of Science and the Southwest Division of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. And both these groups had held annual meetings. The Colorado-Wyoming Academy of Science was restricted, of course, to the two states, and, met at different universities. And, the Southwest Division of the American Association met at different universities or different cities in <New Mexico>, <Arizona>, <Colorado>; possibly <El Paso>. And, I went with Dr. Reynaud to a number of these meetings. And, he encouraged students, like me, to give papers at these meetings, which was very good experience and very, very interesting, I think. I doubt if the papers were great contributions to science, but, at least, he made us feel as if we were doing something really splendid, you see. In the course of these meetings, I met a number of Southwestern archaeologists, people from <Santa Fe> and University of New Mexico, and the University of Arizona, and also Dr. and Mrs. Colton from the Museum of Northern Arizona. The Museum had just been established, and they had really just come to <Arizona> to live. And they were interested in becoming acquainted with archaeologists and other scientists in the Southwest. So, I believe that was probably the reason that they were attending meetings. And, in that way, I happened to meet them.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: While you were still in school.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: While I was still in school, yes. And then, following one meeting, I believe, when I was a senior, the meeting was in <Tucson>. Dr. and Mrs. Colton invited Dr. Reynaud, and me, and Dr. Harry Merra (?), who was with the Laboratory of Anthropology, in <Santa Fe>, to drive with them from <Tucson> to <Flagstaff>, following one of these science meetings. And, that was a very interesting trip. My first visit to <Arizona>, really. So that, oh, I managed to see quite a few sites. I believe we came by <Roosevelt Lake> and up through <Pine> and <Payson> to <Flagstaff>. It was a long trip, too.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: How long did it take?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: A long day's trip.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Oh, it just took a day?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: I believe so. I believe so. And, ah, Dr. and Mrs. Colton had just finished building their home here, and it was very pleasant to see the new house and visit them for a couple of days before going back to <Denver>. And then, the following year, after I had my master’s degree, they invited me to come to the Museum to work, which was really an honor and a privilege. I spent all the rest of my life doing that.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Before we get into the Museum, can we talk about your membership in other professional societies and kind of finish up…?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh yes. Well, I was a charter member of the Colorado-Wyoming Academy of Science, which was formed during the time that I was in college. And then subsequently, I was a charter member of the Arizona Academy of Science, which wasn't established until, oh probably, twenty years after that time. I was a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, beginning about 1930, I guess. And, the American Anthropological Association, and I, subsequently, became a fellow of that society. Then, I was a charter member of the Society for American Archeology, to which I still belong. And, the Special Libraries Association, and the Western, Western History Society, no… I don't think that's the right term… Western, I don't _______. Well, I guess I'll have to deal with that, I can't think what the real, proper name was. And, I think that's, that's about covers it.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: That's a lot. And then you were included in the WHO'S WHO OF AMERICAN WOMEN, about when was that?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, when the first edition came out, I don't really remember when that was, but probably in about, maybe in the 1950s, and I have been in the subsequent editions. I'm also in the DIRECORY OF AMERICAN SCHOLARS, under "historical students", "professors", whatever they are. Professors of history, most of them are historians.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: How, were you nominated for these, or how do you get your name into those (?)?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: I really don't know. I don't know. I suppose that the DIRECTORY OF AMERICAN WOMEN, the list was probably taken, say, from the American Anthropological Association list, or something like that, you see. I don't really know how they get the names.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: They just appeared.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Somehow.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Uh huh. Then, you worked on, with the Rockerfeller grant, on an internship with the Brooklyn Museum?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh yes that’s right. That was after I had been at the Museum in <Flagstaff>, here, for about, oh let's see, about six or seven years, I think. And, I was really very interested in museum… ah, presentations of exhibits and things like that. And, I thought that this would be a very interesting thing to find out more about. And, the Rockerfeller Foundation, in <New York>, gave six internships at the Brooklyn Museum, two different years. And, I was there during the first year. There were three men and three women who took part in this, under the direction of Philip Youtz. I don't know what his background was, but he became very interested in museums at sometime about then, and spent some time at the… I believe the Philadelphia Art Museum. And he thought that the museum was kind of remote from most people, you see. So, he persuaded them to establish a small art gallery in a store or a shopping center, I think it really was. And, this turned out to be very successful. They had just thousands of people visiting this little gallery or little museum branch, whatever you want to call it. And ah, that led him on to more and more interests, you see, in museums, and, ah, presentation of exhibits in an interesting kind of way. And, he was very busily engaged in redoing the Brooklyn Museum. And, persuaded the Rockerfeller Foundation to finance this program with some students of museums. I think this is relatively common, at the present time, but it wasn't at the time I went to <Brooklyn>.

 

The fellowship was for a year, and they paid us a very nice salary, so that we could live properly. And, they wanted us to see all the sights of <New York> and go to the theater, and go to the opera, and travel around, and get the most possible out of it. In the course of this year, we went to the meeting of the American Association of Museums, which was held in <New Orleans>. And, that was a very pleasant experience. The only time I’ve had ever been there.

 

And then, our examination or, like whatever you want to call it, was to put on a large exhibition. So, it turned out that a number of these people were interested in archeology, and the other was interested in Asiatic ceramics, so we finally decided to put on an exhibition of ceramics. You know it was called the "Art and Technique of Ceramics". And, we (coughs) we went all around <New York> and all over the East, as a matter of fact, and borrowed pottery, prehistoric and recent, from various museums and put it together as an exhibition. And, it was really quite a…

 

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGINNING TAPE 1, SIDE 2



KATHARINE BARTLETT: And the museum held a reception when it opened, and that was very exciting, of course. And about the very next day, we got on the steam ship "Britannic" and went to <Europe> for six weeks to visit European museums, especially new and modern museums. Quite a number had opened within probably the previous five years, or something of that nature.

 

So, Mr. Youtz laid out a schedule for us and said go to <Europe> and visit these, and so we did. And that was really a lot of fun. So, I jokingly said many times since, " My feet, will never be the same!" Oh, we walked miles. And, the thing that the museum people always consider is "museum fatigue". But, we certainly had it, that summer. But, it was really a wonderful opportunity, of course, 'Cause most of the people in this course were ah, oh, maybe in their late twenties or early thirties. And, only one of them had previously been to <Europe>. And, several of them were people like myself who always lived in the interior of the <United States>, and hadn't really enjoyed the culture of large cities like <New York> and <Washington> and <Paris> and <London>, and that sort of thing. So, we had to schedule to visit certain, mostly fairly large cities. And we visited the museums that Mr. Youtz suggested to us, of course, which were new ones. But then, we also went to other ones that were really ancient art collections and, oh palaces, you know, for royal collections and all different kinds. We didn't see very much else, but, except as we went by on the train or on the bus or something.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Was there tension in <Europe> at that time, getting ready for the war?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes, I was about to say that in western <Germany>, particularly, ah, the Nazis were very noticeable. And, they weren't at all interested in speaking English. And it gave us a kind of uncomfortable feeling, really. But, when we were away from that, from that particular area, everything was very nice. In eastern <Germany>, well, let's see, in <Berlin>, for instance. And ah, we went to <Dresden>, <Austria>, people were very friendly and nice. It seemed only the German west border area that, that things were really sort of touchy. We'd hear martial music, and look out the window and see that there was a parade going by, of goose-stepping soldiers, you know, with banners and things like that.

 

In the <Munich>, which was really one of the centers of the Nazi regime, I guess from the very beginning, there was a new art museum, which had just opened, I believe before we were there. It was a very beautiful building, in the park, with just a lovely view, with all glass on one whole side of the building, you know, so it looked out over this beautiful park like area. But, one of the things that entertained me most, was, there was kind of a grand staircase and halfway up on the landing, there was a large, enormous painting of Hitler riding a white horse, carrying a standard, a flag, in one hand; looked just like the paintings of Joan of Arc. This was the only thing I could think of. That was really very funny. You didn't dare laugh, because it was there, but when we got away, we really did. It was very amusing.

And we went to… we first went to England, then to <Belgium> and the <Netherlands>; then to <Berlin> and <Copenhagen>, which was wonderful, and back, south through <Germany> to <Dresden>, and then to <Munich>, and then back to <Paris>. And, I guess from <Paris> to the seaport, where we took the same boat back to <New York>. It was quite an experience, as I say. The Museum gave me a leave of absence for the entire year. So, it was nice to know that I had something to come back to when this was all over, you see.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: What was your first impression of the Museum of Northern Arizona, and the area?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, I thought the area was, was really beautiful. Having lived in <Colorado>, I was accustomed to mountains and to pine trees, and thought it was very nice to see the <San Francisco Peaks>, sort of getting something to look at especially. And, the forests, I thought, were wonderful. Such beautiful open forests as there are here, which are quite unlike the forests in <Colorado>, where the trees are so thick that you can't really get through, you know. But, here you can just almost go any place, because the trees are far apart.

 

The Museum was in the Flagstaff Women's Club Building, which was on Aspen and Humphreys Street, or near Humphreys. And, the Museum had a small room, which later became the "Arizona Collections Room," in that building when the public library later had it. And, when the entrance room, which had the charging desk, and things like that, later, when the library was there. And there were just these two rooms, you see.

 

And the Museum inherited a collection of prehistoric pottery from Father Fabre, who was the minister of the Catholic Church. I guess he was interested in ruins, and he had collected this pottery over the twenty or thirty years that he lived in <Flagstaff> here. And, the Women's Club had built this special small room, just to house his collection. So, it was really probably the first thing that the, the first collection that the Museum had. And, so it was sort of augmented, and ah, I think it was still shown in the same cases that had been in the Women's Club since it was built, which was about 1922, I think. So, the Museum was extremely small. So, it's really remarkable to see what it is today, how minute it was at that time.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: How large was the staff?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh, well, we had a secretary, who counted the number of visitors that came, and typed all the letters, and catalogued most of the material, and, I guess she just about did everything. And then, Lyndon Hargraves was the archeologist. And, he was… I think he was out excavating part of the time, and John McGregor, who was a tree ring student of Dr. Douglas', was working on tree ring material from ruins and increment borings from modern trees. And Charles Park was also there. He was a geologist. He was collecting material for geological exhibits. And he and Dr. Colton were also working on the geology of Sunset Crater. They were about to propose, or had proposed, that it should be made a National Monument. And they were working up a geological report on it and some of its special features. That was the staff.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: That was it. As Curator of Anthropology, what were your role… what was your role and your staff?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Ah, well, I guess I was… I did a lot of the cataloguing of the excavated materials. But, first summer we were excavating at Medicine Fork and Medicine Cave, which are out north of <Flagstaff> on the Highway 89, about, oh twenty, twenty miles from <Flagstaff>. All of this was really new to me, and it was new to the archeologist, too, because none of us had really had any experience to speak of. And, well, “matters of” cataloging, and things like that, were just not very specific in those days. And, I certainly hadn't had any experience in cataloging anything. I, I really don’t think that there was a very, very good catalogue. Well, Dr. Colton was the director, and he hadn't had any experience along this line either, so we were all sort of feeling our way and experimenting, I guess you might say.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Oh, what other facilities were used in the town before the library? Didn't they use like the old Monte, part of the Monte Vista Building?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, yes. A room or, I should say after the museum had been going two or three years. Dr. Byron Cummings, who was director of the Arizona State Museum, which was then housed, in the lower part of the stadium at <Tucson>, ah, had heard about some fossils, which had been found someplace near <Springerville>. And, he went to <Springerville>, and he excavated I think, a portion of an elephant. And, he communicated with Mr. Brady, Major Brady. He was about the same as, sort of a volunteer on the Museum staff, and really quite important in the early days. Dean Cummings wanted Major to go and look at these fossil beds. And ah, Major went down there and found some bones, that he was sure weren't part of the mammoth, or elephant. And I think that he got permission of the owner of the land to continue the excavation. Anyway, subsequently, it turned out to be the mylodont, the sloth, which is now in exhibit at the Museum. And, here was, poor Major Brady with all these huge bones, he had that place to lay them out. And a lot of them had to be repaired and reconstructed, almost. And he was going to put it together, you see, as an exhibit, which he finally did, but which didn't have enough space. At that time, the Depression was probably at its height, and the… one of the stores in the Monte Vista Building was not being used. And so they let the Museum use it. And, Major was reconstructing his mylodont in the Monte Vista. (Both laugh). In fact, I guess we had it up to about 1936, probably from about, maybe '33 to '36 or '32 to '36, something like that. And ah, because I remember that when we were moving to the new building out here on Ft. Valley Road, that they loaded this marladon (?), which was, by then was a mounted skeleton, in the Ford pickup, somehow. And, we have a photograph of it riding to the Museum in the back of the pickup. But it was already reconstructed and ah, when we moved over to the new building.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: What was the new building like at that time?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: The new building… let's see was the, the front entrance and the galleries on the left-hand side and the right-hand side, plus the area, which is now used as a special exhibition gallery. Actually that gallery was built first and was used for about a year for storage of specimens, because we were running out of space. By that time, we had the whole of the Women's Club Building, and we didn't have nearly enough room. With the excavations, the collections began to mount up, you see, especially large pieces of pottery. And you just had to have a place to store them. So, that, that section of building was first built, and all the archeological storage was moved there. And the exhibit were just the two galleries and the entrance hall. The walls surrounding the patio were built and sort of roofed over so that the garden and all could be completed, to make it look nice.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Who were some of the early donors, and what were some of the collections?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: One of the first ones that I can remember, was a… one, which was made my Mr. J. C. Clark, of <Flagstaff>. He was an employee in the Flagstaff Post Office, which was then a store on San Francisco Street, between <Santa Fe> and Aspen. He had been interested in archeology and ruins around <Flagstaff> for quite a long time. And perhaps because he was in the post office, I don't know he had been named as the custodian or superintendent of Wupatki National Monument. It had been set aside as a National Monument, but, I guess that people had been there, maybe knocking down the walls, and rebuilding walls and sort of messing the place up. So he was appointed custodian, that was the term that they used before the term "superintendent" was used for national monuments. And, it was a very difficult place to get to, because there was really no decent automobile road. One had to go down a hill near the Doney Crater, which was covered with deep volcanic ash. And people were forever getting stuck there. But anyway, Mr. Clark knew how to drive, I guess, and he managed to get back and forth to take a look at the ruins every once and awhile. And in the course, for a number of years, he had excavated some small parts of the ruin, and he had quite a collection of specimens from <Wupatki>. This would be frowned upon today, because superintendents don't excavate their ruins, but he had done a little work. And he had excavated some places protected from the weather on the… sort of, under the cliff overhang there where the main <Wupatki> ruin is. And there were a lot of cotton textiles and basketry materials, and all sorts of normally perishable things, which were preserved. And, that really made a most wonderful addition to the Museum's collection. I believe he had quite a bit of pottery, too, but that, of course, is not as unusual as the cotton textiles. And some of the textiles were really very unusual. And have subsequently been written up in the report on " Pueblo Textiles of Southwest".

 

Another collection that we got… don't remember the date exactly, but it belonged to Mrs. Helen Mead. And she had a large bungalow, a bungalow-type house at the west end of Meade Lane, sort of under Observatory Mesa, but midway between the Museum and <Flagstaff>, and up against the hill. And she had put a number of students through the University by having them excavate pottery and things for her. And the second floor of this house, which was quite a good size house, really and the second floor was large; and it was just filled with pottery and all sorts of things. And, fortunately, there was a young man who was studying archeology at the University, at that time. And he was able to remember quite a bit about the pieces that he had excavated, and provided us with some information about them. And she had also kept some notes of where they came from. So, that was really a pretty good addition to the collections. So, of course not as good as if the museums had excavated it, but it did have the advantage of being from this immediate area. She was the sister, I think, of a man who was the editor of the "Atlantic Monthly". Her full name was: Helen Ellerly (?) Sedgewick (?) Mead. And, I think, it was (?) someone named "Sedgewick", who was editor of the "Atlantic Monthly". She was, she was well connected, and she lived out here for, I suppose, twenty years. But, she had to sell her house and dispose of her collection and all, because she was moving to <California>, I guess for reasons…

 

END TAPE 1, SIDE 2, BEGINNING TAPE 2, SIDE 1



KRISTINE PENNANCE: We're still talking about the collections.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes, one of the collections, which the Museum had when I came, was from Medicine Cave, which is near Medicine Fork, which was being excavated at that time. I think Dr. Colton and Mr. Brady had excavated at Medicine Cave in about 19, maybe '28 or '29, something like that. And they found about five or six very large pre-historic storage jars, in the area in the back of this cave. Each one was covered with a lid. One had a bowl for a lid, and one had a stone lid, and one had a piece of wood for a lid, and one had a potsherd for a lid. Each one was covered, but a couple of the jars still contained kernels of corn and beans, still in their natural colors of yellow with, seems to me there were a few red and blue kernels of corn mixed in. I think the interior of the kernels had all been eaten away by insects, but the outer part of the kernels were still quite clearly colored. And there were also some sandals and a very interesting pipe, and some string. Oh yes, and the medicine pouch, which was how it came to be called "Medicine Cave", was a little tiny cloth pouch, tied up with a fiber cord. The diameter of the pouch was probably less than one inch. Inside, it had some, I think, some small pebbles, and I don't really remember what else. Ah, but it was a very interesting collection, and because of the cave, a lot of the materials had been protected from the weather so that unusual things remained. Oh, I know it was a medicine box that was how it came to be called "Medicine Cave". It was a stalk, or a part of a stalk of mescal about a foot long, which, in the center part had been hollowed out to make a little… like a box. And that was covered over with a piece of cotton cloth, I believe, and then tied around and around was a fiber string, in this little tiny pouch. And some feathers and various things were inside this little box. Apparently, this was a common way of getting the box, when you didn’t really have one. Because, other places in the Southwest, boxes made from mescal stalks had been found. And at Mesa Verde, there was one that was the exactly the same shape and all, but made out of pottery, an imitation mescal stalk.

 

Another collection, which, I think that Dr. Colton and someone else had found, it came from an area called "Picture Canyon", which is just east of <Flagstaff> a little way. And this was a collection of stone axes. And it seemed that the owner of the house, from which these were excavated, must have been a collector of axes, because there were about, oh, maybe ten or twelve stone axe heads, made of different materials. And, some very well made, some poorly made, but all in one collection in one house. Very curious!

 

Ah, a man who lived in <Flagstaff>, whose name was "Ed Toelle, T O E L L E (Tulley), was a dealer in old books and Navajo rugs and things like that. And, he went all over northern <Arizona> and southern <Utah>. And he bought rugs and books and things like that from pioneer families who had lived in these little towns for decades. And, he knew that Dr. Colton was interested in books (request that tape be turned off). (Tape resumes). Dr. Colton had become interested in Navajo rugs and old baskets and old Hopi blankets, ah, Hopi baskets and Hopi pottery, and all, when, oh I guess, when they had been visiting <Flagstaff> long before they came here to live. So, Mr. Toelle would come around every once in awhile with a large and very fabulous collection of beautiful old rugs and interesting old books and all sorts of things like that. And, Dr. Colton frequently got some of these really special things for the Museum. So, we acquired quite a collection of really nice textiles and some very important southwestern books on history and archeology and things, from Mr. Toelle's collection.

 

One of the interesting things was a scrapbook of clippings and a large collection of photographs, which Mr. Toelle purchased from the estate of a man, named "Joseph Fish" in Holbrook. Many, many years later, we discovered that Mr. Fish had been quite an historian, and had written a history of <Arizona>, which was purchased either at his death or perhaps prior to that time by the State Library and Archives in <Phoenix>. And all these photographs that we had turned out to be the illustrations for his manuscript on the history. So, about 1962, or something like that, why we gave all his photographs to the state archives, so that they could be with the manuscript. We discovered that they were even numbered the way they were supposed to appear in the book. But, we still have the scrapbook of clippings. I can't think of any more collections, right at this moment. You have some more questions?



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Yes, got a lot of them. Ah, we kind of started describing some of the people that were involved in the development of the Museum. And, maybe you can kind of give a real quick descriptions and characterize the people for us. You can start with Dr. Colton.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yeah, ah, Dr. Colton, who was the director of the Museum, acquired the position more by accident than intent. He was a professor of zoology at the University of <Pennsylvania>. And, he and his wife and son had come to <Flagstaff> many times. In fact, Dr. and Mrs. Colton came to <Flagstaff> on their honeymoon. They had met on a mountain climbing expedition in British Columbia. And, so when they were on their honeymoon, they came to <Flagstaff> to climb the <San Francisco Peaks>. Well, the mountains were hardly the same, but they enjoyed it very much, and they liked the area very much. So, they had subsequently come back to spend summers here, about every other summer from, oh about 1914, perhaps, on. One summer they went to <Maine>, and the next summer, they would come to <Arizona>. And, they took horseback trips or trips with a small wagon all over the reservation and all over northern <Arizona>. And then later when cars came along, they had a real… well they had a Model-T station wagon, which they said, they think maybe was the first one in <Arizona>. And, they went all over in that, camping and visiting.

 

So, at the time when the Museum started, they were really very familiar with the area and the, all the features which make it so interesting. They decided to move to <Arizona> in 1927 about, because of their son's health. He had very bad asthma in the East, and apparently, was missing school about three weeks out of every four, and he was really just miserable all the time. And, out here they noticed that he didn't have it. So, they decided to move. And, they bought the John Francis home, which is the same property that their later house was built on. They… I guess they moved in the early part of the summer. And, in December of that year, it was very, very cold, after the middle of December something. And, the chimney of the house caught fire, and the whole house burned down. It was a frame building, a bungalow style, very much like the Lockett house, which is on the road just below the Museum property down here. They went… I guess they lived in their, their guesthouse that winter. And the next summer they built themselves a house.

 

But Dr. Colton had a talk with Dr. Frank Lockwood, who was on the University of Arizona faculty. I think he was spending the summer here. And he was trying to find something to talk about to the Rotary Club, as I recall. And, they were talking over possible subjects, and Dr. Colton suggested that maybe he should talk about <Flagstaff> ought to have a museum. And, so Dr. Lockwood used these suggestions, and he talked to Rotary Club about it, and then, Dr. Gammage, who was then president of the University, was also president of the Chamber of Commerce and a member of the Rotary Club and all. And, as a member of the Chamber of Commerce, he appointed a committee to investigate establishing a museum. And, Dr. Colton was on the committee, and a number of other prominent people around <Flagstaff>, who were more or less interested in that sort of thing. And ah, this committee, then, drew up some… a constitution and bylaws. And, I think the Museum opened in 1928. It was something like the first of August.

 

And, Dr. Cummings from <Tucson> gave a lecture at the opening, and they had a reception, and it was all great. And, there was this committee of people who, well they were, according to the bylaws or the constitution, they were the Trustees of the Museum, you see. And, the group of trustees elected Dr. Colton as president, because he had been in charge of a museum of zoology at the university in <Pennsylvania>. And, he was the only one who knew anything about a museum at all. Well, it was a good choice, I guess, because all the other people fell by the wayside. But, this really piqued his interest. And ah, he just spent the rest of his life working on it. And he, he was just fascinated with the whole idea, you see. So, it became his career; his hobby; his life, actually.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: He had quite a wit about him, didn't he, with joking and things?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes. He loved a good story. And, he told lots of good stories, too. And, no one laughed harder at them than he did himself. (Both laugh). He really enjoyed them. He had very twinkly eyes when he was telling stories on his friends, or whatever happened to be, you know, and, you could just see that he was enjoying it so much, because he'd just sparkle.

 

Ah, Mr. Brady, or Major Brady, as we always called him, though it turned out that "Major" was just a nickname, not a title. "Major" was a title or a name given to him by his family when he was a child. He was English, and ah, I think he had gone to college at Oxford. And then, he was in <South Africa> during the Boer War, and, somehow got to the <United States> and to <Phoenix> area, or perhaps <Tucson>, where he joined up with a Mr. Evans, who had a ranch school for high school boys. Major was extremely well educated, and he could really turn his hand at anything. If it was an engineering problem, or a problem of chemistry or physics, or just anything, he could solve it. And, he was very interested in the ruins around here. And, he always came to <Flagstaff> in the summer. So that when the Museum was being established, he was on the committee appointed by Dr. Gammage, and really became one of the most important members of the staff. He did quite a bit in the fields of geology and paleontology. I mentioned how he was putting this mylodont skeleton together. And then, in later years, he did a lot of work on meteorites. He was a, not a very tall man, probably about five feet six, maybe, with a very English style goatee and nice gray hair.

 

And, he was very interested in camping and outdoor things, too. The Evans School, which I believe was actually in <Tucson>, ah, about the first of May every year, the whole school moved to <Flagstaff>. It got too hot in southern <Arizona>, you see, to stay there. So, all these boys would ride horseback from <Tucson> to <Flagstaff>, led by the Major and probably a wrangler or two to take care of the horses, and the cook maybe, and the chuck wagon, or something like that. This was really a quite a thing for these young boys who were mostly from the East who had never done anything like this, you see. But Major was so knowledgeable about camping and all that sort of thing, and he would conduct them. And they had a camp, which was, oh, just, just south and west from the Lockett house, which is on Ft. Valley Road, down here just about opposite the gate of the Colton residence. This camp had sort of tent houses. And the boys would, I think, study here for a few weeks, and then they gave college entrance examinations in <Flagstaff>, that was the only place in this area. And all these boys, then, would take the college entrance examination. And, then if they passed, they would go home for the summer, and if they didn't pass, I guess they stayed and got tutored the rest of the summer. But, I think, perhaps a few stayed, because they liked to go with the Major. And he would take them to the Snake Dance and different places. So, Sid (?) spent a lot of time here and was very familiar with the country, too. So he was really a great asset to the Museum. Even though the Evans School was sold in the early thirties, perhaps, Major subsequently bought either the Evans School or another school at Mesa and continued to run a ranch school for years and years.

 

And, they came to <Flagstaff> every summer. Ah, really, as long as he lived, he came every summer. And he always spent his whole summer working at the Museum. When he didn't have students around, he helped us. At one time, I'm not sure that he found this, but he subsequently studied it. It's a ruin out east of <Flagstaff> a short distance. Someone discovered a kind of a stone box-like thing set into the ground. And, it looked like it was full of sort of brownish rocks. And, Major got very interested in this and had this material analyzed, and it turned out to be meteorite material. And the only conclusion is that this meteorite fell, you see, at some time when the area was occupied by the prehistoric people there. And they gathered up all these fragments and covered them up and put them in this stone box in the ground.

 

Well, others like this have been found, too, but this seemed very interesting. And, this really interested the Major very much. When he was interested in meteorites, I remember he went, oh, on an expedition looking for a meteorite that was supposed to have fallen in the Bradshaw Mountain area. And I guess they looked and looked and looked and never got any trace of it. They found other interesting things in the course of the trip, but they didn't find the meteorite.

 

Major had a darling wife, and, ah, they always had about two or three cats, which they always brought to <Flagstaff> with them, every summer. They thought the cats were a lot of trouble, but they really loved them…

 

END TAPE 2, SIDE 1, BEGINNING TAPE 2, SIDE 2



KRISTINE PENNANCE: You were going to tell us about Mrs. Colton, now.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh, Mrs. Colton was an artist. She had studied at the Philadelphia School of Design, which was a very well known art school in <Philadelphia>. And ah, very shortly after she graduated from that, she had married Dr. Colton. She was very interested in the country and scenery and exploring, and, more interested in that sort of thing than in people, I believe. And, she painted just beautiful landscapes. The Museum has a number of them at the present time. They're really very, very handsome, beautiful paintings. She was quite a small woman, about five feet four, I imagine. And, very dainty, very wonderful personality, and particularly interested in art in <Arizona> and the arts and crafts of the Indians.

 

She was responsible, in the very early days of the Museum, of establishing the Hopi Craftsman Show, which has become one of the outstanding arts and crafts shows in the country. With the aid of Edmund Nequatewa, one of the Hopis working for the Museum, she went out to the reservation and convinced the Hopis, prior to the first exhibition, that this would be something very worthwhile if they would help. And, she urged each craftsman to keep whatever he or she thought was a really special piece of work, a basket, the blanket, a piece of pottery, until the next spring, and send it to the exhibition to be judged. Oh, it was quite a long process to convince the Hopis that this was a good thing to do. They are very set in their ways, and it's so hard to persuade them that they should do something different. But, she and Edmund worked on them. I think they made, perhaps three trips, before the first exhibition was held. And, ah quite a few Hopis sent things.

And then, in following years, she went out every, every fall, just to talk with the different craftsmen about problems that they had. Ah, many of the basket makers were using aniline dyes, for the baskets and material, and most of these dyes faded very soon, so the people who bought very nice baskets were soon left with nothing but sort of dull, brownish colored containers. Ah, she talked to them about the old type of dyes, which they used, which were made from different plants, which they collected in the neighborhood of the villages. And, they gradually over the years, most of the people began to use the old dyes, again, and, while they weren't altogether permanent, they were much more permanent than the aniline dyes. And, the colors are very soft, so that no matter what combination of colors were used; the end product was really beautiful, instead of being garish, which good many of them were up to that point.

 

And, then she talked to the men who were the weavers about the dyes for blankets. The wool for the blankets was also a problem, at that time, because the government had introduced merino sheep to both the Navajo and Hopi reservations. And, merino yarn is very short staple and very curly. It's very fine wool for commercial spinning and weaving and all, but it's not at all suited to hand weaving. The blankets were very rough and sort of knotty; because it's so difficult to get the fibers smoothed out. And, even the people in the, ah, Bureau of Indian Affairs, and all, became aware of this problem about the same time, and they introduced, I think it was Corodale(?) sheep, which has a much longer staple wool and not so curly. Anyway, the Hopis began to save proper spinning, hand spinning yarn, and some of them really began to produce some beautiful blankets after that. Hopi blankets have always been very simple compared to Navajo and woven in just patterns of stripes, combinations of narrow and wide stripes or bands of color and white. And the favorite Hopi blanket that the Hopis, themselves, have used very extensively was black and brown and navy blue stripes. It makes a very dark blanket, but it's probably very practical when you live in a dusty country like the Hopi villages. The problem with the blue dye for these blankets was that they had to resort to commercial dyes or diamond dyes. And the blue that was produced was sort of on the purplish shade, not really nice color at all. And the original color that they had used was vegetable indigo, which was made in <Mexico> and traded up here in, probably in the 1800s. But indigo was not available anymore since diamond dyes were invented. So, the Hopis really had nothing to use, except the diamond dyes. So, Mrs. Colton communicated with a dye-importing place in <New York> and found that it would be possible to buy East Indian indigo, ah, which produced a very nice color. So she bought a lot of this and sold it at cost to the Hopi weavers. And, we really got some very beautiful textile pieces after that. They loved that blue, really blue, blue color of indigo, and they were very happy to have this.

 

The Hopis, too, at <First Mesa>, were having considerable problem with their pottery. The black designs, which they painted on the mostly yellow pottery, inclined to rub off, which was rather disastrous, too. People bought nice pieces and found that the design would just come off on your finger. So, she talked to the potters about the problems of the paints that they used for the colors and firing the pottery. And ah, she did quite a bit of research, and Dr. Colton did a lot of research on Hopi pottery. And, I think they finally solved the problem of the paint coming off, so that we were able to really get very fine pieces with permanent designs on them for the show.

 

She was a very kind, concerned person, too, and I remember when we made trips to the reservation, she always took along a whole case of powdered milk to give to special Hopi friends with very small children, who needed milk badly. And, of course, on the reservation, they had no fresh milk at all. So, powdered milk was the only thing. And, oh she would send sacks of flour to people who were in need, or take some coffee to special friends. She was just very fond of her Hopi friends. And, she would just do anything to help them out.

 

One of the first people who was employed at the Museum was Lyndon Hargrave. He was… he came to the Museum to be the assistant director and to be in charge of archeological work at the institution. However, he no sooner arrived, in about April of the year that the Museum was established. When Dr. Andrew Ellicott Douglas, who was the tree ring man, wrote to ask if he could please borrow Lyn for the summer, because he had received a grant from the National Geographic Society to make some studies of beams in the Hopi villages to try to see if he couldn't connect his two tree ring chronologies, which he had developed. One was… one began at the present time and went back to, oh, about fourteen hundred, or something on that order. And then there was another chronology, which was archaeological and wasn't connected to the known chronology. So they thought that, perhaps, in the Hopi houses, there might be old beams which had a good tree ring record which would tie these two sequences together. So, Lyn went off, and I think he worked two summers for the National Geographic Society.

The first summer he went to <Oraibi> and was able to bore a large number of timbers in the roofs of kivas and in older houses and collected quite a large number of specimens. Also, bought a large number of pieces of old Hopi pottery for the Museum collection, which was very interesting, too. I guess he stayed quite awhile at <Oraibi>, because he learned a considerable bit of Hopi language while there, and evidently learned enough so that when he went to other villages, notably <Shungopavi> on <Second Mesa>, he spoke Hopi with an <Oraibi> dialect. And so, all the Hopis began to call him "<Oraibi>", which I thought was rather cute they could distinguish that he had learned there. Ah, he went to <Shungopavi>, which is also an old village, and collected beams, beam specimens and all from there. And also, pottery from there for the Museum, I think.

 

And the following summer, he did some excavations at, ah, several of the pueblos in the Jeddito Valley, which is just east or southeast from the Hopi villages. And then, he also excavated at <Kayenta> (?), which is in eastern <Arizona> on the Navajo reservation. And, I think, later that year, also went to Show Low, where Dr. Harring (?) was excavating, and where they ultimately discovered the beam that cross dated the two sequences of Dr. Douglas's dates.

 

I neglected to say that Lyn Hargrave had come to <Arizona> from some South-Atlantic state, I can't remember whether it was <North Carolina>, or something like that. He'd come to <Arizona> some years previously and had worked at Roosevelt Dam as a water recorder, or something like that, for a number of years. And then, he had gone to the University of <Arizona> before he became interested in archaeology, and was a student of Dr. Byron Cummings, who was in the Anthropology Department at <Tucson>. And, Dr. Cummings, I believe, recommended him for the position at the Museum. In later times after this beam expedition was over, he had charge of Museum excavations at a number of pit house village sites, close to <Flagstaff>.

 

Ah, one of the first areas worked on was Medicine Valley, close to Medicine Cave and Medicine Fork. There were groups of pit houses all over that area. And, it was during this period, too, that the discovery was made that Sunset Crater had probably erupted in the time that these prehistoric people were living in the area. Mr. Brady had taken an artist from <Australia>, I believe, out to Sunset Crater to paint. And, while the gentleman was painting, Major was sort of browsing around the vicinity to see what he could see, and he found an uprooted pine tree with potsherds mixed sort of in the cinders and all, around the roots of the tree. And, he began to think about this and think that this was very strange that there was no sign on the surface that there was any dwelling of any sort there. So, he came back to <Flagstaff> with the potsherds, and he and Dr. Colton talked about it, and they talked about it with Hargrave. So they transferred the excavation project to some sites much closer to Sunset Crater, in the area where Major found the sherds. And they put in some exploratory trenches, I believe, ah, at least through the area of the Sunset ash, which is very black and easily distinguished from the older ash falls which are oxidized and sort of reddish colored. And, they went down about six or eight inches and came to the old soil level and finally found a really beautiful pit house, which they sectioned right through the middle. And you could see that the layer of Sunset ash was on the top. And then there was a hollow in the ground surface where the old pit house had just filled in with soil and debris. And ah, several, several additional layers had come to the bottom of the pit house, which was quite deep below the present land surface, probably about maybe, four or five feet below the present surface. So that seemed to indicate quite clearly that this pit house had been abandoned for quite a long time before the Sunset ash fell, you see. So, there was considerable activity and getting cores from living trees in that area, and trying to find charcoal in the prehistoric sites and area and all. And eventually, they did come up with a date of about 1065 AD for the Sunset eruption, which was really quite a discovery, because nobody had realized that it was so recent. Everybody around knew that it was the most recent volcano, because its lava flow is so very rough and not eroded in any way, and looks as if it might have come out just a few days ago.

 

John McGregor was also on staff for the summer for several years. He was getting a master’s degree at the University of Arizona, so he only worked in <Flagstaff> in the summer. He came to <Arizona> from southern <Illinois>, and he was also a student of Dr. Cummings at <Tucson>. He was he was interested in archaeology, but he had also begun the study of tree rings with Dr. Douglas. Students of tree rings were relatively scarce in those days. It was about the beginning of the time when such courses were being taught in <Tucson>. So, we felt very lucky to have him at the Museum. And, over a period of several years, he really collected a tremendous number of specimens. Probably about three or four thousand specimens at least. He made increment borings of living trees, and these specimens are cut through or into the trunk of the tree from outer edge at least through the center of the tree, so that you get one, the rings in the diameter of the tree as it grows outward. And ah, these increment borings are about a quarter of an inch in diameter. Very, very tiny, but the record is just very clear.

 

And then, also collected and dated many hundreds of specimens from the pit house sides (?), that (?) Hargrave was excavating. We were fortunate in discovering many, many sites on which the wood structure, which supported the roof of the pit houses out past the walls had burned, and the charred wood is even better than fresh wood as far as dating goes. It doesn't require any particular preparation. You just slice it off with a razor blade, and the rings are all perfectly visible, just fabulous. So, he worked on that for a considerable period. After, perhaps three or four years, ah, he received his… well he pretty…

 

END TAPE 2, SIDE 2, BEGINNING TAPE 3, SIDE 1



KATHARINE BARTLETT: He began to teach one course each semester at Arizona State College, which became Northern Arizona University. And, he had a number of projects, excavation projects, which University students took part in. And, then after he got his doctor's degree at the University of Chicago, he devoted almost his entire time to the anthropology courses at the University and very little time to the Museum.

 

The… one of the first years after the Museum was established, Charles Park, a geology student, then, at the University of Arizona, spent the summer, or perhaps two summers in <Flagstaff>, and he was working with Dr. Colton, on, primarily on Sunset Crater.

 

In about 1928, I suppose, or '29 perhaps, a movie company had come to <Flagstaff> to make a movie. And people in town discovered one day that they were going to have an avalanche in the movie, which was to be created by blowing off the side of a cinder cone to bring down the great mass of cinders and stuff. And the crater selected was Sunset Crater. And, everybody was quite horrified, and some how they managed to persuade the movie company not to do this, I believe, since they didn't want it damaged. Maybe the Forest Service was able to intervene in this, because it was on the forest, of course.

 

And, somebody suggested that it should be made a national monument; however, before it could be a monument, it had to have some study made of it to find out what it was, you know, and why it was really worth preserving that well. So, Dr. Colton and Charles Park made it their summer project, and they studied the lava flows out there and the features of the lava flows. And they discovered cracks in the flows around the base of the crater there, which apparently had developed shortly after the flow was laid down. And subsequently, more basaltic lava from below had been squeezed up in thin plates through these cracks. And ah, this was very interesting discovery, and they couldn't find that anyone had ever recorded any such thing, any place. And ah, so, they wrote a small article on this for "Science", I believe. And, the, the plates had squeezed up lava just like very thick fudge, (both laugh). You can still see on the lava flows out there.

 

There was an ice cave, there, which people went into and found icicles and things in every summer. And, that was an interesting phenomenon, too. So they, they studied the ice cave and, ah, they climbed the crater, of course, and studied the deposits on top, which make the pinkish color which give it its name.

So they presented all this information they collected to the Forest Service, and the proposal was made that it should become a national monument. And within about a year, the President, I don't remember which president, did make a decree that it was a national monument. That was probably the first really extraordinary thing that the Museum did for the community. And then, of course, later, when the eruption of the crater was dated, that was really a very important step forward, too, because that had never been done in the <United States> before, surely.

 

Ah, the two Hopis who were most important in the early days of the Museum were Edmund Nequatewa, whom I mentioned as having helped Mrs. Colton so much, and Jim Kewanwyetewa. I believe that both these men, Edmund from <Shungopavi>, and Jim from <Oraibi>, met Hargrave when he was working there on the National Geographic Society beam expedition. They may have interpreted for him, or they helped him in some way, and, I guess that he proposed to Dr. Colton that they'd be very good people for the Museum to have.

 

So, Edmund, I guess, began probably about 1928, perhaps, and he and his wife and one son lived in a little house near Dr. Colton's and helped, oh, with the yard work and, ah, they had some chickens and just in keeping up the place. He took care of Dr. Colton's car, I guess, and general sort of handy man and interpreted for the Museum and other things in just odd moments. They had a very cute little stone house, which was very much like a "Hopi house". It had one big room and a, I think it had a bedroom and a bath. And, at the time that it was built, they didn't know exactly that it was going to be used by a Hopi family, but it was being built so that anybody could use it. And, the Hopis moved in, and Mrs. Colton went over to see them one day, not too long after they had moved in. And June, the wife, was taking her around and showing her things, and, ah, Mrs. Colton was horrified to discover that the bath tub, which they had so carefully installed, was being used as a storage place for corn and squash and watermelons and other little treasures. But then that was being Hopi, so that was all right.

 

Edmund had been schooled in the Hopi Day Schools, and then had been sent to the Indian Boarding School at <Phoenix> for high school. So he was about as well educated as most Indians of that age. He had a very excellent memory, too, because his grandfather, I believe, had selected him as his heir to learn all the Hopi legends, which the grandfather knew. And Edmund had spent a long time with the old man, ah, learning all the stories and things like that. I suppose, in the olden days, that was the way the children were educated. At least that was part of their education. And, Edmund, also, was able to speak very good English as well as speaking Hopi and even some Navajo, I think. And, this was a great asset to the Museum, of course, because, without the aid of a good interpreter, the Hopi Craftsmen Show, for instance, probably would never have gotten off the ground. He, he grasped the idea of it and believed in it, and was very instrumental in helping the… helping put the idea over. The Museum published his book called: THE TRUTH OF A HOPI, which was the clan legends of <Shungopavi> and, primarily, <Shungopavi> I guess, plus some other odd stories that appeared in the "Museum Notes" and "Plateau", so it's…

 

Jimmy K. was really not as well educated, I think, as Edmund. He went to the day schools at <Oraibi> and, then, to <Keams Canyon> to the boarding school. But, he was, he was full of energy and ambition, which is not really a Hopi characteristic, at least it isn't, ah, it isn't proper for a Hopi to be "ambitious", and ah, so energetic. And, I think that on the reservation, he had sort of a hard time, because he didn't really want to conform to Hopi ideals too much. And he came to <Flagstaff> to live in about 19, oh, I guess it was about 1930, and he was with the Museum until he died in 1966, or something like that. But he, he enjoyed admiration of people, you know, and applause, things like that, and that's not considered proper in Hopi. I think that he really thrived in the Museum atmosphere. He used to take care of the Museum on weekends, and in that way, he met a lot of people, you know.

 

And the rest of the staff never met them at all, because they were not around on Sundays, perhaps. And ah, Jimmy became just such good friends of a lot of these people, and they would say, "Well, if you're in <California> anytime, you must come and visit us." And, he would go to <California> and go and visit them for two or three days, or a week, or something. And, oh, just had a marvelous time. He's a very fine Kachina carver, too. And, he made lots and lots of Kachina dolls, which were ordered by Museum visitors and people from all over the country. I guess his only fault was that he couldn't say "no" to anybody, so that the orders would collect and collect and collect, and it was awfully hard for him to get them all filled. Just simply dreadful. He was most likely to take off with the order on the top of the pile and fill that one so that the one on the bottom was never, never completed.

 

He was also quite a singer. And ah, I remember at the Hopi Craftsman Show, maybe dull, rainy afternoons, when there would be a lot of people around, and, ah, nobody could go outside, because it was pouring rain, perhaps, Jimmy would get the great big drum that belonged to the Museum. The diameter was probably about maybe two feet, the diameter of the drum, you see, and he would play on the drum and sing. And the visitors would just be enthralled by this. They just loved it. So, that was something, too. I've ridden in the car with him back from the reservation where he was singing at the top of his voice, and that was more of a trial than a pleasure (both laugh), but it was fun.

 

He used to take care of the little lawn that was in front of the Women's Club building when the Museum was down in town. In about 1932, I guess, or '33, there was a very severe drought here, and the water supplies were extremely low, so the water department had issued an order that nobody should water lawns during this period because of the shortage of water. And ah, Jimmy was out in front of the Museum one morning, ah, watering the lawn and the flowers that were around and the trees, and all, and, ah, a state policeman came by, and said, "Don't you know that you shouldn't water the lawn? It was in the paper." And, Jimmy looked at him and said, "Well, do I look like the kind of a man that reads the newspaper?" (Both laugh). The policeman agreed that maybe he wasn't, and he told him not to water anymore. Well, Jimmy told the story with a big smile. He thought that was really pretty funny.

 

When the Museum was first being set up in the Women's Club Building in <Flagstaff>, ah, Dr. Neil Judd from the National Museum, who had spent several years previously excavating Pueblo Bonito under a grant from the National Geographic Society, he came to <Flagstaff> to write his Pueblo Bonito report. And he rented an apartment across the street from the Women's Club Building, and settled down to work. But he was so interested in the establishment of the Museum that he spent about half of every day at the Museum helping arrange the exhibits and prepare for the opening of the Museum, which took place in August of 1929, I think it was. Having had a great deal of museum experience, his assistance, of course, was very pleasing to Dr. Colton and Lyndon Hargrave and others who were struggling to establish it.

 

At about the same time, ah Dr. Herman Bumpus (?), who I think was an advisor to the Rockefeller Foundation on the subject of museums, made a trip to <Arizona> to advise the <Grand Canyon National Park> about establishing the museum at <Yavapai Point>. This was to be a geological museum for people looking at the <Grand Canyon>. It was a very excellent view place. And, he spent several weeks at the <Grand Canyon>, and then a few days in <Flagstaff>. And, Dr. Colton was able to talk to him about this new museum that was being set up. And, I think that he offered a great deal of very good advice, which I know that Dr. Colton had tried to follow over a long period of years, and probably really paid off.

 

Dr. Bumpus was very experienced, and I think that he had been responsible for the, oh, Bear (?) Mountain Museum in <New Jersey>. It's a area along the Hudson River, or maybe, yes, I think it’s in <New Jersey> or <New York>. <New Jersey>. Ah, anyway, trailside exhibits and trail markers and all that sort of things. And this had become quite a famous place by the time that he was in <Arizona> here. He suggested that one should start out very simply and not try to build a large, elaborate building right off the bat. And, I think he also suggested that the Museum publication, which was called the "Museum Notes", and was just a newsworthy little items about the Museum and people at the Museum and all, would really be much more interesting if each issue could be devoted to one subject, and one subject of interest around <Flagstaff>. So at that point, the "Museum Notes" was changed, and having been mimeographed in the beginning, it was printed, and each one was devoted to a separate subject. Oh, there was one on the <San Francisco Peaks>, and one on <Walnut Canyon>, and one on <Wupatki>, and features of particular interest to both the people and tourists in this area.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Okay, let's talk about some of the digs that were going on, or excavations at that time or archeological surveys.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: The Museum decided early in its career to excavate small sites around <Flagstaff> area. Ah, primarily because little was known about the very early sites here. And, secondly, because it was much less expensive to excavate small sites with small crews rather than undertaking the excavation of a large pueblo site. Ah, excavations were made in Medicine Valley and then Deadman's Flat, which is northeast of the Peaks area. And then a little bit beyond there, north of Deadman's Wash. And, a few sites were excavated east of <Flagstaff> near Canyon Padre, where there was some pit houses and the small pueblo, which was excavated in the beginning, I believe, by college students and Miss Ida (?) Wilson, who was the college librarian. In 1933, I think, at the height of the Depression, when the federal government set up the CCC Camps and the Civil Works Project, later followed by the WPA, the Museum applied for and received three…

 

END TAPE 3, SIDE 1, BEGINNING TAPE 3, SIDE 2



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Wupatki National Monument and Keet Seel, which is a large site in the <Navajo National Monument>, and, at the time when the money was available, it was about the first of January, and <Walnut Canyon> was completely snowed in. So, it was impossible to set up a camp and have an excavation project there because of the weather. So that project was transferred to the Citadel area of <Wupatki>. I believe Dale King, who had been a student at the University of Denver when I was there, had charge of that project at the Citadel. Ah, at <Wupatki>, there were several archaeologists. Ah, Richard von Valkenberg (?), Fisher Moats (?), who was an architectural student, ah Milton Snow, who was a photographer and James Brewer, Jr., who was an archeologist, were in charge of the work. And they had a crew of about, probably, twelve men, mostly from <Flagstaff>, and the Museum built kind of a mess hall workroom down below the big ruins. And ah, during this time they really excavated that site. Some previous bits of digging had been done before, but no, no real systematic excavation.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: What was your role in the excavation?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, I, I didn't really have anything to do with excavations except the cataloging materials obtained out of some of the smaller sites. Ah, in the course of excavation at <Wupatki>, for instance, ah, I think Jim Brewer, who seemed to have a knack for this sort of thing, was in charge of cataloging all material that came from the <Wupatki> excavation, so that we didn't have to do very much with the material after it came to <Flagstaff>. There was quite a lot of specimens from there, and ah, that was really quite a job. But, Jim and some of the WPA, or they were "CWA" people, cleaned up the material, and put numbers on it, and made the catalog, and took care of all that sort of thing.

 

Ah, the excavation at Keet Seel was in charge of Irwin Hayden, who was an archeologist, who was then living in <Los Angeles> area, I think, ah, he and his son both came to take charge of this project. And they employed some men from <Flagstaff>, I think, and then some Navajos from the immediate area of the lower Tsegi, probably to take charge of the excavation. That was a very remote place, and everything had to be taken in by horseback. I think it's about fifteen miles, or something like that, from Betatakin, and probably twenty miles from Marsh (?) Pass to the ruin. And to supply this place, and to set up a camp and all in January or February was really quite a project. But, they managed to do really a great deal of work. And ah, they found a large number of very interesting things, of course, at the site in a large dry shallow cave, and so things that ordinarily disappear in open sites were preserved like fibers and cloth and feathers and parts of feather robes. Ah, really special things of that nature.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: When you, when the Museum went out on the reservation to excavate, what was the reaction of the local Indian population?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh, I think Navajos were not much interested in excavations in those days, because skeletons and things like that were associated with death and evil spirits, and things that people didn't want to hear about or talk about. Ah, they didn't really want to have anything to do with it. A few didn't mind working, but mostly they didn't want to do that. Actually, we didn't have any excavation projects of the Museum's on the reservations, I don't believe until much more recently. Within the past ten years, I think the attitude of the Indians has changed, greatly. At this very moment, ah, the Museum is conducting an excavation at <First Mesa> at Walpi, having been invited by the Hopis to take charge of this. And so this is really absolutely remarkable.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Now, we can kind of move into some of the major events that have occurred during the Museum's development. And, we, did you want you to say more of anything else?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: No.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: You didn't. We talked about the Sunset Crater becoming a national monument, was there anything more you wanted to add as far as the struggle politically to get that way… that the Museum might have been involved in?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Ah, it was not really a struggle. I think it was… it took about a year to have all the necessary agencies, and the community was involved, and <Flagstaff> was involved. The Chamber of Commerce and the business people had to approve of it. And since it was on Forest Service land, the Forest Service had to approve of it and recommend it. But I don't think that there was any long struggle involved. It was just a matter of getting the proper petitions, or whatever, signed and approved by the proper agencies. And, as I say, I think it was about a year that was required until it was approved.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: We also talked about the problem of a permanent custodian at the Wupatki Monument.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh yes. Well, when the CWA excavation project there was finished, that was about, oh, probably a six month project, there was this mess hall recreation workroom which the Museum had built there, and the… of course the ruin was excavated, and people were going to see it. Dr. Colton felt that it shouldn't remain unprotected. He hired Jim Brewer, who had been working on the excavation, to stay there for awhile, and kind of look after the building and the excavation, and other things which were involved. And ah, I think this was continued for several months, and then, Jim, maybe had to leave for awhile or something. At any rate, we discovered in another two or three months that people had been going down there and been digging in some of the rooms that we left, purposely, unexcavated for future reference. And, there are other small sites in the vicinity, and they had been dug into, also. And Dr. Colton wrote to the Park Service in <Washington> and said that he felt that it was really very important that this ruin should be protected that they should be able to hire somebody on a permanent basis to look after it at this point. Since there's a "dollar-a-year man", you know he could only go there occasionally, and he couldn't be responsible for it. And they wrote back, I guess, and said that they were sorry, they couldn't do anything about it. And he was really very mad, he was hardly ever was really mad, but he was very angry at this. And, so he sent a telegram saying that he was resigning from the dollar-a-year job in protest for their lack of care.

 

After a few months and a lot more correspondence and all, they appointed Jim Brewer as the superintendent of the Monument. And he and his wife lived in one room in the ruin (both laugh). They fixed it up in a very attractive way, and one had to climb up a ladder to get into it. I don't know how they ever got furniture and things in it. But, it was a very nice little place, and they were very hospitable. And, more and more visitors began to go there. After Jim Brewer left, another young man and his wife were appointed to be in charge of it. And, David Jones, who was a graduate of the University of Arizona in archeology, and they also, lived in the ruin for awhile. But by that time, a little more money was available. And while they were there, a residence for the superintendent was built, and they were finally able to move into that, which was really a great satisfaction. And then, over the years, more and more people have been employed there, and there's, I think at least two or three on the staff there now. A little museum, of sorts, and, oh it's quite a, it's quite a place, now.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: We talked quite a bit about the Hopi Show, but I was wondering what the community's reactions were to the first show?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Oh, about the only way that we have of telling about the reactions, ah, especially in the beginning, was how much we were able to sell. In establishing the show, Mrs. Colton thought that if people could buy the things, that would indicate to the Hopis, you see, that these things were really valued. And people were interested in them and all, because I think, except for Hopi pottery; very few Hopi things were sold to traders or on the reservation. The market for baskets and belts and blankets and, oh, sashes and, oh, hundreds of things that they make, had just sort of declined, so that the pottery was just about the only thing that the traders would handle. And, people really were interested in things, and as the crafts improved, and many of them certainly did, ah, well they could ask higher prices for instance, which was helpful. And we began to get orders from museums from all over the country, you see, for special Hopi things that they wanted. And the kachina dolls became extremely popular and other sort of odd things, which are not really on the general market at all. And so from a very modest beginning of probably a few hundred dollars, every year the market became better and better.

 

And, I think people in <Flagstaff>… well they came and bought things, of course, and then they brought their visitors, summer visitors to see the show. And they were interested in all the things. And, I believe, that it would be as difficult to stop the show at this point as it was to start it in the first place, because the Hopis take it for granted that this is their show. And they are very cooperative, and everybody wants to send something. And, at present day the prices, of course, are so terrific, that it's a gold mine for them.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Why was so much interest shown in the Hopis as opposed to the Navajos in the beginning?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well ah, primarily because nobody was taking any interest in Hopis at all. There were things like the Gallup Ceremonial, for instance, which always had a big exhibition in connection with it, and all the traders, you see, brought rugs to sell. And, it seems that there was a market, you know, already established for the Navajo things. And people knew about Navajo blankets, particularly. But nobody really knew that the Hopis made anything. I suppose there were a few collections of baskets by people who had bought them probably twenty, thirty, forty years before, but the stuff just wasn't on the market at all. And since they seemed kind of neglected, that seemed a good place to start.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Then, when did the Navajo Craftsman show start?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, it didn't start until much later, probably about sometime in early forties, as I recall. Two or three years prior to the war. I believe that the first show was rather inspired by a kind of a fair that the Brewers held at Wupatki National Monument. That monument is really on the Navajo reservation, and a number of Navajos lived in that area. And somehow, the Brewers got the idea of inviting a lot of people out to the Monument, and having the neighboring Navajos bring their blankets and whatever they had and making it sort of a fair, you see. And I think they had a barbecue or something like that that attracted all the Navajos, and a lot of people in town went. And then, the Museum decided that this was maybe something that would be very good was to get the Navajos in the western part of the reservation interested in sending materials. I can't seem to remember too much about the first year of our Navajo Show. I believe that we collected from the trading posts on the western part of the reservation, as we still do. And then we had the Navajo Arts and Crafts Guild, which was then operated by Bill Lippencott for the Tribe, send an exhibit of the really super things that were made around the… I can't think, well, <Window Rock> or, anyway in the eastern part of the reservation. Various people had had projects to improve the quality of Navajo textiles, and so… well at <Chinle> and <Ganado> and other places around that vicinity; they were really producing some very, very beautiful rugs. Just terrific. And I think that that was to show the Navajos on the western part of the reservation what could be done, you see, with wool and vegetable dyes, special dyes. Because the western Navajos were like the Hopis had been the dyes weren't very good, the wool wasn't very good, and it was all kind of running downhill. And the show has continued in more or less the same way ever since.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Did the Second World War have any effect on the shows?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, we had to stop both the shows for several years, because of the gasoline - tire shortage. I think it was tires, primarily, not gasoline as much. But also the Museum staff, of course, was very reduced, and we didn't have enough people to take care of it. But, both of them were revived after the war, I guess in about a year or two. And, both have continued on in the same sort of way ever since. The Museum expedition goes out and collects personally from all the different Hopis and all the villages. 'Cause not all Hopis send, and probably, there are fewer now than then, because so many of the young people don't do these things anymore they're not interested. The boys are supposed to learn to weave, you know, while they're, oh, in their teens, but so many of them are away at school, or they aren't interested in weaving. But ah, there aren't too many. And at the present time, we don't get very many rugs, for instance, or blankets. Ah, in fact, I believe, there's only one or two for this year's show so far.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: And they used to be very abundant at the Museum?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well no, rugs, particularly, have never been very abundant, but in the past we have had, oh, a fair number, maybe say ten rugs in the show. But the last few years, they've just been fewer and fewer and fewer. There just aren't that many men who have either the time or the patience to weave. Many of them weave sashes which are used in the kachina costume. And, the narrow belts, which are worn by many of the women still, and also worn as part of a kachina costume or a ceremonial costume or some sort.

 

END TAPE 3, SIDE 2, BEGINNING TAPE 4, SIDE 1



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Okay, let's talk about the development of the Research Center over here.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: About the end of World War II, the Museum building, which had been opened in 1936, and subsequently enlarged a little bit, had really become very, very full. The present Special Exhibitions Gallery was used as an anthropology storeroom. And because of all the expeditions and all, it had really become stuffed. One could hardly put another piece of pottery in it. The Geology Department was using that portion of the building which is now the Natural History exhibits, and they had expanded so much and collected so much material that there was hardly room to turn around in that part of it. In addition, we had a man who was interested in birds, we had a zoologist. And the library, which had been growing a little each year, was in something like seven different offices in two different buildings. And conditions were just getting impossible.

 

Mrs. Colton, at the end of the war, had given to the Museum the research center area, which had previously been her dairy farm. Dr. and Mrs. Colton had bought the property, well, shortly after they had built their house and all, and rented some of the buildings, like the homestead. And they had built a very nice dairy barn and ran the dairy all during the war. So, Mrs. Colton gave the property from the dairy farm to the Museum. And immediately, the old barn, which is across from the library, the barn was scrubbed out and turned into a geology workroom and laboratory. But, even that was fairly quickly filled up. And Dr. Colton and the other trustees felt that we really needed more storage space and more work space; and it would probably be desirable to get away from the exhibits, too, because the curators were continually interrupted by visitors coming to ask about various things. So, they conceived the idea of building a separate building over here to be called a Research Center, which would house the collections primarily, and provide work space, too, for the different departments. By that time, the Biology Department was fairly large. We had a pretty good-sized herbarium, and animal and bird skins. Ah, geology was already over here and of pretty good size. And the anthropology collections were growing very rapidly. So, this Research Center building was built, and it housed anthropology, biology, the library, and photography. And geology stayed in the building across the patio here. This building did very well for about twenty years, perhaps, no, less than twenty, say about ten or twelve years. And geology was just bursting at the seams in the old barn over here. And so, they got a grant and added on to the… or I mean, built a new building for geology, and that is the building that's out east of this part of the Research Center.

 

In about three years ago, a large addition was built for the library to use. I think it will be three years in September, which more than doubled the stack room space, besides giving workroom space. Then last summer, they built a very large storage area for anthropology off the end of the anthropology wing over there. I think that that… those are the most recent additions. But, there are plans, I'm sure, for building other things. For instance, the Biology Department, which, oh yes, the Biology Department is a small wing which extends from the end of the anthropology gallery toward the west. And it was built in a very short time to house the first group of people from the USGS Astro-geology Department, who came to <Flagstaff> to set up a program, who had to have some place to set up offices and working space. They occupied that for about two or three years, and then when they moved out. The Biology Department moved in here, but now the Biology Department has grown so that they are overflowing, and they want to have a building like the Geology building out from southeast side of the Research Center building. So, it just continues to grow and grow and grow.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: About how large is the staff now, do you know?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: I have no idea. It was about… say four or five in the beginning, and some of those people were part-time. And when Dr. Danson became director in 1958, I think it was, he said there were twelve permanent people on the staff. And last year, there were something like ninety people permanently, plus I don't know (?) how many extra people in the summertime on special projects and all that sort of thing. This year I just don't know. I've lost count completely.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Yeah, probably over a hundred. This is a little off the subject, but have you done some historical research yourself?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes, I have. Well, I… you might say that I had done some archaeological survey in the early days, and I've done some things on Hopi crafts, Navajo crafts, ah, studies of, well, weaving on the western Navajo reservations ______. And, I've always been interested in history, so I had done some papers on Hopi history and Southwestern history in general, sort of the relation of some the Spanish expeditions of the sixteen, seventeen hundreds in relation to the general topography of the country. Tracing their routes of travel and things like that. Oh, a few things on history. I collected material that hasn't yet been published, unfortunately. Being a librarian takes up a lot more time than other things, sometime.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: A lot of changes have happened in the <Flagstaff> community, as well as we see at the Museum…



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: And I wonder if the Museum's role has changed somewhat over the years; its role within the community?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Ah, that's, that's really very hard for me to answer. There are a lot of people in the community who have supported the Museum marvelously ever since the beginning. And have been very appreciative of the Museum's efforts, but there are also a great many people in <Flagstaff> who've never even heard of the Museum, I'm sure, even at the present time. If you asked them where the Museum was, they wouldn't really know, and they would never have been in it. Or if they do know about it, they bring their friends and relatives who come to visit to entertain them.

 

Ah, one of the main objects of the Museum when the constitution was first written was to encourage art, and preservation of natural areas and wildlife, and things like this. And now this is the sort of thing, which today is, you know the thing. But the Museum will have been incorporated something like fifty years in a very short time, so this was really a very early effort to try for the same things that everybody is trying for nowadays. And I think there are a few people in <Flagstaff> who really appreciate this. But I think there are also a lot of other people who don't really care at all. But then, we know there are people like that.

 

However, in the last couple of years, there has been organized a group called "Friends of the Museum" which would certainly indicate that there are some people who are interested in it and interested in helping it along and doing what they can. And, they have sponsored lectures, you know, which we hadn't really had recently in recent years. And, they’re doing all sorts of things, sort of to aid the exhibit side of the Museum. One of the particular emphasis of the Museum has been on research, and perhaps trying to popularize the results of research by exhibits in the Museum. But now the Friends are establishing a training course for Museum docents. And the docents are taking tours, you see, and guiding people around the Museum and explaining the exhibits and things to them, especially for the children's groups from the schools and all, to make this a sort of cooperative thing. And I guess that all of this is really a very good sign. I mean it indicates that people do want to help, and they see things that the Museum hasn't done so they are filling in these gaps.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: So there's still a lot of cooperation within in the community itself.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Yes, I think in the last few years there have been really a lot more cooperation than perhaps in past times.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: I'm sure that probably the visitors that visit the Museum were important people that have had something to do with the Museum. (?)that was visited for awhile has changed throughout the years. You mentioned having lived at the Coltons and met many of the visitors.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, special visitors, of course, if they were museum people or archaeologists or geologists, and they, perhaps, came here to spend the summer to do research, which is one of the things that Dr. Colton had encouraged. They also entertained these people at their home. And, it was quite fun to meet lots of really prominent, well-known people. I remember at one time, the International Geological Congress came to <Flagstaff> as part of a tour of the western <United States>. They came after a meeting, and Dr. and Mrs. Colton entertained some of those people at home. And then, the Museum took them on a sort of conducted tour, of a lot of areas around <Flagstaff>, a two-day tour. And there were really famous people involved in that. We were just so impressed, we could hardly tell them about what we were supposed to describe to them in the course of the tours. I think one member of the staff accompanied each bus on this trip, and, you know we were just overcome with admiration and awe for these famous, really famous people.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Did you travel with the Coltons?



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Ah, well yes, to a certain extent. They made several trips to <Hawaii>, and one time they made a trip around the world. They often went to <Philadelphia> to visit the family members and all, and I didn't go with them on any of those trips. But, we went to scientific meetings, probably at least once a year. Different places like <Santa Fe>, and <Denver>, and <El Paso> and <Tucson>, and, you know, sort of local, and I did go to those.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: You must have become almost a part of their family.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: Well, really, that's right, I did. It was a great privilege and a pleasure, too. And it was also interesting. Dr. Colton would get some ideas about something that he thought the Museum ought to do, you know. And we would talk it over at the breakfast table or dinner table, something like that, and ah, it was fun to see these ideas develop, you know, and to hear all the possibilities when the ideas arise. Now the institution is so large, that, you know one hand doesn't know what the other hand's doing, really. The Museum is over there, and geology is over there. I don't see these people very often anymore. Not being on the spot with all these people all the time, you don't hear what they plan to do, or what they planned and it didn't turn out; or what they'd like to do, you know. Maybe they can do it. Yes, I really miss that sort of thing. It was very inspiring, really, and I hope I contributed a little bit to it from time to time. Dr. Colton was very receptive to ideas from all the members of the staff. So, I think possibly I did contribute a few things.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: I'm sure you did. But probably one of the biggest changes within the Museum, itself, has been the impersonal… you know, with the larger staff; it's become much more impersonal.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: That's right. That's right.



KRISTINE PENNANCE: Well, can you think of anything else, any other memories? Okay.



KATHARINE BARTLETT: In about 1956 or 7, Gene Foster, who had made some trips through <Glen Canyon>, found that there were many, many ruins there, and she realized that very little had been written about the ruins, and that not nearly all were recorded. And she thought that an archaeological survey should be made prior to the time that the area was flooded by the <Glen Canyon Dam>. The dam was to start construction in about 1957, I believe it was or '58. And she had talked to various people at the Museum, and so an application was made to the Park Service for a survey, and they granted the Museum money to do this from <Hite Utah> to <Lees Ferry> for one year, I believe 1957. And, Gene, who by that time had become a very good friend of mine, organized the expedition.

 

It took three groups down the river; one in the spring, one in the summer and one in fall. And each one of these trips lasted about a month to six weeks. We made a short trip in October of '56, I believe, and I could see that there were many, many, many ruins there, every side canyon and the main canyon were just full of all sorts of beautiful little cliff dwellings and all sorts of little structures. So when the Park Service money came through, she had two boats and, rubber rafts that is, and about four or five people to each party and made these various trips down recording sites.

 

The University of Utah was also interested in the project at that time. And so they would take the right bank of the river that is all the way through <Utah> and the Museum, at the end, had the area from the <San Juan River>, from the mouth of the <San Juan> down to <Marble Canyon>. But very interesting, and a very curious feeling to get into a boat at <Hite> and wave "good-bye" to the cars and your friends and push off down the river, completely dependent on your own resources and management to last for a month to six weeks.

 

Well, we had very interesting experiences and saw dozens of wonderful ruins, all of which are now under water, of course. And we collected as much as we could from these sites, such as they were, and transported all the stuff back to <Flagstaff>. It was very, very beautiful red rock canyons with springs that came out in sort of cave like places, and every place where there was a spring would be covered with ferns and little flowers. Oh, just so beautiful. Of course, that's why it was named "<Glen Canyon>" because of the glens. And the side canyons were very flat, and some had shallow running streams in them. And we'd just either walk along the bank of the stream or just wade in the stream, up the river to the, what was supposed to be the maximum level of the lake, in order to record everything. It was, it was, it was just so interesting. I just enjoyed every minute of it though I was kind of scared sometimes when the weather was bad or the river was very rough. But, we never had any accidents, happily, and no problems at all.



