LES HART INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-3la, 57-3Ib



[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A (Babbitt Tape 57-3la)]





Hart: I don't have much, really. 





Babbitt: Les, when did you first come to <Arizona>? 



Hart: We landed in <Flagstaff> March 15, 1883. 



Babbitt: That was your daddy and your family, is that it? 



Hart: And with a bunch of cattle. 



Babbitt: How old were you when you came here? 



Hart: Ten. 



Babbitt: Where'd you settle first when you came in? 



Hart: (unclear) <Oak Creek>, (unclear) 



Babbitt: Did your daddy homestead there? 



Hart: No, I think [Harding?] homesteaded. I wouldn't be sure. I ain't sure about that. I believe Harding did, though. 



Babbitt: Your dad was here looking around for a location for a cattle outfit, originally, wasn't he? 



Hart: No, he come out the year before and hauled ties on the railroad. (unclear) in 1881. He was out here haulin' ties, [he and my bother?]. And then he went down to <Oak Creek>, fishin', and he liked it, so he come back and got us and we come back the next year. 



Babbitt: That's when you bought Old Harding out down there? 



Hart: No, no, we sold out to Harding. 



Babbitt: Oh, that's right, you started.... Your dad probably didn't homestead, he just located? 



Hart: Just located, yes. 



Babbitt: What did you do, did you homestead? 



Hart: No, I don't think he did. Just located. 



Babbitt: He just sat down there and decided that was where he was gonna stay and that was it? 



Hart: Yeah, and put them ditches out, and was farming. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Nobody else claimed that land then, a'tall, huh? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: Who were your neighbors? 



Hart: Didn't have any. 



Babbitt: Were you the first people in the canyon? 



Hart: Yeah. Old Man Howard came in that fall. He moved in there. 



Babbitt: Where did he settle?--down where the (unclear) canyon is now? 



Hart: Well, (unclear) worked for it. 



Babbitt: That's (unclear) Creek Lodge? 



Hart: Yeah. Yeah, that's where he settled. 



Babbitt: Did he come in alone? 



Hart: No, the old family [McPeter?] come in there, John Peters. 



Babbitt: How do you spell that? 



Hart: I don't remember how he spelled his name. Used to call him Peter, [C-A- V-E-R?], I guess. 



Babbitt: Oh, John (unclear), yeah. They came in hunting, didn't they? 



Hart: Yeah, used to hunt together. Found that (unclear) and located. 



Babbitt: Wasn't Hart a big man? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: How big would you say he was, Les? 



Hart: Weighed 225 pounds. 



Babbitt: About six-feet-what? 



Hart: Six-feet-four. 



Babbitt: No fat on him, was there? 



Hart: Not a bit. 



Babbitt: Was it true about the old fellah and his molar teeth all around, both upper and lower jaws? Is that a fact? 



Hart: That's a fact. 



Babbitt: You actually saw that? 



Hart: Oh yes, I was with him most of the times (unclear). 



Babbitt: In other words, even across the top of his mouth he had molar teeth? 



Hart: Yeah, (unclear), jaw teeth all the way around, (unclear) jaw teeth. 



Babbitt: I could never believe that, (unclear) 



Hart: (unclear) back (unclear) prove. Old Mrs. Purtyman, she knows it. 



Babbitt: Well, if you tell me, I believe it, of course. But I mean I've heard that story from unfounded sources. So 'til you had told me that you'd actually seen it, I wouldn't have believed it, unless you had told me. 



Hart: Well, I remember one time he got drunk here in town, and I come in after Mrs. Purtyman, and that's his daughter. She wanted me to come and get him out of town. I was only one could get him out of town when he was (unclear) and drunk. I came in and got out here (unclear) what they call the old blacksmith's cabin. I guess you don't know what I'm tellin' about--lock jaw. And Bill Beck [phonetic] was camped there. That's the first time I ever saw Bill Beck. Mashed two of them teeth out. I know he was out there with hot coals on him, and his jaw (unclear) took one of them teeth out. 



Babbitt: You mean mash (unclear). 



Hart: (unclear) jaw. Lockjaw was all that was the matter with him. We got it loose some way or other. Bill out at camp there, he was comin' to town (unclear). We got hot coals on it (unclear). 



Babbitt: The old fellah was quite a battler when he got drunk, wasn't he? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Didn't he used to take 'em on down here in these saloons? 



Hart: Yeah. (unclear) go down unconscious. (unclear) 



Babbitt: What did he have to do, just hit 'em once? 



Hart: That's all. 



Babbitt: Was he belligerent himself, or was it somebody pickin' a fight with him? 



Hart: He kinda liked to fight when he got drunk. 



Babbitt: You know, somebody was tellin' me about an old Mormon bully around here that claimed he was gonna whip Old Hart? And he rode up on his horse there one time? 



Hart: Oh, he wasn't Mormon, he just (unclear). Somebody told him he used to whip everybody in the saloons, you know. Somebody told him that Old Man Howard would come in sometime and clean 'em. He said he wanted to see. It wasn't long after that Old Man Howard rode uptown (unclear) had a (unclear) pack on there, and leadin' a burro. And he carried his gun right across his saddle in front of him. Somebody told this old Irishman, "There's Old Man Howard now." He said he just went out and whipped the son of a bitch. They went out there and they told him, "Are you Bear Howard?" "Well," he said, "they call me Bear Howard once in a while." "Get down, I just want to whip the hell out of you." Well Old Man Howard said, "Okay, wait 'til I tie my burro." 



Babbitt: Nobody ever seemed to get him down, though, did they? 



Hart: Nope. 



Babbitt: Well, he hunted bear most of the time, didn't he? 



Hart: Yeah, that's the way he made his living. Used to hunt with that Old Man Wilson. (unclear), he never hunted much, he stayed down on the ranch. [Taylor?] made most of them ditches and fixed the ranch up. But the old man, he'd hunt and sell meat and buy grab. 



Babbitt: What would he do, sell bear meat to the butcher shops? 



Hart: Yeah, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Were the butcher shops in <Flagstaff>? 



Hart: Yeah, old Hawks used to own a butcher shop up in Old Town. Later on, Old Man Hawks moved down here, and he owned what's called Pine (unclear) House now. 



Babbitt: Pine Hotel (unclear)? 



Hart: Yeah. Two Hawks brothers (unclear). I guess you read about that. 



Babbitt: I've heard about it. Were they cattle thieves? 



Hart: No. No, George Hawks and Bill Hawks was goin' to school with me at the time--that is, the same school over here where the college is now. George got into trouble that night, killed John N. Berry. 



Babbitt: Was that Pete Berry's boy? 



Hart: Pete Berry's brother. Yeah, Pete Berry's brother. Killed him, and then put 'em in jail. Bill made the remark that if he didn't kill Berry, why, he'd kill him, see. So they put Bill in jail, too. And that night a mob raised and killed 'em both in jail. 



Babbitt: Shot 'em right there in jail? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: They didn't take 'em out and hang 'em? 



Hart: I know John Hawks was goin' to school--he was younger--and he asked me to help carry some clothes up there. I went up to the jail with him, and they had Bill and George on a table, washin' 'em. (unclear) I'll never forget it. We carried the clothes up there to dress 'em in for the funeral. 



Babbitt: Pretty bloody situation. Where was the jail then, Les? 



Hart: Over there where City Hall is now. It was just made out of two-by-fours. 



Babbitt: Wasn't there any city marshall or anybody [who] tried to protect the Hawks boys? 



Hart: No, weren't no city marshall, just a sheriff. 



Babbitt: Well, the sheriff apparently didn't try to help 'em, right? 



Hart: Didn't have a chance, I don't think. There were about 20-30 of 'em. 



Babbitt: How long ago was that, Les? 



Hart: Oh, Jesus Christ, I don't know. 



Babbitt: You were goin' to school, weren't you, a kid? 



Hart: Yeah. I was here in <Flagstaff>, and my father was down at <Oak Creek>, (unclear). He'd have probably been in it, if he'd have been here. Most all the old-timers was in it. There's a lot of'em went into that jail. 



Babbitt: Well, Berry was popular. 



Hart: Yeah. And George Hawks wasn't. Bill was all right, but the trouble (unclear) some things leaked out that Bill called somebody's name, like Old George Hawks was (unclear). Somebody else up (unclear). He called their name, and they just killed him to keep him from (unclear). He just committed suicide. If he'd kept his mouth shut, they wouldn't have shot him, likely. 



Babbitt: What was he gonna tell on 'em? 



Hart: Well, he called some of their names, see, and knew who some of'em was. It was a masked mob. 



Babbitt: Oh, I see. 



Hart: And he knew some of 'em, and he called some of their names, and they just shot him. 



Babbitt: Were there many lynchings and hangings like that? 



Hart: That's the only one that I know of. 



Babbitt: How was <Flagstaff> at the time you were a boy? Wasn't it a pretty rough town? 



Hart: Yeah, it was pretty rough. 



Babbitt: Did they have a lot of saloons around, Les? 



Hart: Yeah. That front row was pretty well all saloons. Two main ones was Sandy Donahue and (unclear). 



Babbitt: Sandy Donahue was quite a fellow, wasn't he? 



Hart: Yeah, quite a character. Pretty good man, too. He was sheriff of the county here once. 



Babbitt: Well, didn't he own most of <Flagstaff>? 



Hart: No, he didn't own much property. He just owned that saloon there. Babbitts finally got it. He got in debt, got drinkin' too much whiskey, ruined Old Sandy. 



Babbitt: He was a good-hearted fellow, though, wasn't he? 



Hart: Best in the world. 



Babbitt: I've always understood that he'd give the shirt off his back. 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: But he liked to fight pretty well in his own right. 



Hart: Quite a scrapper. He was an awful powerful man. You bet, Sandy was a very powerful man. 



Babbitt: Along with the saloons, they ran gambling games. 



Hart: Oh, yeah, faro and craps, monte. 



Babbitt: Do you remember any of the old-time gamblers that were here? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, I knew 'em all, I guess, if I could remember their names. 



Babbitt: Remember Three-fingered Hennessy? I've got a picture of him somewhere. 



Hart: Three-fingered Jack. Yeah, I remember him very well. Jack Hennessy. He was no relation to John and that outfit. They called him Three-fingered Jack. 



Babbitt: What'd he do, deal monte and faro? 



Hart: (unclear) bank. And then [Banana?] Kid, he was what they called a rounder in them days. He'd go in a saloon and he'd mooch you for a couple of dollars, a stake to play [fairbank?] with, and he'd divide the winnin's. (unclear) Then they had a little fellah here they called "Sheenee." He was around there too. 



Babbitt: Was he a gambler as well? 



Hart: Well, that's what he'd do, he'd mooch his friends for money to play fairbank on. That was quite a game in all them days. They'd mooch some money off of you to play fairbank, they'd make a winnin', they'd divide up; and if they lost, you didn't get no thin'. 



Babbitt: Were they pretty good about splittin' up? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, them young fellahs played almost for that. 



Babbitt: Did they play for some pretty high stakes, Les? 



Hart: George Dole [phonetic] used to play pretty high, and John Francis. 



Babbitt: Well, you know, my dad told me about Old Judge Dole. Sometimes he'd come in and he'd have a lot of twenty-dollar gold pieces he'd leave with him. Then he'd come back in and borrow those all back, and some more too. 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Didn't they used to stack those twenty-dollar gold pieces up on the gambling tables? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, I've seen many a stack. They'd have twenty pieces high. That's the way they'd stack their silver, twenty dollars high. 



Babbitt: The gold pieces and the silver both? 



Hart: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: They didn't know what paper money was. 



Hart: No, we didn't have no paper money then to amount to anything. There were no pennies. Hard times conies with the pennies, you know. 



Babbitt: (laughs) That's right. They didn't have pennies 'til they had hard times. 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Well, let's see, there was a Vail Saloon, you said, and Sandy's were the two biggest. Were there many others around? 



Hart: Oh, there were several. It's hard for me to remember their names now. There's a Wigwam down there (unclear), and then there's another one up the other way, a fellah--I don't remember his name--(unclear), pretty close there. Then there's John N. Berry's saloon. That was built up after he went out. I forget who run it. 



Babbitt: Were they all right down the main drag? 



Hart: Yeah, right down Front, Saloon Row. That used to be known as Saloon Row. 



Babbitt: They had a shootin' once in a while, I guess, didn't they? 



Hart: Oh, there was lots of people killed on that. 



Babbitt: Was that mostly because they were drunk, or 'cause they were arguing over gamblin', or just what? 



Hart: Oh, just them days, you know, them bad men wanted to be bad. 



Babbitt: What kept the town going? Was the mill going? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: And then let's see, there was saloons, and you mentioned, I believe, Hawks' butcher shop. 



Hart: That was up in Old Town. That was before they were buildin' the new town down here. They used to call this New Town then. 



Babbitt: What other businesses were there down here in the New Town area? 



Hart: Wasn't any--not 'til later on. That is, when we first come--I don't know whether you remember the Beal House, Marv Beal House up here in Old Town. (unclear) That was the furthest house down this way when we come. The section house and some water tanks, that's all. We camped right where the grammar school is over here. 



Babbitt: The Emerson School? 



Hart: Emerson School, yeah. We camped there, and let the cattle go up that flat. 



Babbitt: Didn't Old Brannen come down here and build a big building right where Santa Fe and San Francisco Street is now? 



Hart: It was right across from George Black (unclear). 



Babbitt: Yeah, that's right, that's what (unclear). 



Hart: Yeah. And then Doc Brannen had a place right next door down, (unclear). (unclear) 



Babbitt: But you spent most of your time down at <Oak Creek>, didn't you? 



Hart: All except the winters. 



Babbitt: Was your mama down there with you too? 



Hart: Oh yeah. 



Babbitt: I remember one time, Les, you told me that you grew tobacco down there, and you had your own [meat?]. 



Hart: Old Man Hart grew tobacco. 



Babbitt: And you had meat. Did the boys make their own liquor there? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: They didn't, huh? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: You had all the meat you wanted, in bear and turkey and deer? 



Hart: Yeah. They didn't suffer for meat. 



Babbitt: Were there quite a few bear down in <Oak Creek>? 



Hart: Lots of 'em. 



Babbitt: Were they vicious, did they attack you? 



Hart: No. No, they'd run from ya'. 



Babbitt: You were talking about Old Howard going hunting with Wilson. What do you think is the true story of this Old Wilson getting killed there, the one <Wilson Canyon>'s named.... 



Hart: Well, he actually got killed. He had a couple of burros with him, and they were packed. He'd gone out after grub, and he had his old Winchester. And he shot this bear, and it went up that <Wilson Canyon>, and he followed it up in there, and there's a bluff--I've been to the place several times, when I was a kid. He thought the bear was bleedin' pretty bad, showed blood on them red rocks. And he followed it up (unclear). He'd set his gun down against a little ledge there, and walked up. The bear went out after him, and he clumb on them yew trees. It pulled the sole of his shoes off--it'd clumb up after him, pulled him out of that tree and killed him. I got the dogs up there, his hounds. He was actually killed there. I knew him, he used to be around us a whole lot. 



Babbitt: One of the Purtyman boys told me that they found a carcass of a big bear up above there, and they always thought that perhaps Old Wilson really wounded it to the point where it died later. 



Hart: That's just a theory. Old Man Howard used to think it was an old big bear in a secret canyon after that, [went and chopped and put?]. And he thought that was the one that killed the old man--we don't know which one it was. But he was killed by a bear all right. He was there a couple of weeks before they ever found him. 



Babbitt: A couple of weeks. Of course a man would go out alone then for a month or two at a time, wouldn't he? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. He was stayin' out at Indian Gardens. Old Man Thompson was gone. When Thompson come home, why then he knew something was wrong and (unclear) went huntin' him. Old Man Thompson, one time he was buildin' trail, dropped a rock on his toe and skinned it pretty bad. He went to bed, it hurt the toe pretty bad, his foot. The flies bloat it. I come along there one time and maggots was eatin' his toe. 



Babbitt: Didn't he know it?! 



Hart: Yeah. Didn't have no medicine. I took flour and stuck in there and killed 'em. Flour smothered 'em out. 



Babbitt: Is that what you use? The old man got well, did he? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Was that Old John Thompson? 



Hart: That was Old Normal, Old Thompson, Indian Gardens there, in the Thompson family. 



Babbitt: Well, that was John, wasn't it? 



Hart: No. You're thinking of John Thomas. 



Babbitt: What was Old Thompson's first name? 



Hart: Jim Thompson. He's related to the Jameses, Old Lady James and that outfit. That is, he married one of Old Lady James' daughters. And them Thompson boys, I guess they own that place yet, don't they? 



Babbitt: Well, they sold out some, but they own a lot of it yet. Young Jimmy, I know, owns a lot of it. Well, then Old Jim Thompson and the Jameses were probably the first people (unclear). 



Hart: Yeah, Old Jim Thompson come in there, and he enjoyed it before we did. 



Babbitt: He came in '76, they tell me. 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: And you say you came into <Oak Creek> in.... 



Hart: Eighty-three [1883]. 



Babbitt: And then the next year Old Man Howard came in next to you there. 



Hart: That fall, I think is when Old Man Howard Taylor come in. 



Babbitt: Then didn't Old Man Robinson come in? 



Hart: Yes, (unclear) with my father. 



Babbitt: Well, he settled down on what's known as Santa Fe Flat there, where that spring is, didn't he? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Then he packed up and left? 



Hart: He sold it off to a fellah, and then Cayenne [phonetic] sold it to George Hawks. I don't know what become of it after that. 



Babbitt: I don't think any of 'em owned it. I think (unclear). 



Hart: (unclear) claim, that's all. 



Babbitt: Well, then, who came down in there next? Did Dyer come in, Old Banjo Bill? 



Hart: Old Banjo Bill. He was there. I don't know what year he come in, but he was there with us, and he went down and located what they call Banjo Bill now, (unclear) I got that twisted up. 



Babbitt: Where was Banjo Bill? 



Hart: Banjo Bill's place, you know where Juni-Pine (unclear) is? 



Babbitt: Yes. 



Hart: It's up this way, across the creek, flat there. 



Babbitt: Oh, I know where that is. 



Hart: Well, that's the Old Banjo Bill place. 



Babbitt: We used to call it Bootlegger Flat over there. 



Hart: Well, that's Banjo Bill's place. I've been there with him when I was a kid, several nights. 



Babbitt: Wasn't he one of the early settlers? 



Hart: Yeah. He used to play his banjo in the saloons up here for a living. 



Babbitt: (unclear) get a little change, he'd go down to <Oak Creek> and stay there? 



Hart: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: Well, let's see, was there any other people in there then, or about that time? They didn't come in 'til later, did they? 



Hart: Didn't come in 'til later. 



Babbitt: Let's see, John Thomas probably came in. 



Hart: Well, he bought Hyde out. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Well, who did Hyde bring in with him? He brought his daughter, I know. 



Hart: His daughter come in there and lived with him. That was Mrs. Purtyman, the mother of these boys. Her name was Alice Cook. She and (unclear) separated, and she married a fellah by the name of Jim Cook. He used to run the pump out there. 



Babbitt: And your mother was there. Did you have any brothers and sisters, Les? 



Hart: Yeah. One sister, she was the youngest. Three brothers. 



Babbitt: What would you do, would you move out of there in the winter? 



Hart: Out of there in the winter, and go to school up here in <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: Was there any sort of get-togethers, social times in <Oak Creek Canyon>? 



Hart: We had a Fourth of July one time, just our own people. I had some uncles come out from <Kansas>, and they brought down a keg of beer, and we had a Fourth of July. That was the only social gatherin' they ever had there. 



Babbitt: I see the Purtymans were located down below, down toward the (unclear). 



Hart: They came later on, down below. Hired a while, and later on they located down below, (unclear) all little kids (unclear) there. 



Babbitt: They were some of the early settlers, though. 



Hart: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: Well, did Old Howard kill many bear? 



Hart: Yeah, quite a lot. 



Babbitt: What did he do, go up over into Barney Pasture? 



Hart: Yeah. I killed fifteen bear while I was with him, myself, when I was a kid. Yeah, he located in Barney Pasture. Barney was his partner up there. 



Babbitt: He was Howard's partner? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: In what way, in hunting? 



Hart: In cattle, and that ranch up there. 



Babbitt: Well, Howard had quite a history, didn't he? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. 



Babbitt: Didn't he get out of jail with a file that was in a cake? Somebody was telling me that. 



Hart: Yeah, Mrs. Purtyman made a cake and sent to him. He was convicted to be hung in <Oxnard>, Californy. Well, I think that's called <Oxnard>, right close to <Oxnard>--it's <Ventura>. He killed three Mexicans, and then the sheriff got after him, and he killed him, and he come out to <Prescott>. They took him back, convicted him to be hung, and Mrs. Purtyman made a cake, and made a saw out of a clock spring, and sent it in the cake. And they said she put a bucket bail in there some way to stiffen the saw. I don't know how that was. 



Babbitt: (unclear) bucket bail? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: What the deuce is that? 



Hart: The bail, on a bucket. Twisted it around so he could make a back for that saw to stiffen it. I don't know how he done it. But anyway, I've heard tell that she put this bucket bail in the cake with the saw, and he sawed out. (unclear) saloon, tell it a hundred times, and went over to the little saloon about four o'clock in the morning, nobody in there but the bartender. He had a bar of this iron that he sawed off, about two foot long, he said. And he [copped his arm?] on the bartender and made him throw up his hands, and then he backed him behind the bar, and got the bartender's shotgun. He got a bottle of whiskey, and made the bartender go out with him a couple of miles there, and told him, "You go back. I don't want to hurt you a'tall. I'm leavin'." He come back to Arizony. He was shot in the Mexican War through the right lung. I was with him. He wanted me to go with him. When he was eighty-three years old, he had a doctor--was it Dr. Grawbison [phonetic] or Dr. Adams? Dr. Grawbison, I believe was the name. Anyway, Dr. Grawbison cut that cavity out. It was about as big as my two fists. Had that bullet in it. He was shot in the Mexican War in the right lung, and it'd lodged in the (unclear) on his back. When he was eighty-three years old, when he was ridin' around, ridin' a horse, it hurt him, he was gonna have it cut off. He laid down there, and they cut that out. When they went to cut it, he wouldn't take any. He said "ouch" once in a while. After that operation, he got up, and him and me walked. He wanted me to (unclear) and I stayed with him. We walked from there down to the Hawks (unclear) about two blocks. The office was up there over the hotel, where he was operated on. I cut that bullet out, I had that bullet, and my house burned up (unclear) in town. I cut the thing open and got that bullet out. It was black. 



Babbitt: He was a pretty tough old guy, wasn't he, Old Howard, to stand stuff like that. 



Hart: He said them Mexicans shot him, and he fell on their little rim of rock (unclear). He said he knew that Mexican would look over and see if he was dead. So he had his bayonet ready, and sure enough, the Mexican (unclear) put his foot against it to (unclear). 



Babbitt: That was in the Mexican War, Old <Mexico> somewhere? 



Hart: Yeah. But when he got into trouble, he come up out of there at <Ventura>, and located a ranch up there (unclear). The Mexicans (unclear) field of barley and a field of corn. He put out a ditch and was irrigatin' it. The Mexicans put their sheep down there and cut his barley off, and was lettin' down the fence to go in and feed the corn off. He got down there and killed three of 'em, and (unclear) those sheep over in the river and drowned 'em. Then they had to lay out in the woods, and (unclear). Mexican sheriff come after him, and he beat the sheriff to it, and killed him. Then he come to <Prescott>, and they arrested him in <Prescott> and took him back on a mule to convict him. And he sawed out and come back. 



Babbitt: Gee whiz. They didn't try to get him back again apparently. 



Hart: No. After that I was not with him. He moved to Dewey over there with Mrs. Cook. I understand they sent him a parole when he was about ninety years old. He lived to be ninety-three. 



Babbitt: Gosh, he must have been a husky man. 



Hart: Oh, he was awful. 



Babbitt: Wasn't he kind to animals? Somebody was telling me he saw a fellah hit a horse with a quirt and beat the stuffin's out of him. 



Hart: That's the first, I was there and I was tellin' him about it. I was the first (unclear). 



Babbitt: Where was that, down in <Oak Creek> somewhere? 



Hart: Yeah, that was at the lodge there. That's where they lived there. A fellah by the name of Jack, he stayed all winter with us. I stayed with the old man that winter, me and Jack and him. This Jack was quite a bragger about his fightin', and he always carried a six-shooter. He was fightin' bulls up here at these loggin' camps, and he cut a whole bundle of whip stocks, enough to use in the camps that summer. He went up and an old man pastured his two horses that winter, and they got fat, and (unclear) along March. He went and got the horses, and he was gonna come to <Flagstaff>. He went to saddle one up.... [END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Hart: (unclear) left-handed, you know. And he went down, and he stayed down. And that old man run in the house and he used to carry, he had a 40-calibre, 120 black powder gun (unclear) hunt bear with, and he put three cartridges in his fingers there, so to have 'em handy, as it only chambered one, you know. So he went in and got that old gun, got three cartridges (unclear) and come out and set down on the porch with the gun across his knee. Old Jack was still layin' there, unconscious. And he said, "You know, if you don't want to see that son of a bitch die, you've got to throw some water on it." And I'm scared to death. I went in the house to get the bucket, and it was empty, I had to go down to the spring and get a bucketful. I got part of a bucketful and come up there. I remember I slipped up kinda, and I got pretty close, and (unclear), got up, went down to that spring and washed hisself, packed his horse up, put his (unclear) on and saddle. He had to come right out in front of the old man. The old man's still settin' there with that gun across his lap. "Jack," he said, "I want you to go satisfied." He said, "I'm satisfied," his old jaw's swelled up about like that. He couldn't see out of [one eye]. 



Babbitt: How old was Old Howard then? 



Hart: Oh, I imagine about sixty-five, somewhere's along there. 



Babbitt: You mentioned Purtyman. Was he a partner of Howard's over in <California>, and then came to <Arizona>? 



Hart: No, Purtyman was his son-in-law. Mrs. Purtyman was Howard's daughter— that's Mrs. Cook. And Steve Purtyman was his son-in-law. He married Howard's daughter first. That was his kids that's down in the canyon. 



Babbitt: Uh-huh. And then Mrs. Purtyman, who was a hired girl later on, married a fellow by the name of Cook? 



Hart: Yeah, they separated, and she married Jim Cook. He used to own a pump out here at the pump house. She was a sister to this Edith Fenstermaker [phonetic], too, by the way. 



Babbitt: Oh, was she? The one that Lynk Smith is married to? 



Hart: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: Well, then the Schneblys came in quite a bit later. 



Hart: Yeah, they come in [bowl?]. Of course that was two different neighborhoods. They was a long ways apart then. 



Babbitt: Was there a trail down the canyon? 



Hart: There was a trail, but it'd take you all day to go down to Indian Gardens, it was awful rough. 



Babbitt: No wagon road or anything? 



Hart: Oh, no. A long time before they even had a wagon road into Indian Gardens. They made a wagon road in there first. 



Babbitt: Didn't you folks start building a road up the hill there, right east of the ranch? 



Hart: Yeah, we had a road out of there, when we stayed there. 



Babbitt: That was before Thomas ever started buildin' his road up there? 



Hart: Did Thomas start to build a road? 



Babbitt: The one he finally built-Lew Thomas, you know. Well, the Purtymans and Thomas and different ones. 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: You can still see it. It was near where the new road comes out now. 



Hart: Oh, at the head of the canyon. 



Babbitt: Yeah. 



Hart: Oh, yeah. 



Babbitt: Where were you fellahs figurin' on comin' out? 



Hart: We was goin' right out in front of our house right up there. Figured out to go out. 



Babbitt: You were gonna swing back and forth on the side of that hill? 



Hart: Yeah. And then we'd come out at what they called the main road, the Verde Road, at <Newman Park>. You know where it is? 



Babbitt: I don't recall right now. 



Hart: So that's on the Schnebly Road out here. 



Babbitt: Was that anywhere near <James Canyon>? 



Hart: The other side of <James Canyon>, two or three miles. 



Babbitt: Were there any Indians around when you were a kid? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: You didn't have any trouble with 'em? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: You were telling me one time that you went up and camped in those maple trees. Did you get any sugar out of those, or any syrup? 



Hart: No, we didn't make sugar--we made syrup out of it. We tapped 'em several winters there. 



Babbitt: How was it, pretty good syrup? 



Hart: Yeah, (unclear) that trap. We had a burro and [we] put a pack saddle on, and two coal oil cans on each side, and had 'em cleaned out, and we'd lots of times bring down twenty gallons of that sap. My mother would cook it up. Twenty gallons won't make over a quart of good syrup. 



Babbitt: A quart?! My goodness, that wasn't very much. 



Hart: I don't remember what it made, but it wouldn't make much syrup, I'll tell you that. Had to boil it down. 



Babbitt: When you built these roads and worked on these trails, there wasn't any such thing as powder. 



Hart: No, we didn't use any powder then. 



Babbitt: What would you do with your big boulders? You just fight it out, is that it? 



Hart: Dig 'em out. 



Babbitt: That meant an awful lot of work. 



Hart: Oh, they had powder at that time, yeah--black powder. 



Babbitt: Didn't have dynamite, though. 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: How was fishin' when you were a kid? 



Hart: Well, we used to go out, in fifteen, twenty minutes catch all we want. 



Babbitt: In fifteen or twenty minutes? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Were they pretty good-sized fish? 



Hart: Yeah--they were small, maybe twelve. 



Babbitt: Well, they would get large, though, some of them, wouldn't they? 



Hart: Well, my brother caught 'em four pound and a half, caught down there just above the falls. 



Babbitt: Well, didn't you used to take 'em uptown and sell 'em when you were kids? 



Hart: Yeah. Him and me went down. Father told us (unclear) Fourth of July, if we could get some money out of fish. So we went on down and we caught a hundred pounds, him and I, laid out down at the falls. I took 'em to town, sold 'em to [gambler?]. We had a real Fourth of July. 



Babbitt: What brother was that, Les? 



Hart: Bill and Elmer. Bill was older than me, and Elmer younger. 



Babbitt: Are any of your brothers alive now? 



Hart: Luke's all. 



Babbitt: He's over in <Kingman> now? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: But the undergrowth in the early days, was it about like it is now? 



Hart: Oh, now, altogether different. All over the country, as far as that's concerned. The undergrowth is much more dense now than it was then. 



Babbitt: You mean down in the bottom of the canyon? 



Hart: Well, it was pretty brushy in that canyon, but it seems to me like there's more now than there was then. Stuffs growed up more. 



Babbitt: How would you account for that, anyway? 



Hart: Well, it'd been burnt out several times. 



Babbitt: Did they deliberately set fires to it? Or would nature take its course, lightning hits? 



Hart: It caught afire, nobody gives a damn, let it burn. 



Babbitt: (chuckles) I guess they were glad to see it burn. 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Well, it made it easier, gettin' back and forth. 



Hart: Oh yeah. 



Babbitt: You crisscrossed a creek a number of times, undoubtedly, going down there. 



Hart: Oh, yeah, you bet. 



Babbitt: When you came on up to Flag, when you were a kid.... You know, they're still arguing about where this flagpole was, that <Flagstaff> got its name from. Where do you think that was, Les? 



Hart: Well, Old Man Tump Freeman, he lived in <Phoenix>, and he was here on that company, with the soldiers. I don't know whether he was with the soldiers or just here, but he said it was heisted up there by the Old Town Spring. He was here at the time--he was living here at the time. 



Babbitt: How old a man is he now? 



Hart: He's pretty old. He lives right in <Phoenix>. I don't know just where he lives. He used to have cattle up there at <Florence>. 



Babbitt: Old Tump Freeman? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Charlie Clark told me that it was over toward where the grandstand might be, perhaps not that far up. You know, on the old Clark Ranch. 



Hart: No, Old Tump had it up there by the Old Town Spring, is all I know. 



Babbitt: And Tump was with the party that came through and raised the flag that Fourth of July? 



Hart: Yeah, the ones that raised. I think that some soldiers were here. I don't know whether he was with the soldiers, or comin' through. He crossed at <Lee's Ferry>, I think, and come in here. He was Mormon. 



Babbitt: Tump Freeman. I'll have to try to look him up. I wonder how I could find him, anyway. Do you know anybody that might know him? 



Hart: (unclear) <Phoenix> (unclear) cattle. 



Babbitt: Talking about cattle, you left <Oak Creek> then and came on up to Flag and went to school, and you got in the cattle business, didn't you? 



Hart: Yeah, I got in the cattle business at Verde first. I bought Johnny Daugherty [phonetic] out. That's where I first went in the cattle business. 



Babbitt: About when was that, Les? 



Hart: That was about.... Let's see, I left home in 1892. Oh, it was about 1890,1 guess. Somewheres along there. I owned them six years. 



Babbitt: How was the range down there? It was good, wasn't it? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: They had a lot more grass than they do now. 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: Didn't they? 



Hart: Had a lot more cattle, though. 



Babbitt: What'd you do about permits? 



Hart: Didn't have any, wasn't any Forest. Didn't have any permit. 



Babbitt: Just as many cattle as you could get on the range? 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: But they overgrazed it? 



Hart: They certainly did. 



Babbitt: Well, you know. Lynk Smith told me they used to cut hay down in the <Verde Valley> there, years and years ago. 



Hart: They did, on the first shoulder there. (unclear) cattle (unclear) when they first come in there, the soldiers at <Camp Verde>, they used to buy that <Sacaton> hay. They used to cut it up there on Middle Verde, the hole, and then haul it across the river and pour water on it and take it up and sell it to the soldiers--make it weigh good. 



Babbitt: (laughs) What did they do, sell it by the pound, huh? 



Hart: Pound, yeah. 



Babbitt: Well, somebody was tellin' me about one old guy who used to have some rocks underneath the bottom of the hay there. 



Hart: Might have. 



Babbitt: Old Hance? 



Hart: George Hance? George Hance is an old-timer there. He (unclear) cut hay. 



Babbitt: And then you came on up and got in Babbitts later on. 



Hart: That was in 1905. No, let's see, wait a minute. In 1906 I got in with Babbitts. 



Babbitt: Well, you built up a whale of an outfit. That Hart Cattle Company was one of the biggest of the bunch, wasn't it? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: How many cattle would you run? 



Hart: We had a hell of a lot of 'em. I don't know how many. 



Babbitt: Ten thousand head? 



Hart: Yeah, around that, I guess. 



Babbitt: And your range was from <Mormon Lake> on down toward Meteor Mountain, all through that country. Was the grass any thicker and better then than it is now? 



Hart: Yes, I believe it was, out there, a little. Well, I don't know, this Forest is protecting the range--you've gotta say that. You can't say anything else. What I think is a lot of hooey about it, but they have protected this range. But, the first four or five years I was the head of Hart Cattle Company, and we didn't sell anything but beef. Then we always [felt?] the country ourselves. And then we'd sell part beef and part feeders--later on, all feeders. That's the way it worked out. 



Babbitt: What did you get a pound for beef? Remember? 



Hart: The first I sold out of the Hart Cattle Company I sold for three and three-quarter cents. The next was four cents. And then when we made a trade with O. B. Fuller, why, we sold them for six cents. 



Babbitt: They gradually kept goin' up, didn't they? 



Hart: During World War I, we sold for nine and a half, was the most we ever got. Probably made more money only sellin' for six cents than we did when we sold for nine and a half. 



Babbitt: You had less running expense? 



Hart: Less running expense in every respect. When you was smaller, [grub?] was cheaper, and the care, and everything else. 



Babbitt: And the cowboys worked a little harder, probably. 



Hart: Well, we done lots of work. 



Babbitt: Who were some of the old cow men? 



Hart: You mean that owned? 



Babbitt: Some of the old cattlemen that used to be around <Flagstaff>. 



Hart: Well, Jack Brown had cattle. That was later on. Bill Holden. Before Bill Holden, Mac (unclear, dog barking). 



Babbitt: Matt McLean? 



Hart: Mac Lee had the Durham cattle, and the cattle Walter Durham had. See, I bought Walter Durham out. That's what started the Hart Cattle Company. Mac Lee and Al Gordon. 



Babbitt: Let's see, [cattle, Francis, Roy's?] and sheep? 



Hart: They had sheep, yeah. 



Babbitt: Then there was the Babbitts. Teddy Thurston [phonetic] was a sheepman-no! he was in the cattle business, wasn't he? 



Hart: He went with Babbitts and the "T" Bar Outfit south. That was later on. But the old-time cattlemen, that Old Bob Finney, and [oncom?] people, the Clicks, Hacker and Walker [phonetic]. That was the old-time cattle people. 



Babbitt: Who's that Walker? 



Hart: Walker and Hacker, yeah. (unclear) 



Babbitt: That was old Boss Hacker? 



Hart: Boss Hacker, yeah. (unclear) John Woods was one of the oldest-timers there was in <Arizona> before he died. He used to freight (unclear) from <Santa Fe> to <Los Angeles>, and across through to J. Cox Tanks [phonetic] and [Heinzburg?] and that way. 



Babbitt: Where did he wind up, into <Phoenix>? 



Hart: No, there wasn't no <Phoenix> there then. What was before <Phoenix> time. They freighted (unclear) man by the name of Howard. In them days, they used to have what they called bull trains and mule trains--probably be thirty, forty wagons in each train. They had a bull train, him and Howard. A fellah by the name of Howard. He died over there at Seven Lakes. They freighted from <Santa Fe> to <Los Angeles>--take 'em six months to make the trip. Used to always talk (unclear) [and let their hawks and flatten up?]. 



Babbitt: Where is J. Cox Tanks? 



Hart: That's east on the Hart Cattle Company range. 



Babbitt: That's out in <Mormon Lake> somewhere? 



Hart: Yeah. Just this side of (unclear) just a little ways, that's Soldier Lake. You know where Soldier Lake is, don't you? 



Babbitt: Yeah. 



Hart: Well, that's J. Cox Tanks, right over this way about a half-mile. Natural tank. 



Babbitt: What did they freight, Les? 



Hart: Bacon and flour, stuff like that--coffee. 



Babbitt: That really must have been early. That must have been in the [18]70s, I imagine. 



Hart: Oh, yeah. Yeah, that was a way back there, right after the Civil War. 



Babbitt: And then this fellow Woods came up here and got in the cattle business? 



Hart: Yeah, he owned the Wood Ranch out here, (unclear) <Camp Verde>. (unclear) Woods. He lived to be quite old. I knew him, and old Boss Hacker, he was an old-timer down there. 



Babbitt: Well, was that Old Boss Hacker, too? 



Hart: Yeah. Hacker and Walker on the "T" Bar Cattle. That was before Babbitts ever bought 'em. 



Babbitt: He's really an old-timer, then, Old Boss. 



Hart: Oh, yeah. 



Babbitt: He had a meat market at one time, too, didn't he? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: I've seen pictures, Les, of deer on a chopping block. Does that happen very often? They apparently used to go out and shoot deer and bring 'em in? 



Hart: Still do, butcher shops here. Old Man Hawks in his butcher shop used to deal in, mostly, wild game. 



Babbitt: You could go out and shoot a deer anytime you want, I suppose. 



Hart: Whenever you want to. 



Babbitt: And how 'bout wild turkey? 



Hart: Same way. They just slaughtered 'em off, and (unclear) used to be lots more game than there is now. 



Babbitt: How 'bout antelope, were there lots of antelope? 



Hart: Not so many. 



Babbitt: Were there any other kind of game birds around? 



Hart: (unclear) turkeys. 



Babbitt: I suppose lots of ducks used to come into the lake. 



Hart: On the mesas out there you'd see lots of ducks. I guess (unclear) rains. 



Babbitt: There weren't elk here then in the early times? 



Hart: (unclear) elk (unclear). 



Babbitt: They were brought in later on. Well, there were lots of lions, I suppose. 



Hart: Yeah. (unclear) bear. Lots of bear. 



Babbitt: Did you have much trouble with lion and bear, with your calves and sheep? 



Hart: Yeah, (unclear) killed the calves pretty bad, and colts. You said you had some stuff you wanted to.... 



Babbitt: Yeah, I want to talk to you about the early history of <Oak Creek>. Excuse me a minute, I forgot about that, Les. Right here, let's see. 



Hart: Any dates I can straighten you out on.... 



Babbitt: Oh, I just wanted to see if you thought this was right. By the way, here's a picture of Old Man Howard, in case you're interested, while I'm looking at these. 



Hart: I saw that. I'd like to have a copy of that. 



Babbitt: Well, I'll get you one and send it to you. 



Hart: I wish you would. 



Babbitt: I'll be glad to, Les. I'll tell you another character is Old Sterling. When did he come up <Oak Creek>? 



Hart: Well, that was soon after we moved in there. He located up the head of the canyon. Charlie Sterling is his name. He was convicted for counterfeitin'. 



Babbitt: I understand what really got him in more trouble than anything, he stole some calves, didn't he, and got himself in bad? 



Hart: No. Counterfeitin' is what he went to the penitentiary for. They sent him to <Yuma>. 



Babbitt: Yeah, I know, but they said nobody paid much attention to him up there, they kinda let him alone, didn't they? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: I heard he butchered calves and got 'em sore at him, and the cowboys came after him. 



Hart: I never heard that. 



Babbitt: Did you ever see any of the counterfeit money he made? 



Hart: Yeah, I saw. My father was a witness on that, and my father had a tin cup where he'd poured some lead back in, and a part of a dollar stuck in it, and Dad.... Had it all melted down, see, and part of that dollar stuck out. 



Babbitt: What was it made out of, lead? 



Hart: Yeah. My father was a witness in that. That was before [I had?] <Coconino County>. 



Babbitt: That's when your daddy was livin' down in <Oak Creek>? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Well, now, the Purtyman boys got together with some of the folks down there and talked this over, and they said that Old Abraham James and Elizabeth James, and Bill and Jim and daughter Maggie and son Dave, along with--they called him John J. Thompson--and wife Maggie Thompson, came in the country in '76. 



Hart: I guess they did, but that was a different neighborhood, as I told you. They came low. 



Babbitt: Okay, now let's see what they say. Then they got Charles "Bear" Howard--Charles Smith Howard or Bear Howard-they got him comin' in as '82. And Jesse Howard and John J. Keater. That's the fellah you're talkin' about? 



Hart: Keater, yeah. 



Babbitt: K-E-A-T-E-R. And Jack Robinson, and Sterling. 



Hart: Jack always was with us--Jack Robinson. 



Babbitt: They've got David F. Hart and wife, Mrs. D. F. Hart. Sons and daughters, William, Elmer, Luther, Anna, and Les. 



Hart: Howard didn't come in there in '82. He come in the fall we did. 



Babbitt: Well, they've got you comin' in, in '82. 



Hart: No, we come in '83. 



Babbitt: Eighty-three, I see. Well, they were pretty close with that. Then they had the Purtymans comin' in, in 1887. 



Hart: Well, that probably is right, 'cause they come in and lived with Old Man Howard awhile. 



Babbitt: We're [freighting?] on erecting a monument for them. Oh! and then I see they've got--later on here then they've got John L. and L. V. Thomas coming in, in 1888. 



Hart: Well, I couldn't verify that. I remember when they bought Old Man Howard out. 



Babbitt: John and Lew Thomas? 



Hart: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: What were they payin' for ranches? 



Hart: Oh, I don't know, I don't remember a'tall. 



Babbitt: Wasn't much money, I don't suppose. 



Hart: No, no, wasn't much money. 



Babbitt: Did they generally swap some horses in on the deal, or cattle? 



Hart: No. Let's see, where'd they come from? From the East someplace, old J. L. V. Thomas. That's the old man. I remember his initials, J. L. V. 



Babbitt: And he was quite an old fellah. 



Hart: He was a great book man. I helped him carry his books down. He was well-educated, an awful reader. He had a whole trunkful of books, I guess 200 pounds of'em. He could kind of (unclear) in one of them books anything you'd want to find out right now. 



Babbitt: I heard that he was lieutenant governor of <Indiana> before he came out here. 



Hart: He was quite a man, as I remember. 



Babbitt: Do you remember whether or not he came from <Indiana>? 



Hart: He come from way east someplace. I don't remember just where he come from now. 



Babbitt: I wonder how he happened to come down to <Oak Creek>? 



Hart: I don't know. 



Babbitt: He never told you? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: Well, then they have O. P. Harding coming in, in '89--O. P. and Mattie Harding. 



Hart: That's when we left there, I guess. 



Babbitt: That must have been when you sold out. 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Then they've got Lewis H. Thomas and Rosie Thompson, 1893. 



Hart: Rosie Thompson, I don't remember that party a'tall. 



Babbitt: In '93 they have Lewis H. Thomas come in. In '94 they had Frank Owenby [phonetic]. That, again, was down below. 



Hart: That was down Schnebly Ranch. I had a chance to buy that ranch for $500 once, for the whole thing. 



Babbitt: What, that Schnebly Ranch? 



Hart: Yeah. The whole damned works. 



Babbitt: Is that where Sedona is now? 



Hart: Uh-huh. (unclear) owned it, and they wanted to sell it. Instead of that, I bought this (unclear) windmill pump, and I had a chance to buy that Windmill Ranch for $500. Instead of that, I bought (unclear). That's when we had the O.K. cattle. I made a mistake both ways. 



Babbitt: How many acres would there have been in that Schnebly Ranch, that Owenby property? 



Hart: Oh, I don't remember how many acres was in, or how many acres of farming land they had, but the whole thing. 



Babbitt: It was right in that valley, wasn't it? 



Hart: Yeah, the whole business on this side of the creek. Now, that's before I married. I know my wife and I went up there before we married, and I asked her if she could live up there. This was a little while before we was married. She wouldn't live up there, so I didn't buy it. 



Babbitt: One of your grocerymen and cattlemen down in <Camp Verde>, the famous family, one of the old-timers there.... 



Hart: Wainfields? [phonetic] 



Babbitt: Well, the Wainfields said they were gonna throw that ranch in on a deal, 80 acres, and he said, "Oh, go on, keep it. The durned stuffs no good. It'd just be more taxes." That land is selling for $8,000 and $10,000 an acre now. That's probably most of the data on that. You remember anything interesting that happened down in <Oak Creek> in the pioneer days? 



Hart: No, not that I know of. 



Babbitt: Up around Flag, I suppose around Fourth of July, I suppose they really had some big times here on the Fourth of July, when you were a kid. 



Hart: Yeah. Well, I never went to but one Fourth of July here. I was punchin' cows. When I worked for (unclear) I used to come in every Fourth of July. (unclear) have a lot of fun. 



Babbitt: I'll tell you, we're talking about cattle outfits a minute ago. We didn't say anything about this big Hashknife. Were they going when you were a little fellah around here? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. (unclear) for a long time. That's where I went in the cattle business. 



Babbitt: Did you know this fellah working, Roderick McNeil [phonetic], the bandit? 



Hart: Yeah, very well. 



Babbitt: What did you think of Old McNeil? 



Hart: I treated him pretty smart (unclear). He come back here and stayed all winter with me (unclear) outfit. 



Babbitt: Was that about the time he held up Schusters? [phonetic] 



Hart: No, no. Hell, that was after I left Hart Cattle Company (unclear) Clear Creek. 



Babbitt: That was just recently then? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: I mean, comparatively speaking. 



Hart: He was livin' less than a year ago, livin' in <Oakland>. I had his address and I was gonna write to him and didn't do it. 



Babbitt: I've got it, I can give it to you. 



Hart: In <Oakland>? 



Babbitt: Yeah. Are all these stories you hear about him, are they true? or escapades? 



Hart: There was a lot of em that was true, I know that. 



Babbitt: Well, he was from a prominent family, wasn't he, Les? 



Hart: Yeah. There was what they called the McNeil Building Company. They built the Congressional Library Building in <Washington>--his father and uncle. And then he robbed this train over here in <Salt Lake City> and got ten years' sentence, and studied law. And his father died and his uncle was tryin' to embezzle the company, the state, out of all the money. [END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A (Babbitt Tape 57-3 lb)] 



Babbitt: As I remember, you came to <Oak Creek> when you were a boy with your daddy. 



Hart: Yeah, 1883. 



Babbitt: That's where you met Old Bear Howard, wasn't it? 



Hart: Well, now, I don't remember for sure whether he come in that fall or the next spring, but I believe it was that fall--that was the first time we seen him. (unclear) '83 when I first met him. 



Babbitt: You were about how old then, Les? 



Hart: Ten years old. 



Babbitt: Well, you know, you hear a lot of stories about how big a man Bear Howard was. How big a man was he, anyway? 



Hart: Well, he weighed 225 pounds, he was six-foot-four-inches high, wore a number 11 shoe, and he couldn't get gloves big enough for his hands unless he bought a yarn glove. And when I was nineteen years old, his big finger was the same size as my wrist. 



Babbitt: And your wrist must be a lot bigger than the average man's wrist. 



Hart: Well, it is, but at that time it wasn't as big as it is now. He was a powerful man. 



Babbitt: Six-feet-four. I'll bet he was all muscle, wasn't he? 



Hart: He was very raw-boned and had no surface flesh on him whatever. 



Babbitt: Now, they have the story that he had molar teeth all the way around both his upper and lower jaws. Is that right? 



Hart: That's a fact. It was just the same as all your teeth, above and below. And the reason I know, I've heard him talk about it, and then one time, when he used to get drunk, he was pretty bad to get drunk. Mrs. Purtyman--that's his daughter-used to send for me. That's after she came here. When he'd get drunk, I was the only person could get him out of town. It's a fact. And he'd go out with me anytime--didn't make any difference how drunk he was. If I'd come in the saloon, get aholt of him and say, "Mr. Howard, let's go home," I'd generally get his horse out of the barn. (unclear) old hitchin' rack in front of these saloons. And I'd lead the horse up and tell him his horse was out there, "go on home." He'd say, "All right Lessy." That's what he called me. (laughter) And then he'd get his arms around me and I'd help him (unclear) and get a bottle to go with. (unclear) (laughter) Oh, he was powerful. 



Babbitt: He came into this country quite a while before you came in when you were a boy? 



Hart: Yeah, he was here before we came, but not in <Oak Creek>. He'd been around there. He used to hunt for a livin'. That's the way he made his livin', killin' bear and turkey and deer, and sellin' it. 



Babbitt: I heard that he sold meat to the old mill commissary up here when it was run by Ayers. 



Hart: I think he did. There's only one butcher shop in town, and Old Man Hawks run that. He would sell his meat, a lot of it, to that butcher shop. 



Babbitt: What would he bring in, bear meat and deer meat? 



Hart: Bear meat and deer meat and turkey. 



Babbitt: Hm. I don't suppose you knew what he'd get per pound for that? 



Hart: No. No, I don't remember. But I do remember this: he used to have a big old (unclear) the old town. That was before there was any town down here a'tall. I'd like to show you the beaver house up here. I don't even know where it is. That was the [fullest?] house this way, when I come here. 



Babbitt: I've heard of that, yeah. 



Hart: There's just one old building up there, and just put in all saloons, except one store, I think. And this [Swede?] there, he was Irishman. He flipped everything in those saloons and then barroom fights with whoever he got ahold of. And somebody told him, "Bear Howard will come in here one of these days and clean you!" And, well, Old Bear Howard come along one day with a bear packed on a burro, ridin' another one, had an old (unclear) rifle across the front of him. And this Swede was almost drunk, and somebody pointed, said, "There's Old Bear Howard." "Well," he said, "I'll go out there and whip the son of a bitch right now." And he went out and he said, "Are you Bear Howard?" and the old man said, "That's what they call me sometimes." "Well," he said, "Get down, I'm gonna whip ya," callin' him names and all. And the old man said, "Well, wait 'til I tie my burro up." And he lent this (unclear) rifle up against the telegraph post and tied the burro to the telegraph post, stepped out there and the Swede said (unclear). The old man missed him first. He hit left-handed, the old man did. And the next time he hit him aside his face here, and tore his ear off--clear off. The next time he hit him, he went down on his haunches, (unclear) 



Babbitt: Was the Swede a big man? 



Hart: Irishman. Yeah, an awful big man. But Old Man Howard had [the law?] even had boxing gloves on and he was quite scientific with his fists. And he always hit left-handed. He was naturally left-handed in everything. Now I'm going to tell you about the first fight I ever saw and had. I was down in <Oak Creek> with Old Man Howard, and a fellah by the name of Jack somebody--I've forgotten his name--he was a bull whacker up here in these loggin' camps. And he come down and stayed all winter with us. And he was an awful man to brag about his fightin', and always carried a six-shooter, a .45 six-shooter. But he had a couple of ponies, and the next spring he got ready to come back up here about the time loggin' started, and he'd cut a bundle of these whip stocks, little old saplings for whip stocks. And he got his ponies up, and they were fat. They'd been on alfalfa pasture there. The wind was blowin' pretty bad, and he went to put the saddle blankets on one of 'em, and it reared back and was gonna hit the rope and jump forward, and it kinda run against him and made him mad. He got one of these sticks out of this bundle of whip stocks and went to whippin' him on the head. And the old man let him whip him a little while, and then he walked out and he said, "Jack, don't hit that horse another lick." And he kind of turned around and put his hand on that six-shooter and he said, "You old son of a bitch, what have you got to do with it?" And I'll never forget the motion, that old man hit him the (unclear) and right in the jaw, and down he went. The old man had a peculiar way of saying "son of a bitch." I'm gonna go ahead and tell it just (unclear). 



Babbitt: Sure (unclear). 



Hart: He went in the house and got the old [Sharp's?] rifle, and he always carried three cartridges between his fingers that way. It was single cartridge, that's the way he hunted bears, with three cartridges here, so he'd have 'em handy. 



Babbitt: (unclear) cartridges in between his fingers. 



Hart: Yeah. He had a magazine, and he's got 'em in between his fingers. All right, he went in the house and got that and sat down on the porch with the gun across his lap, and this fellah's out there by the oak tree (unclear), layin' on the ground, hadn't moved. And the old man said, "Lessy, if you don't want to see that old sumbitch die, you'd better pour some water on him." (laughter) So I went in the house and got the bucket and it was empty. I had to go down toward the creek there just a little ways in front to the spring and get some water. So I got that bucket of water half full and I know I'll never forget it. I was just a kid, and it didn't make any difference what Howard would tell me to do, I'd do it. So I slipped up to him kinda (unclear) and dumped the whole business on him. And he wallowed around in that blood and water there a little while and got up. When he got up, his face was swelled up, and I know he couldn't see. But he went ahead and saddled.... No, he went down to that spring and washed first. Then he saddled up and left, and the old man set there, never said anything. When he got his horse packed and his other horse saddled, he had to come right out in front of the old man, and the old man said, "Jack, I want you to go off satisfied." He said, "I'm satisfied." (unclear) That was the first man fight I ever saw, and I can remember it just as well as if it was yesterday. 



Babbitt: That was down where the [Mayhew?] Lodge is now, isn't it? 



Hart: Yeah. Is that what they call Mayhew Lodge? 



Babbitt: Yeah, the old Bear Howard home there. 



Hart: Yeah, out there at the mouth of [Westport?]. 



Babbitt: That's it. That's the Mayhew home. What sort of a lookin' man was Howard? Did he have sharp features, big features? 



Hart: No, it was kind of wide features. And (unclear) big whiskers--he never shaved. (unclear) cut his whiskers off, but they was quite long. 



Babbitt: What color eyes did he have? 



Hart: I think they were blue, if I remember--grayish-blue kinda. I ain't certain about that, but I do remember his eyes, they were pretty keen. 



Babbitt: Piercing blue eyes, huh? 



Hart: Yeah, that's what I'd say. 



Babbitt: Did he have a big nose? 



Hart: Yeah, big, wide nose. 



Babbitt: Stick out prominently, too, right? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Big mouth, big chin (unclear)? 



Hart: I don't remember. I don't remember so much about that, because it was always covered with whiskers. 



Babbitt: Was he clean in his habits, or was he one of these rough mountaineers? 



Hart: Well, I wouldn't say he was too clean in habit. 



Babbitt: What nationality do you suppose [he was]? 



Hart: I think he was Scotch. I think that's what I remember, that he had a Scotch descendance. 



Babbitt: How did he happen to come to this country? 



Hart: Well, now, I can't tell you just how he happened to come to this country, other than what Steve Purtyman, his son-in-law, told me. He got in trouble in <California>, and Old Mexican courts over there, and come out here to get away from the law. 



Babbitt: He had a sheep outfit over there, didn't he? 



Hart: No. He had a farm near <Oxnard> there. Well, I say <Oxnard>--it was in <Ventura California>. And he had patch of oats and a patch of corn, and the Old Mexican and Spanish courts over there then, and the Spanish was runnin' the country. And they had sheep in there, and they come down and let down his fence and come in and fed off of--he had brought in corn, and they fed off with the sheep they brought in with lettin' down the fence and puttin' the sheep in on the corn. He went down there and killed three of 'em, and run about a half of them sheep over in the river and drowned 'em. 



Babbitt: Gosh. Was he a vicious sort of a fellah? 



Hart: Very vicious when he got mad--had no sense a'tall. 



Babbitt: He was dangerous, wasn't he? 



Hart: Yeah, awful dangerous. I seen him make a man lay down a six-shooter with a rock--one of the Tewksburys. (unclear) these Tewksburys (unclear) out here at (unclear) Park. 



Babbitt: How'd that happen? 



Hart: I don't remember what the quarrel was over now. I don't remember the circumstances. Oh, he was very vicious when he got mad, had an awful temper. 



Babbitt: You said he made Tewksbury lay down a pistol, and all he had was a rock? 



Hart: Yeah, he picked up a rock and made him lay his pistol down. 



Babbitt: He just plain bluffed him, didn't he? 



Hart: Yeah, it was a bluff, but it took nerve to do it. 



Babbitt: I'll bet it did! I imagine Tewksbury was no softy himself. 



Hart: Well, he was kinda soft, I think. He was bound to be, because a man lets you take a rock and make you lay a pistol down, (unclear). It didn't look like he had too much nerve. 



Babbitt: What were they quarreling about? 



Hart: I don't remember what it was--something about the range somewhere. 



Babbitt: Did Howard run cattle? 



Hart: Yeah. Well, at that time he had horses. Later on he had cattle--him and Jim Barney [phonetic]. Old Jim Barney died over here in (unclear). 



Babbitt: That's Barney Pasture, you mean? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Wasn't there a Howard Park up there? 



Hart: I don't know anything about a Howard Park. 



Babbitt: Is there anything named after the old man around here--Old Man Howard? I thought there was a Howard Park. 



Hart: No, I don't remember anything named after Old Man Howard. 



Babbitt: Seems there should be something named after a character of that sort. 



Hart: Well, the same way with me, I was here (unclear) lot of developin', and there ain't nothin' named after me, as far as that's concerned. 



Babbitt: Uh-huh. That's right, you sure are an old-timer here, Les, there's no question about it. 



Hart: It just happened that way. 



Babbitt: When you were a kid, you went hunting with Howard quite a bit? 



Hart: Yeah, we were together, as near I can remember, it was about eight years, off and on--most of the time together. 



Babbitt: Weren't you goin' to school? 



Hart: I'd go to school in the winter. 



Babbitt: Then you spent the rest of the time with the old man? 



Hart: Most of it. 



Babbitt: How many bears do you guess the old fellah killed? 



Hart: Oh, cripes, I wouldn't know. He killed a lot of 'em. I killed fifteen myself. 



Babbitt: He probably killed several hundred? 



Hart: Oh, yes. At that time, when we first went into <Oak Creek>, there was lots of bear in there--lots of bear in <Oak Creek> and up in the West Fork. Lots of bears on the mountain, both sides. Lots of turkey and deer. 



Babbitt: What sort of bear were they? 



Hart: Well, brown bear, black bear. There was a large black bear and a small black bear. 



Babbitt: What do you mean by a large black bear, Les? 



Hart: Well, I imagine weighing 400-500, dressed that much. 



Babbitt: Dressed out. 



Hart: I know the first bear I killed, I was with Mr. Howard, and we was camped down in what they call Jack Tanks. And we was down in a big canyon where we camped where there's some natural tanks. After dark, the dogs was broke out. He had huntin' dogs--three hounds and a curly dog, Lucien terrier, big build. And by the way, there was one thing my mother made him promise, never let me get out of his sight unless I would take this Lucien terrier with me. He had a string and a snap on 'em to lead these dogs with. And I'd always have to snap my string onto Curly and take it along with me for protection. Didn't make any difference where I went, the old man would make me take him. Well, anyway, these dogs broke out after dark, and they treed somethin'. You can always tell when the hounds tree anything by the way they bark. He said, "They've got a lion treed." So we went and was lookin' for it in camp. We went down below there, and it was dark. The dogs was barkm' up a pine tree, and we looked up there (unclear) skyline, and an awful big bear on a steep hillside, layin' right on a big limb, and laid out flat kinda. The old man said, "You've never killed a bear. Now, you shoot him. But we'll build a fire. So go on up the hill." The hill was all but 45 degrees steep. And right level with the bear we built a big fire to pitch chunks, and we got a great big fire, and he put me down below the fire and coached me how to shoot him right behind the ear. That was a silver-tipped bear, one of the biggest ones I ever saw in my life. And it's the only silver tip I ever did see. A silver-tipped bear is partly grizzly, he claimed. That was a big one, though. 



Babbitt: I was gonna ask you. I heard in the early days that there were silver-tips up Sycamore Canyon and up West Fork. 



Hart: Well, now, that was in what they called Secret Canyon. A tributary to Secret Canyon was (unclear) where we killed it. I never killed any bear in Sycamore. 



Babbitt: Well, I've been told that these silver-tips would charge a man. 



Hart: Oh, they're just as vicious as a grizzly, and almost as big. They're a cross between a grizzly and one of these other bear. That's what he claimed. 



Babbitt: Yes, I think he's right. There aren't supposed to be any more silver-tips left in this country at all. 



Hart: There's very few bears of any kind--they've been killed off-slaughtered, as far as I was concerned. And the same with all game. The game in this country has been slaughtered off by the early settlers. 



Babbitt: Well, how 'bout the method of getting these bears. Would he turn the hounds loose, and they'd take up a trail and follow it until they treed it (unclear)? 



Hart: Yeah, they'd tree it. 



Babbitt: Well, wouldn't some of these other bears charge you too--the big brown bears or big black bears? 



Hart: Not unless you wounded 'em. (unclear) a bear unless you wound it. 



Babbitt: The old man killed that many bear, he must have wounded some without killing 'em. 



Hart: I know one time--I wasn't with him--but he was leadin' a burro down a trail in the canyon there, and went down to a tank called Jacks Tank--that's in Barney Pasture--and the dogs got after a bear up in the canyon above. And a bear come down this trail that he was leadin1 the burro on. He jumped behind a tree, and as the bear went by, the bear grabbed that inventory overhaul off above his knees and went on. (laughter) That's a regular (unclear). 



Babbitt: Well, would the old man hunt alone quite a bit? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. And he was deathly afraid of a bear. He knew what they could do. I did too. A bear is dangerous. He's so powerful. You can't imagine how powerful a big bear is. 



Babbitt: Well, I heard a rumor that the old fellah was huntin' with Wilson, and Wilson got killed by a bear. 



Hart: No, he wasn't with Wilson at that time. 



Babbitt: I know he wasn't, but I understand the old man got to hatin' bears after that, blamed 'em for Wilson. Is that right? 



Hart: Yeah. Yeah, Wilson had two black hounds, and when he got killed, I don't remember how it was, but I fell heir to these dogs. And I kept one of them dogs for years--he died. He was a huntin' dog. I killed lots of turkey and stuff with him. I got that dog, and I don't remember what I done with the other one. But the old man always wanted to kill the bear that killed Old Man Wilson. I'll tell you where Wilson was killed and you'll remember it. You're goin' down <Oak Creek>, you know where that bridge is the other side of Indian Garden? 



Babbitt: Yeah, they call it Midgley [phonetic] Bridge. Is that it? 



Hart: That's across <Wilson Canyon>, and it's just about a mile-and-a-half above that where Old Man Wilson was killed. 



Babbitt: Well, that was up that canyon there, wasn't it? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: They never did know for sure how it was he was killed, did they? 



Hart: Well, pretty sure, because where the trail used to cross above where this bridge is--there was no wagon road then--up on that trail is where he had a .44 Winchester, and that's where he pumped the shells out of his gun. The evidence is he was comin' down that trail, and shootin' at the bear in the canyon. Well, right above, that canyon is boxed up, so nothin' can go on up, you see. And these tracks showed that this bear went up just as far as it could--there's a ledge there, kinda in behind--and it shows that he set the gun down and figured the bear was dead--that's the way they used to think--and went up to cut it's throat or somethin'. And this bear run out after him, and he clumb one of these cypress trees they used to call a [yewtuma?]. 



Babbitt: Yewtuma, right. 



Hart: And it pulled him out of that tree and pulled the shoe sole off of his shoe, bit him through his skull. He was there a couple of weeks before they found him. 



Babbitt: He was a pretty good friend of Old Howard's, wasn't he? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, they hunted together a long time. When Old Man Howard first come in <Oak Creek>, he had a partner by the name of John [Cady?]. That's located right (unclear) ranch right at the mouth of Westport, what you called the Mayhew Ranch. 



Babbitt: Yeah. 



Hart: Well, they were partners in that ranch, and Cady would stay there and run the ranch, and the old man would hunt to get a grubstake for 'em. 



Babbitt: The old man must have loved to hunt. 



Hart: Oh, yeah. 



Babbitt: Did he have any peculiarities in the way he talked? You told me how he called sum.... 



Hart: Sumbitch. (unclear) particular way. That's about the only peculiar way I can remember. When he wanted to call his dogs to feed 'em, he'd call 'em (unclear). I remember that. That was the phrase he used. 



Babbitt: What did he call 'em? 



Hart: (unclear) these dogs would come a'runnin', expectin' somethin' to eat. 



Babbitt: [White partcherain (?)] 



Hart: White partcherain was the phrase he used for the dogs. 



Babbitt: How would you spell that? 



Hart: I don't know. 



Babbitt: White [partcherler?]. 



Hart: Yeah, that was the phrase he used talkin' to these dogs, like he'd have some particular phrase you'd use to (unclear) dogs. That would do it, you know. 



Babbitt: White partcherler. (laughs) The old fellah lived alone, did he, when he came out? Or did he have a wife? He had a daughter, didn't he? 



Hart: I never knew anything about his wife. Yeah, he had a daughter, they come and she married Steve Purtyman (unclear). That's the fellah these Purtyman boys were here down in <Oak Creek Canyon>. And then they separated later on, and she married a man named Jim Cook. She (unclear) down and talk with her. 



Babbitt: I did, I talked to her one time. She's over ninety years old now. 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: She was the first white woman in <Oak Creek>. 



Hart: No, she's mistaken there. Our folks were there before ever she come. 



Babbitt: Oh, is that so? 



Hart: We don't know whether we were the first white woman to live in <Oak Creek> or not [i.e., narrator's mother]. 



Babbitt: Well, she was one of the first white girls. 



Hart: She was one of 'em. Jim Thompson was the first man that located on <Oak Creek>, other than (unclear). He was there before, and his family was there, I remember, when we come. But as far as any family living there before we did, I don't know any. But Mrs. Purtyman come later on. I don't remember how many years later, but they come from <California> and Steve Purtyman. And some of the children was born after they come here. 



Babbitt: But Howard's wife never came out here? 



Hart: Never knew anything about her. Don't remember nothin' about her. 



Babbitt: She had a son that came out. 



Hart: Yeah, Jess Howard. He died here later on. 



Babbitt: Yeah. 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Did Howard have any strong views about America or about the Indians, (unclear)? 



Hart: No, he (unclear). That's where he got shot. He got shot through the right lung in the Mexican War, and he (unclear) Limestone Canyon. He fell, and he kind of went over a little bluff, just a shallow bluff, kind of shallowed out a little. And he figured that that Mexican that shot him would follow and look over, which he did, and he shoved a bayonet through his head when he looked over. Said he had to put his foot against his head to pull the blade out. And then after the Mexican War, that part I'll explain. He come up to <Oxnard> or <Ventura>, and located this ranch. Then he got into this trouble I spoke to you about, and come back to <Prescott>. And they come out there and arrested him and took him back there on a mule. He was convicted in a Spanish court to be hung. And Mrs. Purtyman at that time lived there, close someplace--! don't know where--but she baked a cake and made a saw out of a clock spring with a three-cornered file, and sent it into the prison to him, and he sawed out. When he sawed out, it was about four o'clock in the morning, and there was a saloon right pretty close, and he kind of watched 'til everything died down, and there was nobody but the bartender. And when he sawed out, he sawed a piece of iron off about two-foot-and-a-half long, kind of a bar. And he slipped up to that door very cautious, and nobody but the bartender in there, and he jumped in the saloon right quick and popped this bar, carried it with him, and told him to pick his hands up or he'd bang him. So he did. He backed him behind the bar, and this bartender had a shotgun in there, and he got that and got him a bottle of whiskey, and he said, "You're comin' with me," and started out. He walked the bartender out about two miles and he said, "I don't want to hurt you. You go on back." He said, "I'm gone!" 



Babbitt: They were gonna hang him, I guess, weren't they? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. Spanish court. 



Babbitt: He hadn't had a chance, probably, in the trial. 



Hart: No, he said he didn't. Well, what they convicted him for, he actually killed these Mexicans that I told you about, puttin' sheep on his barley. He hid out in the hills. And him and Steve Purtyman was together--that's his son-in-law I told you about. And the sheriff was a Spanish sheriff, come out after him, and the old man had a 50-calibre carbine, and he beat the sheriff to it, and killed him, and that's what they convicted him for. That's when he come to <Prescott>. When he sawed out of jail, he went up close to [Arthurladyis?]. 



Babbitt: <California>? 



Hart: Yeah. Now, I'll tell you a funny story. (unclear) Hart Cattle Company, Babbitt wanted me to go around and look at this pup they called the Goulder [phonetic] Ranch. That's close to Arthurladyis. And I got on the train in <Los Angeles> and I went up and there's a little old Irishman, and this train was pretty well crowded. I had to set by the little old fellah, and we got to talkin' just casually and kind of got acquainted. Well, where we got off was a little place to go up to (unclear) a man named Gabioda [phonetic]. That's above (unclear). I figured I'm goin' over there on the stage. And when we got there, that stage was a spring wagon with two seats on it, and there was nine people besides me to go in it. So this little old man said, "If you can walk up here to <Las Cruces>, five miles, I'll lend you my buckboard and a team there." I told him I was goin' to Arthurladyis, and I'd asked him about the Goulder Ranch. And he said, "If you walk that far and help me hitch that team up, I'll take you over there." (unclear) "I can walk five miles." So I went up there and he had a team of young horses and we had a hell of a time hookin' 'em up. But we finally got 'em hooked to that buckboard and we went over a high mountain. When we got to the top, (unclear) frettin' and prancin' and one thing and another, uphill. So he stopped 'em, said, "I've gotta let 'em cool off." And he showed me another blue mountain east of that, off quite a ways, and he said, "You see that peak over there?" "Yeah," and I told him I saw the peak. "Well," he said, "you see that canyon comin' down one side, and another one on the other side?" "Yeah." "You see where they come together? There's a wagon road up that mountain there, and that's where I used to carry the grub out there and hang it on a tree for Old Jeff Howard." (unclear) down that mountain again, about three miles down it, and he told me all about this stuff I've told you about, about killin' the Mexicans and one thing and another. 



Babbitt: That's how you found out about it? 



Hart: No, no. I knew about it. I didn't say a word, but I knew. And when we got to the bottom, I said, "Mister, I know that man better than you do." "No," he said, "you don't. He went out to <Arizona> and changed his name." I said, "I'll prove to you in just a minute, and I'll make it that I know him." "Well," he said, "All right." And I described the old man, and I said, "He's got molar teeth above and below." 



[END TAPE 2, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Hart: That's him. And he carried grub to Old Man Howard. He had a reputation there about like Black Jack had here, you see--a bad man. 



Babbitt: Old Bear Howard? 



Hart: Yeah. But before he died, they sent him a parole. 



Babbitt: Was Howard liked around here by the people? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, very much liked. 



Babbitt: Sort of a hail fellow, well met guy, huh? 



Hart: Yeah, everybody liked him, but he'd get drunk and (unclear) hit somebody. I seen him (unclear, dog barking) they all went down in front when he hit 'em. 



Babbitt: You say he hit eight men? 



Hart: Eight (unclear) men. (unclear) hit many times when he'd get on these drunks. He was pretty bad to get on drunk. Liked his booze. 



Babbitt: When he'd come in, would he need the liquor, want to start a fight? 



Hart: Yeah, he's a little coarse and touchy, very high-tempered. Anything would set him off. 



Babbitt: I wouldn't think they'd want to be around, maybe, he was so powerful. 



Hart: I remember one time, I believe that's the last time I come in contact with the old man. John Francis was sheriff, and he had a knife about ten inches long, and had one blade in it, they use it for a skinnin' knife. And when it opened, it had a spring attached to shut the blade. You've seen 'em. 



Babbitt: Yeah, they click into place. 



Hart: I don't know whether it was on the Fourth of July and the back end of Vail Saloon there, and somebody crossed him and he got mad, and he had this knife out. John Francis knew--he was sheriff--he knew I could handle Old Man Howard. So he come to me. I was in the crowd there, and the saloon was full of people. The old man had him backed off toward the front. He had the whole back end to hisself back there. I knew he was a (unclear) drunk. And the old man come and got me and said, "Lessy, I want you try to get Old Man Howard out of here. I don't want to have to kill 'im." So I went up to him and tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Mr. Howard, give me that knife." He said, "All right, Lessy, wait'll I shut it." He touched the spring and shut the knife and handed it to me. I said, "C'mon, let's go (unclear)." So we walked out of the back of the saloon. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Would it take much whiskey to get him drunk? 



Hart: Quite a lot. (unclear) 



Babbitt: What could he drink, a quart? 



Hart: Oh, I don't remember now. I wouldn't know how much he'd take, 'cause I was pretty much a kid, and it was a long time ago. 



Babbitt: Did the old fellah perform any feats of strength that gave rise to all these stories about what a big, powerful man he was? 



Hart: Nothin', only I seen him lift a rock out of a (unclear) and made his own (unclear) down at <Oak Creek>, and had a rock to press it down--a board in there, and put a rock on it to press that [trout?] down. And he took that rock out one day and laid it down, and I remember he took it out with one hand, and I got hold of the rock just to see how heavy it was, and it was just as heavy as the devil, I'll tell you that. It was pretty hard for me to lift it with both hands. 



Babbitt: Were you a little fellah then? 



Hart: Oh, no. Well, I wasn't big at all, I was slim. I never weighed over 135 pounds. I think about the time I took Hart Cattle Company I was about 135 pounds. 



Babbitt: You were talked about the old fellah would kill bear and also deer and turkey. Was it hard to go out and get deer then? 



Hart: Hell, no. Could get 'em anytime. I remember when we come here, we stopped at what we called [Werther?] Spring. We had a little bunch of cattle, and Jack Robinson was there, and he had eight deer hangin' around the cabin when we got there. 



Babbitt: Werther Spring, where is that? 



Hart: Werther Spring, that's out.... Well, you know where [Willard?] Spring is, on the road goin' to Woods Ranch? 



Babbitt: Oh, yeah. 



Hart: Well, it's north of the Willard Spring, across between that and <Oak Creek> kind of. That's where we landed when we got there. We called it Werther Spring. 



Babbitt: Who was it named after, Les? 



Hart: Wayne Werther. 



Babbitt: Who was he? 



Hart: He was a cow man over at [Grinch?] Creek? 



Babbitt: You said there were a lot of turkeys around, too, huh? 



Hart: I had my mother whip me for bringin'--that's a fact, I had my mother whip me for bringin' turkeys in--lay around the cabin and stink. When we first come here, we had these Durham cows, and we milked 'em, my mother made butter. Us kids had to milk 'em, and you could hear turkeys gobblin' in every direction--wild turkey. They wouldn't let me carry a gun that year. I don't (unclear) some days I'd be carryin' a gun, (unclear) gobble, until the next year I carried an old Hotchkiss [phonetic] rifle. 



Babbitt: How old were you that year? 



Hart: I was eleven. 



Babbitt: (unclear) Where were you livin' at that time? 



Hart: Out at that spring. We stayed there that summer and that fall, and then we moved to <Oak Creek Canyon>. That was in 1883. 



Babbitt: There weren't many roads in the country? 



Hart: What there was, was damned rocky. 



Babbitt: Just trails, weren't they? 



Hart: Oh, wagon roads--we called 'em wagon roads--but never had a.... Oh, hell, there wasn't a lick of work done on roads, I guess, 'til twenty years after that. 



Babbitt: Who made those roads originally? The old pioneers (unclear). 



Hart: Yes, they'd just go through and make a track from somebody (unclear). That's all there was to it. Maybe if they come to a canyon or somethin', they'd make a little grade and throw rocks out and fix it so they could get through. And the next fellah would follow up. That's the way those roads was made, just the same as in latter days crossin' the plains. 



Babbitt: You wouldn't know for sure where you were goin', a lot of times, except for the general direction of what you wanted to go, was that it? 



Hart: I guess so--that is, the old-timers. 



Babbitt: When you were a kid in here, did you have any trouble with Indians? 



Hart: No. No, Indians was pretty quiet when we got here. 



Babbitt: Did old Howard ever have any trouble with 'em? 



Hart: No, none that I know of. 



Babbitt: Was he an educated man? 



Hart: Not very well, from the way I remember it. Nope. (coughs) 



Babbitt: Just an old-time westerner, wasn't he? 



Hart: He really was. 



Babbitt: I don't suppose he cared much about money, did he? 



Hart: No, money didn't bother him. If he had enough to buy a little whiskey and grub, that's all he needed. 



Babbitt: What did a bottle of whiskey cost him? 



Hart: A bottle of whiskey then would cost about two dollars. 



Babbitt: It cost that much?! 



Hart: Yeah, $1.50 to $2.00. The best you could get for $2.00. 



Babbitt: Probably the Old Taylor. Did they have any brands like they have now? 



Hart: Oh, I don't remember. 



Babbitt: You didn't pay much attention to it, did you? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: I heard some fellah talkin' about a man that had him dancin' down there, shootin' a pistol at his feet, and the old man.... 



Hart: No, that was Old Tom Drum [phonetic]. He was deputy sheriff here under Sandy Donahue at that time. That was Old Tom Drum. Tom Drum was as powerful a man as Old Man Howard, prit near. (unclear) great big belly, he was fat, and very active. And actually, that's the only time I ever remember him comin' to <Flagstaff>. (unclear) got drunk, and had people a-dancin', 'til one of 'em, a fellah by the name of Pruder [phonetic] decided to make Drum dance. Well, Drum's (unclear) when he got to fightin', kicked a man on the chin. This Pruder was makin' him dance, and in Vail Saloon, shootin'. I saw this myself. They'd once in a while shoot down in the floor, you know, a .45 six-shooter. And Old Man Howard had his hands crossed up this way and was a-dancin'. 



Babbitt: You mean Old Man Drum? 



Hart: Yeah, Drum. And he was kinda grinnin' all the time, and he danced around just 'til he got his [bare?] and just slapped and kicked that fellah under the chin. It looked like he went up in the air, and just lit on his back. And Drum kinda jumped up in the air and hit him with both fists right on each side of the nose, just peeled his face clear to the ear. And that was the last time Hashknives ever shot up <Flagstaff>. (unclear) ever heared, that I know of. That was a long time ago. He was deputy sheriff under Sandy Donahue. 



Babbitt: Was Tom Drum the man who was related to Walter Durham, (unclear). 



Hart: Yeah, he married Walter Durham's mother-in-law--married (unclear)'s mother. 



Babbitt: How did Drum come into that picture? Drum married Walter Durham's mother-in-law? 



Hart: Yeah, Mrs. Neil. Neil and Mrs. Drum come to some Lake Loki, that [needled eye?]. And he was the father of Rube Neil and D. D. Durham. That's Walter's wife. 



Babbitt: I see, D. D. Durham (unclear). Did Sandy Donahue and Bear Howard ever tangle? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: Sandy was a pretty good scrapper. 



Hart: Oh, yeah, that would have been a bad one. I don't know how it would have come out. 



Babbitt: Sandy was a powerful man too. 



Hart: Oh, yeah. And had a lot of [science?]. (unclear) Sandy (unclear) whip Old Man Howard, because Sandy knew how to protect hisself better than the old man would. 



Babbitt: (unclear) old man ever hit you (unclear). 



Hart: If he ever got in a lick, he'd go down and out. But the old man was inclined to be a little awkward, and Sandy was active. 



Babbitt: Did Old Man Howard and Drum ever tangle? 



Hart: No. No, the old man career's was mostly ahead of Tom Drum. I don't know that Old Howard was here after Drum was deputy sheriff, (unclear) 



Babbitt: Well, Old Howard went on back to <Oak Creek> then. That was his headquarters, wasn't it? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: I've heard that he's got a chest out here somewhere in a briar patch. Did you ever hear of that, the cave? 



Hart: Unt-uh. I don't know, but I know where the cave is, if he's got it. 



Babbitt: My gosh, could we go out there sometime? 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Well, one of his boys told me that there was a big chest out there that the old man used to bring supplies up there and leave 'em. 



Hart: Well, that'd be down at what they call Jack's Planks. There's a cave there he used to camp in. It's not a cave, particularly--it's just a big shelf of rock that come out far enough that they could be under there in a storm and protect 'em. 



Babbitt: Well, the old man hunted alone a lot. Was his mind normal? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. 



Babbitt: Didn't bother him, bein' out in the country like that? 



Hart: Oh, no. No, nothin' like that. 



Babbitt: (unclear) imagination he has, huh? 



Hart: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Were mountain lions pretty thick then? 



Hart: I really don't know. I've heard (unclear), but I never saw one in my life. All the [crawlin'?] I ever done around these hills, I never saw a live lion, that is, on the range. But I've heard 'em at night. There never was too many, I don't think, in this country. 



Babbitt: Were there wolves, lobo wolves? I used to hear about lobo wolves when I was a kid. 



Hart: No. At that time, I never heard of a lobo wolf, but the first I ever knew of was when I had the Hart Cattle Company, I come in there. I think they followed cattle (unclear) and brought a lot of sheep from <New Mexico>. And I think they probably leave 'em here. 



Babbitt: Were there many coyotes? 



Hart: Oh, yeah. 



Babbitt: (unclear) the turkey? 



Hart: I guess (unclear). 



Babbitt: Were there any other game birds? Any other wildland birds? 



Hart: No. No, not game birds, but later on I seen grouse in the White Mountains. But there was never nothin' like that here. 



Babbitt: Turkeys and deer. I guess wild antelope. 



Hart: Yeah, quite a lot of antelope. 



Babbitt: Deer and bear, and that was about it, huh? 



Hart: Yeah. A few mountain lion. 



Babbitt: The only way you got around the country then was to use horses? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, and on foot. Us kids never owned any horse. We'd get out and walk (unclear) when I was a kid. If we wanted to come from <Oak Creek> to <Flagstaff>, we wouldn't give a damn for a horse, and (unclear) go a-foot. Wouldn't take us long. 



Babbitt: How long would it take you to come to <Flagstaff>? 



Hart: Well, I don't remember, (unclear). We'd always come up the head of <Oak Creek> and up [Friar?] Canyon or Woody Canyon. 



Babbitt: Come out of Woody Canyon then come up by Pump House Spring? 



Hart: No, come in by Black Fiddle Spring there. The way the highway comes now. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hart: There's a trail out the head of the canyon, where that grade comes up. That is, you're not kind of straight up the hill. 



Babbitt: Would you go back the same day? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: Stay in town, huh? You kids used to bring fish up, didn't you? Did you carry it? 



Hart: Yeah. I know one time, the Fourth of July, my father said if we could catch fish to pay expenses, we could come for Fourth of July. So my brother Bill and I fished down to prit near to Indian Gardens, and we laid out that night without any beddin', and carried a lunch. Fished back the next day and had a hundred pounds. (Babbitt whistles appreciatively) Had a little ol' bay mare, so I loaded 'em up. We packed 'em in grass the best we could, and tied it on the little mare, and I took 'em to town. That was on the second [July 2], sold 'em the third, and the family come up the next day--they come up the third. Then I had a foot race up here. I had this little (unclear). I had a foot race. I was kind of bashful, but they finally got me in the damned foot race and I winned it. I got $25 out of that. Had $100 I got out of the fish, and we had a hell of a time. We bought firecrackers and everything there was in town. 



Babbitt: You mean to say you got a dollar a pound for your fish? 



Hart: Gamblers would pay us a dollar a pound for them fish just as fast as we could weigh 'em out. 



Babbitt: I guess they didn't have any fish, did they? 



Hart: No. Well, that was the only place in the country, until they got the White Mountains, I guess, for the trout. They were speckled trout. 



Babbitt: Were they old yellow mountain trout? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Were there any great big ones in it? 



Hart: No, we caught 'em as high as four pounds. 



Babbitt: (whistles) You did?! They'd be about twenty inches long? 



Hart: Yeah. (unclear) weighed four pounds, got four bucks out of him. 



Babbitt: You talked about the Fourth of July celebration. Here it is the twenty-ninth of June, we're about ready for another Fourth of July celebration, Pow Wow. What did they do at the celebrations? When was that, in the nineties? 



Hart: Well, no, that was in the eighties, I guess--latter part of the eighties and first part of the nineties. They'd have horse races and steer ropin', bronc ridin', foot races. I don't believe they had any steer ropin' at that time, but later on when I worked for the A-l's [Arizona Cattle Company, A-l Bar], they used to rope steers here. [I won that pot (?)] 



Babbitt: They didn't have any of this bull doggin', did they? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: They didn't know what that was? 



Hart: No, they didn't have no calf ropin' like there is now. We'd just catch a big steer and pull him and tie his feet. That was when I worked for the A-l's. 



Babbitt: Did you have to tie his feet like they do now? 



Hart: Yeah, tied until he lay. 



Babbitt: Would they give the steer a start on you? 



Hart: Yeah, give him a start, and you catch him by the head and pull your rope over him and go by and pull him. If you got to him and tied him quick enough, you win money. 



Babbitt: Do you remember what some of the times were? 



Hart: I remember I had one once in thirty seconds. 



Babbitt: Those were big ol' steers? 



Hart: Yeah, great big. Big old oxen. But we had good horses. 



Babbitt: Would they give the steer a start, like they do now? 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: About the same thing, huh? 



Hart: About the same start. 



Babbitt: Did they have team ropin'? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: That's a new development, isn't it? 



Hart: That's a new development--that and calf ropin'. That's a trade. (unclear) cowboys (unclear) ropin' calves. They've got to have a race horse to win that now, and you've got to have a world of practice. 



Babbitt: Yeah, I bet you do that. 



Hart: Used to be, we caught the calves because we wanted to brand 'em and cut 'em and mark 'em. Now they catch 'em to make time with it. It's all together different. Team ropin's the same thing. And they've got it down pat-it's wonderful. 



Babbitt: It is, I've noticed that. 



Hart: As far as that's concerned. 



Babbitt: Well, this bronco bustin' was pretty rough in those days, huh? 



Hart: It was pretty rough in those days. 



Babbitt: Who were some of the famous old cowboys? 



Hart: (unclear) I was just layin' there a while ago thinkin' there ain't a human bein' that I can think of that's livin' and worked for the A-1 outfit while I was there, but myself. 



Babbitt: Bert Cameron didn't work for them at all? 



Hart: No. I often had a punch job. 



Babbitt: You're the last living cowboy of the A-1? 



Hart: I can't think of a single living person that worked for the A-l's that's livin' yet. 



Babbitt: How big was that A-1 outfit, Les? 



Hart: Well, I think we gathered out somethin' like 9,000 cattle when we shipped out. I helped 'em ship out. That was John W. Young. That was a co-op herd when it come here, same as Bob Smith had the Circle "S" when he come here. That was what they called a co-op herd. And when these fellahs got 'em here, they said they was theirs, and they was, too. And John W. Young had the A-1 outfit, and Bob Smith had the Circle "S" out here at <Mormon Lake>. 



Babbitt: He just took (unclear). 



Hart: He just kept 'em. And he sold out to some corporation in <Chicago> there in the East someplace, and they sent Bullwinkle out here to run it. Bullwinkle got killed out here just the other side of where the hospital is now. Then they sent a fellah by the name of Wainwright. He was there when I was. I didn't work for 'em when Bullwinkle was here. 



Babbitt: Well, didn't some of those people that had (unclear) cooperative deal, didn't they come out and try to protect their rights? 



Hart: I don't know. That's too far back for me. I don't know how they done it. 



Babbitt: Do you know where that A-1 brand came from? 



Hart: Well, originally from <Utah>. 



Babbitt: I mean, the A-1. You don't know the reason for that, or the significance? 



Hart: No. It was Arizona Cattle Company. A-1 Bar was the brand, split each ear--ear mark. 



Babbitt: Their range was north here from.... 



Hart: They got the same (unclear) we got now. 



Babbitt: How were the range conditions then, compared to now? 



Hart: Well, I'll say this, for example. The Hashknives turned loose 38,000 cattle in this country in 1885, between here and Holbrook. And there wasn't a water tank made, no development a'tall, and those cattle lived and done pretty well. Same way with the A-1 Cattle Company. There's lots of big outfits in the country that was considered small outfits that was bigger than the [Shield Bar?] outfit is now. Besides these big companies, and them cattle all lived. So that'll show that the range was lots better then than they are now. I'll say this much, I've been a cattleman all my life, and the cattlemen hogged this country. There's no mistake about that, and they grazed it off. These conservation people are absolutely right about it. And this country now, under the Forest system, is coming back. 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Hart: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Well, you said they had no tanks. Where would these cattle water? Were there springs all over? 



Hart: Springs and natural--it rained in them days more than it does now, snowed more in the winter--and just natural water holes is what they depended on. 



Babbitt: What would they do with the cattle in the fall, round 'em up? Of course, railroads (unclear). 



Hart: They just turned 'em loose and let 'em ran. 



Babbitt: What would they do in the winter? 



Hart: They just let 'em go, and (unclear) for theirselves. 



Babbitt: Was there enough feed here for 'em all winter? 



Hart: Yeah. And browse. Take this [sleesh?] brush then, was lots higher than it is now. They lived on that. Of course the Hashknives lost lots of cattle, hoggin' in the Colorado River. They lost thousands of 'em that way. But the range conditions was altogether different than now, especially on the Forests, they're gettin' kinda back where it was when we come here. 



Babbitt: Did you have loco? 



Hart: I don't remember it then. I remember it afterwards. 



Babbitt: I thought maybe somebody brought loco in, some cattle or something. 



Hart: I don't know how it got here. 



Babbitt: You don't remember it when you started out, huh? 



Hart: No. 



Babbitt: Did you have trouble with rustlers? 



Hart: Oh, (unclear). 



Babbitt: When you're on the roundup would you all get together with your wagons, like they did? 



Hart: Oh, yeah, (unclear) wagons. They'd have these smaller [men south?] that had [pool up], they called pool wagons. These companies all owned wagons. The Hashknife had, A-1 had a wagon, the Hashknife had [Durafee?] and they used to have a pool wagon at Williams and down around the Verde and that country--all of 'em get together. Sometimes these little fellahs would have what they called a greasy sack outfit--that would be a pack outfit, wouldn't have a wagon. They called that a greasy sack outfit. 



Babbitt: Would they swipe a camp now and then from the bigger outfits? 



Hart: Oh, all of us stole from the big outfits. Had to, to keep even. 



Babbitt: That was the Hashknives and the A-1 were the biggest? 



Hart: Yeah, [Joe Bias?] (unclear) and stole from him, (unclear). 



Babbitt: I imagine they were. Well, what would they do, steal 'em and re-brand 'em? Or would they steal 'em for beef and sell 'em for beef? 



Hart: Both. Then there's a lot of workin' brands over, but that kind of wore out, that didn't last long. As a matter of fact, your brand is not only your brand, obliterated, make a new brand of it. 



Babbitt: Would they ever shoot or hang any of these old boys that were cattle [rustling?]. 



Hart: No, I don't know of anybody bein' shot here, and I don't know of'em damned sure ever bein' convicted. 



Babbitt: It's pretty hard to prove anything. 



Hart: That's a hard thing to prove anything on, any cattle stealin' case against a man. 



Babbitt: I imagine in the early days that Old Man McMillan and some of them fellahs, they'd take 'em out and work 'em over without the law comin' into it, probably. 



Hart: You mean cattle? 



Babbitt: Old Man McMillan. 



Hart: He never had cattle. 



Babbitt: Didn't he have? He had sheep, didn't he? 



Hart: Yeah, all sheep. 



Babbitt: I understand he was pretty rough on anybody that he caught stealin' his stuff. 



Hart: Oh, yeah, he used to (unclear) Old Mac was, I know. 



Babbitt: Did you know him? 



Hart: Yeah. One time some Mexicans brought sheep from down here, and they got about as far as <Canyon Diablo>, and Old Mac moved a lot of men in on a spring wagon here, and pulled the curtains down on 'em. They met down there, all had Winchesters. I don't know what happened. They scattered a lot of them sheep all over the country, and them Mexicans went back to <New Mexico>. 



Babbitt: I heard somethin' about that. 



Hart: Yeah, I don't know, I kinda think Old Mac got a lot of them sheep. 



Babbitt: I heard a story that Old Mac and some of the other fellahs got together here, way, way back in the early days because a young bunch of roughnecks came in here and got these cowboys drunk and cleaned 'em--robbed, you know. Did you ever hear about taking a bunch of 'em over and hangin' 'em on a tree? 



Hart: Unt-uh. 



Babbitt: George Huff tells friends they hanged thirteen there one time. 



Hart: I've not heard nothin' around right here before Hochderffer was. I know there was two fellahs hung up here. I don't remember what that was for. I was up here the other side of Main, they hung two men. They hung one man, and I remember it was after I had the Hart Cattle Company. Lightning struck that tree and a hobo was under it, and killed him. 



Babbitt: The same tree, huh? 



Hart: The same tree. I think it's there yet. I think it's dead now. If I remember, last time I looked at it, it was dead. 



Babbitt: Well, Les, when did you have the Hart Cattle Company, when did you start? 



Hart: I bought Durham out in 1905--no, I bought Durham out in 1906, and Loden [phonetic] out in 1907. 



Babbitt: You had a whale of an outfit of your own there, didn't you? 



Hart: No, I didn't. I only had about.... Well, when I come up there, I had a hundred head of yearling heifers and two bulls, and (unclear) saddle horse. 



Babbitt: I know when you got in Babbitts, you built up a big outfit, didn't ya'? 



Hart: Yeah, that's what started the Hart Cattle Company. See, when I had them heifers, I went to work for [Olden?], thirty-five dollars a month. I had my family here in town, and I maintained 'em on thirty-five dollars a month. Surely different now. But, I jumped (unclear) they wanted a foreman on (unclear) up here. And Billy Babbitt had this land in <Kansas>, and he was down there with that. And so C. J. offered me seventy-five dollars a month to [go on the C-Bar wagon?]. I wouldn't go for seventy-five (unclear) a hundred. That's what Old Jack Brown got out of the A-l. So he said, "Will you wait 'til Billy comes? See what Bill says." So later on, Billy come, and in the meantime I'd kind of suspicioned that Walter Durham and Olden (unclear) set out some of these days. Wrote me once in a while saying if he could ever get $100,000, he'd quit the cow business and one thing and another. Walter would make remarks. So anyway, when Billy come, they decided to put me up there on the C-Bar wagon. So C. J. told me I could go up there. (unclear) I said, "Some of these days, Golden and Durham are gonna sell out, and some son of a bitch will loan me the money to buy 'em out. I'm just gonna stay there and see what [time the better market makes?]. "Well," C. J. said, "I believe that's a pretty good idea." That's all the trading that I had from C. J. And in two years I had both outfits. And they put up the money. But we didn't put up no cash. We only put--we bought Golden out for $95,000 and we only give him $5,000 in cash. And we bought Durham out for $5,000. That was kind of a funny trade. I wanted to buy Durham out before Bud Golden, and C. J. wanted Billy to go down and see how many cattle we could see. So they went with me, and we went a-horseback down over the mesa, and the damnedest rain you ever saw, and I don't think we saw a dozen head of (unclear) cattle. And I'd bought a ranch for $600--me and Sanford [phonetic]--on the south end of <Mormon Lake>. I had a camp there. 



Babbitt: Was that Al Sanford? 



Hart: Al. So Billy (unclear) and I was back when he got there, and that night my agreement with Walter Durham, I was to let him know by a certain date whether I'd take it or not, see. And the time was up at twelve o'clock. He was down to Stone's Lake. And when we got in my camp there, it was dark and just rainin' like a son of a bitch. And Billy said, "Well, you go on down and tell (unclear) we'll take it." I told him, "I have to get there before twelve o'clock." "Well," he said, "go on and tell him we'll take it." 



Babbitt: How much did you pay Durham for his outfit? 



Hart: Five thousand down, and paid him $25,000. 



Babbitt: How many cattle did you get from him? 



Hart: Oh, hell, I don't remember how many cattle was on the range. I know I paid it out in three years, and I had as many cattle as I started with. 



Babbitt: What was his land? 



Hart: A-L. Seven A-L. Seven on (unclear) and (unclear). 



Babbitt: What was [Roten's?] brand? 



Hart: Pitchfork. 



Babbitt: And how many cattle do you suppose he had? 



Hart: Well, he had a damned site more than we paid for. We gave him $95,000 for 'em. I paid that out in three years, and we divided up $49,000. 



Babbitt: You didn't have income tax to worry about then? 



Hart: Oh, no. 



Babbitt: What'd you get for those cattle that you sold? 



Hart: Well, the first cattle I shipped to Roten's we got three and three-quarters cents. 



Babbitt: What would they weigh? 



Hart: That first shipment, we weighed 'em off a car in <Los Angeles>, and they averaged 1120, I know for a fact. 



Babbitt: Gee willikers! That's (unclear). 



Hart: We handled nothin' but big steers then. I was shippin' nothin' but big steers. 



Babbitt: Five, six years old, wasn't it? 





