Loie Belknap Evans Part 2

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli 

April 5, 2009



QUARTAROLI:  This is Tape 2 with Loie Belknap Evans on April 5, 2009.

EVANS:  Fourth?

QUARTAROLI:  April 4?  I don’t know.  It’s Sunday.  We’ll figure it out, we’ll look at a calendar later.  At South Rim.  And we were talking about the Western River Guides Association, some of the meetings with the BLM and agencies up there.  You asked me if I had been to one, and I said I hadn’t.  You said, "Oh, those were something!"  So what else about those meetings can you remember, other than discussing rules and regulations with the BLM?

EVANS:  Well, that was always a big part of it.  I mean, the Coast Guard was there, and the BLM was there, and the Park Service was there.  It always seemed at that time, the only place that didn’t have any problems was the Park Service in Canyonlands, and I think that was probably when Bates Wilson was here.  Anyway, they always just seemed to have their-it didn’t seem like there were any problems down there with the regulations, which was always sort of interesting.  The whole thing in <Desolation>, with trying to find out initially the BLM giving permits, and then taking them away.  And some people who had tons of river history getting these enormous permits down there, and then immediately selling them for big money.  It was just an interesting, interesting time.  But it was always held at some hotel.  There was usually a big room with vendors and rafts set up.  So a lot of the socializing would be people just sitting around on the rafts and visiting.  Sometimes there was a little entertainment.  I remember Katie Lee coming to one of those.  That was the first time she realized that my dad wrote "Cavitatin’ Katie," so that was kind of fun.  They were a good time.  I just think some of it was-they weren’t always easy with all that contention.  There was a lot of contention that went on.  But probably the forerunner of kind of the river guides’ meetings today.

QUARTAROLI:  Right.  At the time I started-and I actually joined WRGA, but it was more of an outfitter organization, rather than a guides’ organization at that point.  And so many of the guides became outfitters, so that was kind of a natural step.  But I think they left the guides behind.

EVANS:  Right, it definitely was initially more of an outfitters’ meeting.  And I think the way to deal with all these issues on the river-I don’t remember so many things at that time about rules and regulations about sanitation, that kind of nitty gritty.  It was management plans and making arbitrary decisions, and some people really losing a permit.  As I remember, I think Outward Bound, they issued one and then they took it away.  It was quite arbitrary.  And it was hard going from just being able to tell the State you were going down there....  And I think it was just hard for my dad because he was such a pioneer down there, and just knew it and understood it better than a lot of people did.  I think he just always kind of struggled with the fact that we initially got such a small allocation.  It seemed unfair, the way they did it at the time.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you get a larger [unclear]?

EVANS:  Somehow I think we were able to get a larger one, enough to operate on.  But when it’s done on passenger days and you do long trips, you use up....  We were doing much longer trips than anybody down there.  And I think a lot of people now still only do five-day trips, and nine is the longest you can do, which I think is too bad, because it’s really easy to spend a lot of time down there.  And Outward Bound used to spend a couple of weeks down there.  They would climb and do all kinds of stuff down there.

QUARTAROLI:  And why do you think Canyonlands is different?  Was it because of Bates Wilson?

EVANS:  I’m sort of remembering that from my dad saying he just felt it was run differently, and there just weren’t-there was more of a spirit of cooperation.  It wasn’t the head-butting.  I mean, it’s still different down there today.  I mean, it’s much easier to get permits.  There’s no lottery.  You just call in to see if you can get a permit.  It just was always run a little differently down there.  And I don’t know if the tone was set there, but isn’t that your perception a little bit?  It doesn’t seem....

QUARTAROLI:  Well, Canyonlands has always been pretty easy permit-wise.

EVANS:  Yeah, much easier than other places.

QUARTAROLI:  I did one research trip there when I was with Glen Canyon Environmental Studies.  They wanted to start some research and they wanted to use kind of Grand Canyon techniques or protocols for doing the research.  And Bob Webb of the USGS, after doing that trip, said, "I’m not sure I ever want to do a <Grand Canyon> research trip again, because the permitting in <Grand Canyon> is so impossible, and in Canyonlands, they were so welcoming, they actually came on the trip.  They sent a boat down [unclear] personnel."

EVANS:  And I think it’s just always been that way, I don’t know.  I went on a trip with Serena Supplee a few years ago, with Katie Lee and Serena, and it was real easy to get a permit and just go.  That was pretty fun.  I think it was ’88, ’89.

QUARTAROLI:  She was a youngster.

EVANS:  Yeah.  The first time she’d ever been through <Cataract Canyon>.

QUARTAROLI:  She told me that, and I was surprised.

EVANS:  Isn’t that amazing?

QUARTAROLI:  She had missed that stretch.  She’d done all the others.

EVANS:  Yeah.  And so then, to do that, and then of course come out on <Lake Powell>....  And actually, when you’re still up in the canyon, to see those fifty-foot mud banks, and to see the river reclaiming itself.  I mean, she was thrilled.  (chuckles)  That was pretty fun, and fun to be with her for her to see that.  Of course she would be thrilled.  So you can get down and see everything at Hite all high and dry, and facilities that you can’t even get to because the lake was so low.  That was kind of fun.

QUARTAROLI:  You mentioned Sportyaks on the Dolores too.

EVANS:  Uh-huh.  We did <Desolation Canyon>, because a lot of people would need to come back and do another Sportyak trip; and we did the <San Juan>; and then the Dolores was kind of our graduate trip.  And you really had to go on another Sportyak trip before you could go on the Dolores trip.  And it was just Slick Rock to Bedrock.  Did I get those right?  Yeah, Slick Rock to Bedrock.  Beautiful stretch of river, maybe five, six days.  But the Dolores is just a little harder teach on.  You know, you start out, it’s moving fast, and you’ve got stuff right away happening.  So that was just always for people who really wanted to come back and do another trip, and had a couple under their belt, and they already knew what they were doing, so that was kind of the graduate trip.  So until....  Because it was seasonal, with the times.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you run it every year then?

EVANS:  Pretty much, yeah.  And we would always do one, sometimes two.  Probably more often just one Dolores trip when the water was good.  I usually timed it, I’m sure, around late May early June.  So those were fun trips.  Little tiny camping spots.

QUARTAROLI:  Probably a smaller group, too.

EVANS:  Smaller groups.  Just so different than the Green where you have huge sandbars, and you just had these little cozy camps on the Dolores.  Beautiful river, and just so different-clear.  Those were fun trips.

QUARTAROLI:  Okay, we’ve gone way upstream from the <Grand Canyon>.

EVANS:  We have!

QUARTAROLI:  You mentioned about hiking in on one <Grand Canyon> trip.  Was that your first <Grand Canyon> trip then?

EVANS:  That was my first <Grand Canyon> trip, in ’67.

QUARTAROLI:  And Sheila Smith, Ron’s wife, hiked in with you.

EVANS:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  You said it was late fall?

EVANS:  It was October, very low water, one-boat trip.

QUARTAROLI:  That would be one motor rig?

EVANS:  One motor rig, uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  What was the occasion for that trip-just the end of the season?

EVANS:  I think it was an end-of-the-season trip, and very small.  I can’t remember how many people, but very small.  As I mentioned, Ed Abbey had been the ranger up at <Lee's Ferry>, and Ron talked him into coming along.  Just kind of a handful of people.  I think a couple of people had hiked out at <Phantom>, and maybe that’s why Sheila and I hiked in.  That was the trip where we did the famous "Girls’ Grill" picture.  (chuckles)  Yeah, so that trip was really my [first]-other than spending so much time in the lower end of the <Grand Canyon>, when I was little, going up as far as Bridge Canyon and spending a lot of time up there.  And then I really don’t think....

QUARTAROLI:  Let’s get back to that trip:  Do you have any Ed Abbey stories?

EVANS:  Well, you know, I didn’t....  At the time, Ed was just a character on that trip.  It was before Desert Solitaire, so I really didn’t know who Ed Abbey was, other than he was just a character on that trip.  We had a lot of fun on that trip.  We had a lot of waiting for the water to come up, hopefully.  Especially at <Horn Creek> we waited and waited, and built mud slides, and just playing around.  It never did come up, and we ended up breaking a frame.  I mean, it didn’t keep us from going on down, but it was really low.  And I think we probably went all the way to Temple Bar on that trip-motored across the lake down there, when we got down there.  So that was a long haul.

QUARTAROLI:  Were there big mud banks then?, because they were filling <Lake Powell>.

EVANS:  I think so, uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  So not releasing as much water.

EVANS:  Uh-huh, that’s probably part of why it was so low, yeah.  I think we motored all night across the lake, tried to kind of sleep.  But I like that part of it.  I like the lower canyon and the lake.  That all just seemed like part of the fun, doing that.  So then probably the next trip was in, I think, maybe ’68 was the Geographic trip with Toppy [Walter] Edwards-and my dad was on that trip too.  Our whole family was on that trip.  That was when Silver Grotto got its name.

QUARTAROLI:  Was that the first time that anybody-and that was another Grand Canyon Expedition trip [unclear].

EVANS:  Yeah, that was Grand Canyon Expeditions, Art Gallenson.

QUARTAROLI:  Was Ron too [unclear]?

EVANS:  Ron was on the trip-Ron and Art.

QUARTAROLI:  Two boats?

EVANS:  Yup, two boats.

QUARTAROLI:  Had they been up to Silver Grotto before?

EVANS:  I don’t think so.  I don’t think so, as far as I know.  I think that was a first.  That was fun, beautiful, going up in there, pictures from that trip.  It was a nice trip.  I do remember it being a pretty muddy trip.  I think there’s a pretty spectacular picture in that article at Lava [unclear].  And I think I remember actually walking around Lava, I’m not sure.  I feel like a bunch of us walked around Lava on that trip.  I don’t know why, but I kind of remember that.

QUARTAROLI:  Was it higher water then?  Well, probably a lot higher than October of ’67.

EVANS:  Oh yeah.  I think it was July.  I also remember rowing a Sportyak across the head of <Lava Falls>, my mom not being real happy, worried.  But it was fine.

QUARTAROLI:  How many Sportyaks did you bring on that trip?

EVANS:  I think we just had one, just to play.  I can remember messing around, doing something down at <Lava Falls>.  There was a helicopter that came in.  I remember getting to ride up to the top on the helicopter there-but I can’t remember why, if it was supplying something, or came in.  It was a good trip.  The whole family was there, and lots of good pictures.  We’d been on a <Lake Powell> trip with Toppy Edwards before that, so where we actually met John was on <Lake Powell>.  But you know, growing up with my dad doing those kinds of articles with the Geographic, it was just kind of normal. I don’t think I did another <Grand Canyon> trip until-gosh, it was a long time after that when we revised the old blue river guide, which was in ’89.

QUARTAROLI:  So for almost twenty years then.

EVANS:  Uh-huh, isn’t that somethin’?  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, let’s talk a little bit about the river guides, now that you bring 'em up.  We did cover that with your brother, with Buzzy, last weekend, about how he was playing around with [playing?] profile maps in ’68, and the guide came out in ’69 for the Powell Centennial.  So he had that for twenty years, and that was Westwater Books.

EVANS:  Uh-huh.  Started out as Canyonlands Press, and that’s when my dad worked for Ron.  And then it became Westwater Books.  So I think probably in that old original, isn’t that Canyonlands Press?

QUARTAROLI:  I think so.

EVANS:  Yeah.  Printed-maybe Buzz talked about that-down in <Riverside California>, A to Z Printing, stitched by a tentmaker.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear]

EVANS:  Yup, the binding was a tentmaker.  Real hardy books, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  So when did you get into it?  That went through multiple printings.

EVANS:  It went through lots of printings.

QUARTAROLI:  At least, I think, seventeen or something like that.

EVANS:  You would know the best.

QUARTAROLI:  I’m just trying to [unclear] numbers.

EVANS:  Lots, yeah-lots of printings.  And then maybe ’73-you’re probably going to have to go back and check those.  But we started working on the <Dinosaur> next, I think, just thinking we should do the whole system.  And so I really got involved just in doing a lot of the researching and writing and going to the Denver Public Library, Western History Section, and just starting to just really research-which was fine, I liked doing that.  And it was kind of, I don’t know, my dad, it was kind of like, "No question, I need you to do this."  But it was a lot of fun.

QUARTAROLI:  You were living in <Colorado>?

EVANS:  Uh-huh, yeah.  I made a lot of trips to <Boulder City>, and didn’t have any kids at the time.  Lynn came along in ’74.  So we did the <Dinosaur>.  I know my dad and I went up and did a lot of research up in <Vernal> and <Flaming Gorge> and just gathering a lot of information early on.  And then we did the next two.  And he really did more of the Canyonlands initially.  I did a lot of the work on <Desolation>, a lot of the writing and research on that.  And we had a lot of fun with the McPhersons and Jim McPherson was still alive at that time, and he was the youngest brother, youngest McPherson, and went down to <Moab> and went through all the scrapbooks.  I think you probably have all that at the Cline as well, the tapes with the McPhersons and the Wilcoxes.  And we went down with Budge and Pearl Wilcox.  So that’s where we got all those wonderful things.  So I did that, and then I think Dad and Buzz really did more of the work on Canyonlands.  So they were pretty much-we didn’t do a lot of revising on those for really quite a long time.  But they worked well, good maps-best that you could get at the time.  And then it just seemed....  I know my mom, shortly before she passed, she was the one who just said, "You need to revise that <Grand Canyon> guide."  And of course Larry Stevens had come out with his guide, so she was really the big pusher initially for that.  And Buzz was really just getting into computers at the time.  So that was kind of the start of really doing things in the computer.  When you look at it now, it was pretty crude, just the little tiny Mac Plus-isn’t that what they were, the little Mac Plus?  That’s what we started on, that little tiny ol’ Mac.

QUARTAROLI:  Imagine that.

EVANS:  Yeah!  Just incredible.  Pagemaker and just sort of learning-Buzz just sort of learning by the seat of his pants and doing that.  So we put a lot of work into that ’89 revision, and doing I think thirty-two pages of color in that one.  And by then, of course, lots better maps.  But boy, all those color separations.  We sent those-it was a big deal, you couldn’t do it digitally, and so those were all sent off to....  It was somewhere overseas, I’m trying to think-I don’t remember where it was.  But that’s what you did, I mean, to get the best color separations you could get at the time.  So we put a lot of work in on getting that updated, and it was a good thing.  Started doing pretty well with that one.

QUARTAROLI:  So that’s when you went back down the river?

EVANS:  Uh-huh, and that was another Grand Canyon Expeditions trip.  And I think Buzz had made a trip before that, too, and he hadn’t been down for a long time, and took some of the pictures that are in the geology section.  I’m sure that was a GCE trip as well.  So I went right after the book came out, so that was kind of exciting to go and have the new book.  Did some experimenting with paper-didn’t work out too well.  Our first printing we switched paper from the Texprint to Polyart, which is what the Trails Illustrated started on.  They’re on something different now.  It was much lighter, but it really had some downsides for us, and maybe Buzz talked about that:  the glue wouldn’t stick to it.  So we switched back to the Texiprint after that.  Yeah, so that one stayed in print.  Then we started revising some of the others, just gradually working on different sections, and did a lot of updating of geology and Canyonlands.  R. J. Johnson did a great job on the geology, really getting that up to snuff.  And then we added Ruby-Horsethief.  So that kind of [piecemeal], we kind of worked away at getting those better.  And then I guess it was just a few years ago when we really decided we needed to totally overhaul the Grand Canyon guide again.  So that would have been like 2006, and get everything digital.  We’d been working between two worlds for too long.  Also, that’s about the time that we felt like we really needed to start bringing in <China>, and that worked out to be a good thing for us-quality-wise especially. We did that, and now we’ve revised it a couple times since then, adding different things, adding the GCMRC miles and shaded relief, and now the campsites.  So I don’t know what’s next.

QUARTAROLI:  You’ll think of something to put on there.  At least on your website, do you have GPS?

EVANS:  We will.  It will be for the campsites and other marks.  I’m not sure how it works exactly, but right now it’s just "coming soon."  But he’s actually working on it now, he told me that today.  A number of them you can already download a lot of them.  And maybe the GCMRC, they may have some that already coordinate with a lot of the stuff.  They won’t be on the maps, but people can go in and download 'em, and then they’ll have 'em.  And we do get people wanting GPS points.  I think it would be just too much to put 'em on the map, there’s just no way.  But we’re pleased that the Park Service started putting on their website the campsites.  And that’ll change, of course.  It’s gonna always be a work in progress, because they always change.

QUARTAROLI:  Right, and GCMRC is doing their [unclear] getting on line.  They want to find out how some of the camps got their names.  That’s pretty interesting.

EVANS:  Yeah, that’d be great.  So our website is really-have you looked at it?

QUARTAROLI:  No, I haven’t.

EVANS:  There’s lots of resources on there-not only information about the guides, but if you want to know, to get a commercial permit, a private permit, for all the different areas, all the links to lake levels and river levels, real time, Native American stuff.  Just a lot of great links.  So it’s gonna be really informational.  There’s some interesting pictures of, say, the <Pearce Ferry Rapid>-anything that might be interesting, that we can just pop on there, just to keep it really good information.

QUARTAROLI:  Who’s doing the website work?

EVANS:  Well, Buzz is doing a lot of it with our son-in-law, Mark.  Mark’s a website person, and so he’s doing some of the intricacies.  Buzz is really doing the whole design.  He’s done probably most of the work on it.  Mark helped him get it up and running.  I think it’s pretty neat.  And you can click on the link that goes right to the campsites, so you can see if they’ve updated or changed it.  They don’t really have the campsite atlas, they only have a page that sort of shows it, but you can see what it’s gonna be like.  They show you the old high-water line, and where they really would like you to camp, and "here’s a suggested place for the groover, here’s the suggested place for the kitchen."

QUARTAROLI:  Quite a lot of detail.

EVANS:  Quite a lot of detail.  I think it’s neat.

QUARTAROLI:  I hope people can get across too that they can camp in other places.

EVANS:  Exactly.

QUARTAROLI:  Because you never know.  It’s always good.  I started working on some campsite studies, and I made it a point to camp at places I’d never camped before.

EVANS:  Oh, it’s so much fun.  But I do think a lot of people really like to kind of be fed that information.  I know my dad always-he loved the idea of leaving something to the imagination of the river runner.  And that’s why I think he initially didn’t want to put campsites on there-that somehow you ought to know enough when you go down there, how to be able to find a good campsite.  I mean, that’s what those early guys did.  And granted, it’s a little different in <Grand Canyon> because you don’t have those big beaches.  There were a lot of beaches.

QUARTAROLI:  Right.  And they were there just for the season, too.  They’d come up with the spring runoff, and you could use 'em all season, and they might be gone at the end, but you didn’t have to worry about it.

EVANS:  Yeah.  And you can camp in really creative places.  It’s just nice to know that you can do that.  So we try to have enough disclaimers in there to suggest to people, "If you find a good campsite, it’s okay.  If a little beach appears, it’s probably okay to camp there."

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah.  You mentioned about your dad, a little bit of his philosophy.  He had quite a few little things he tried to adhere to about taking photos and things.

EVANS:  He did.  I mean first and foremost, I guess, he was a photographer.  But like everything else, he loved teaching.  He loved teaching people how to run rivers, and he loved teaching about the canyon country, loved people, loved to help people take good photographs.  So he started this little photo workshop, and we of course have that in the back of the Grand Canyon River Guide.  He had a lot of funny little principles about "it’s not the camera, but it’s the imagination of the person who uses it."  He always said, "It’s the little old lady with the Instamatic and the creative, you know, who gets the best picture."  If somebody writes a story and you say, "Oh, great story!  What kind of typewriter did you use?"  That’s what he would always say.  And how often you would hear, "Great photo!  What camera did you use?"  He was like, "It’s not the camera."  Just encouraging people.  He was always so funny about slide shows and the importance of being able to just....  "The bad pictures you don’t show can’t be used against you."  And you probably know from the Cline, there was not a lot of bad pictures in his stuff.

QUARTAROLI:  No, he was incredible.

EVANS:  He really weeded stuff out.  You only want the good stuff there.  Leave people begging, pleading for more.  He had funny things like "Pandemonium in the condominium," and "What to do with your slides after the trip."  He just had a lot of fun with everything.  He had such a light touch, with kind of making things fun for people, and inspiring them. I didn’t really get into photography, but I guess I always knew those principles.  I did a couple photo projects for a ranch in <Wyoming> at one point.  It was kind of like it was all there, everything I needed-just had to learn the technicalities of the cameras, that was about all.  He never knew I did that.  I think he would have been proud of me.

QUARTAROLI:  This was after he died then?

EVANS:  Yeah, a long time after.  And I definitely think people remember him more as-really, not everything he did, it was just what a great person he was.  I noticed that at the Cline when we had that celebration, and all these people showing up, many of whom who had never met each other, who had just-you know, my dad had sort of touched different, you know, different ways.  And so many of them had no idea that he did all of these things.  He just never really talked about it.  So it was kind of....  The one common bond was just how much they liked him.

QUARTAROLI:  Well and then you talked about him giving and taking pictures.

EVANS:  Oh yeah, always giving pictures, never taking pictures, always giving pictures.  I think you feel that.  I mean, sometimes you see a well-known photographer, and I don’t know, the picture is just sort of flat.  It has a high price tag on it, but it doesn’t do anything for you.  And he said pictures always had to evoke something, some kind of reaction:  didn’t always necessarily have to be a good reaction.  I think some of those old war pictures were pretty poignant, but they got a reaction.  And I feel like he-I think he would love that all of his picture are at the Cline, and in such a place where they’re so open to everybody to use, because that would be giving pictures.  And I think he’d really like that.  Did you ever meet him?

QUARTAROLI:  Yes, I did, once or twice in <Boulder City>.

EVANS:  At the house?

QUARTAROLI:  Uh-huh.

EVANS:  So you’ve been to the house.

QUARTAROLI:  Art Gallenson, we did a-this was kind of a funny little event-I worked for Henry Falany, White Water River Expeditions, and we had a powerboat on the lake and we were to go upstream.  This was spring, early spring.  Just to go upstream to pick up, I think it was a Hatch trip-the passengers off a Hatch trip.  So Michael Denoyer and I drove the boat to <Boulder City>, and Art Gallenson went upstream with us.  We camped out the night before, and then picked up this trip, and then on the way back-I think it was on the way back-we stopped in.

EVANS:  At the house?

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, at the house.

EVANS:  Oh good.

QUARTAROLI:  And that was early eighties, I guess.  There might have been another time.  I remember that one [unclear].

EVANS:  Uh-huh.  The hub.  That was the hub.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, "Let’s stop and see the Belknaps."

EVANS:  Yeah, that was the hub.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear]

EVANS:  Oh yeah, that was great, yeah.  You had mentioned, we were talking about the Dock, Buzz’s jet boat, and what happened to it.  When we went to the building the other day, and Buzz noticed that it said, "National Park Service" on it, and that triggered some memories of that, because when that boat came off after the up-run, I guess it was Buehler Corporation just gave it to us to have down there on the lake.  So for at least a year or two we used that as our play boat down there on the lake.  But then it was given to the <Boulder City>-maybe we talked about this.  Didn’t we a little bit?

QUARTAROLI:  You know, we’ve been talking so much the past two weekends....  It’s all right that we....

EVANS:  Some of this we were talking about, I think, after he and I were talking about it.  Then one of the Park Service employees, after it had been given to the park for a museum, decided to activate it and make it the lake boat.  Is that what you called it?

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, recently when the historic boat project started up, they said, "We’ve got the lake boat in the collection."

EVANS:  Uh-huh, that was the Dock, and it still has the National Park Service lettering on it.  And so Buzz was commenting after, just because he remembered at the time that I think he and my dad both felt that-I mean, why did they feel that they should take it out of the museum [collection] and just activate it and use it, when it had really sort of been taken out of service.  It was supposed to be in-it was a donation to the museum.  So he was just saying that he hoped for the boat collection, they thought that the "National Park Service" should be taken off and the Dock should be put back on it.

