BEN SHIRD INTERVIEW

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This interview was conducted by Dr. Carol Maxwell on August 12, 1999 at Mr. Shird’s home in Brannen Circle. Chris Anderson served as the audio/visual technician. 

Maxwell: I’m Dr. Carol Maxwell. Say your name. 

Shird: My name? Ben Shird. 

Maxwell: Let’s start right back where you were talkin’ a minute ago before the camera went on. Where did you come from before you came here? 

Shird: <Louisiana>. 

Maxwell: <Louisiana>? Where in <Louisiana>? 

Shird: <Oakdale>. 

Maxwell: Where’s that? 

Shird: <Oakdale>. 

Maxwell: But where is <Oakdale>? 

Shird: That’s on the Highline 

Maxwell: What’d ya do there? 

Shird: [I’m Timber feller?] 

Maxwell: You know I think it might be better if I got you to put the gum aside. I’m having trouble understanding you. I was having trouble pickin’ out your words. What were you doing there now? 

Shird: Sawmill. 

Maxwell: Sawmill? What did you do in the sawmill? 

Shird: Lumber, handled lumber, different. I came in a timber feller. 

Maxwell: How old were you then? 

Shird: I was twenty-four when I came here. 

Maxwell: How did you decide to come here? 

Shird: Well, there was family over to the mill, and I was quite young, they didn't want me, so I came in with the work makin’ the money. 

Maxwell: You could make more money here than.... 

Shird: Oh, Jesus Christ! I made more money in one day than I made in a whole week back.... 

Maxwell: Gee! 

Shird: That was like a hundred dollars more in one day. 

Maxwell: Wow! 

Shird: Fallin’ timber. 

Maxwell: How'd you hear about it? 

Shird: Well, they sent a recruiter. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh, a recruiter? 

Shird: He was down huntin’ labor, boy I got caught in it. My wife’s family was without hands, so that made it easy for me. 

Maxwell: What was your family's name? 

Shird: Bostons. 

Maxwell: Bostons? 

Shird: And the Reids. 

Maxwell: Were they from <Oakdale> also? 

Shird: No, from <Jonesboro>. 

Maxwell: <Jonesboro>. There were quite a few people here from <Jonesboro>. 

Shird: Oh, gee, yeah. 

Maxwell: So your wife's family came here? You were married before you came? 

Shird: Yeah. Yeah, I was married before I came. I married her when she was fourteen and I was twenty-two. 

Maxwell: Wow. 

Shird: We used to be together. I loosed her three years, near about three years ago. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I remember. 

Shird: Yeah, we together 53 years. 

Maxwell: Boy! 

Shird: And we did fifty-three together. 

Maxwell: Did you have children? 

Shird: Well, I got step children children, but no luck. Our only boy got killed in a car wreck a few years back, comin' out of Oak Creek. He's the only one that had on a seat belt, and the only one that got killed. 

Maxwell: Oh! what a shame. 

Shird: Yeah. It's one of them things. He was a big brother, weighed over 200. And that reject thing broke his neck. 

Maxwell: But he was your son? 

Shird: Yeah. 

Maxwell: And your wife’s? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What was her name? 

Shird: Addie. 

Maxwell: Addie? 

Shird: A-D-D-I-E. Yeah, Boston before my name got in there. 

Maxwell: What was your life like before you came here, when you were in <Louisiana>? 

Shird: Well, I was [track waitin'?], workin' on the railroad. I worked at a couple of Army bases. Then run into this guy, well he’s on labor. It wouldn’t cost me nothin’, so I took the ride. 

Maxwell: Huh! Didn't cost anything to come here? 

Shird: They sent me ah he was, he’d see how many he could get, and then he'd call over and they'd send him a ticket, go and grab the train. I got off the train the third of January 1945. I've been back a couple of years, but I come back where I could make more money. 

Maxwell: So what was it like when you got here? 

Shird: Oh, a lot more wild then. The Indians couldn't buy no drinks. Bootleggers and what. It was real wild, real wild. Folks gettin’ in a few fights, but everybody got along. 

Maxwell: People did get along, huh? 

Shird: Oh yeah, everybody was drinkin' and they wasn't fightin'. Now, they're killin' one another. Everybody was able to drink, tryin' to hide somewhere. 

Maxwell: Wow! 

Shird: Days before that were dark. I’d had friends to give me rolls of money to keep me. Unt-uh, no more. Now they want you to think you got no money. Wild, wild sense of realities. 

Maxwell: Let me ask you to think back to <Louisiana> for a little bit more. That way we get kind of get a picture of what your life was like there. Where did you live when you were in <Oakdale> in a house? 

Shird: We didn’t have a house. 

Maxwell: Whose house was it? 

Shird: My parents'. 

Maxwell: Did your wife live there with you? 

Shird: Yeah, cause she come out here. She come out here. Her mama come out, and then she come out, and then a year later I came out. 

Maxwell: So you were there a year after she came? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Why was that? 

Shird: <Oakdale>. 

Maxwell: No, why did you stay behind? 

Shird: I had a job, I mean. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. 

Shird: She came because her uncle’s place, her mama's brother. Then she come. Her sister, next to her, sent her a ticket. I had to stay home and work. And then they called me for a good job, so here I come. Wouldn’t take me that long to pick it up. 

Maxwell: What kind of job did you have when you came here? 

Shird: Before I came here? 

Maxwell: No, when you got here. 

Shird: Oh no. 

Maxwell: What'd you do, loggin’? 

Shird: Timberfall. 

Maxwell: Timberfall? 

Shird: Cut timber and bundle it up to the sawmill. Load trucks. Then we had trains. Where Lonetree was there used to be a track, railroad track. 

Maxwell: Huh! I didn't know that. 

Shird: Yeah, that goes from this [leel?] up here, where Tyrrell Chevrolet -there used to be a sawmill there. The two mills was connected. 

Maxwell: Oh okay 

Shird: We drove both mills. 

Maxwell: Where did you work when you were doing that? What part of the woods did you work in? 

Shird: <Happy Jack>. 

Maxwell: <Happy Jack>? 

Shird: (chuckles) It’s down next to Long Valley. You know where Long Valley is? All down through there. 

Maxwell: Yeah, [I've been to?] <Happy Jack>. 

Shird: Uh-huh, we had three different <Happy Jack>s. 

Maxwell: Oh, you did?! 

Shird: Had one when the timber gets further off, then you move two or three different times. 

Maxwell: So wherever you went, it became <Happy Jack>? 

Shird: Yeah, still <Happy Jack>, just moved the camp. 

Maxwell: Uh-hum, huh. 

Shird: Yup, Long Valley we knock off Friday, that would be our first stop comin' out. 

Maxwell: How was your trip out here on the train? What was that like? 

Shird: Oh, it was a lot of fun, oh gee, a lot of fun. 

Maxwell: What happened? 

Shird: Oh you’d have your own drink get you a little shot. Then a guy would come around, bring you your lunch, buy you a lunch and go in the kitchen or dining room or what. Most of my travelin' I did on a train. Just relaxful. 

Maxwell: Why'd you have to hide the drink? 

Shird: Well they sell drinks on there. You got your own drinks, a little bit of a fuss come up. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. (laughter) Did you come with a group of people that were recruited or was it just? 

Shird: I was just by myself when I came. More people come, but I was travelin' by myself. 

Maxwell: Tell me about the first day, when you first stepped off the train. What happened? 

Shird: Oh, my it was night. The third of June. My mother-in-law was standin’ up on the sidewalk where she could see me by the lights. I could see her, hey hey, I’m up here, looked like I was lookin' at the 'Frisco Peaks. Yes I did a lot. I helped cut the stone. I helped build. 

Maxwell: When was that? 

Shird: Oh, early, early, early. The early time really, back in the 40s, this is the 90s now. 

Maxwell: Fifty years ago. 

Shird: Yeah, I was twenty-four years old. Sunday passed I was seventy-nine. I'm seventy-nine years old. 

Maxwell: Sunday past? 

Shird: Seventy-nine. 

Maxwell: When did you turn seventy-nine? 

Shird: Sunday. 

Maxwell: This past Sunday? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh, congratulations! 

Shird: Eighth(?). 

Maxwell: That's a lot of years. 

Shird: Well (chuckles), I'm still around. 

Maxwell: Yeah. Where did you stay when you came here? 

Shird: Right there behind old. You knew where old El Rancho. 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Shird: Right that house still there. 

Maxwell: The one where Mr. Parker lives? 

Shird: Uh-huh. That's the first house I rented when I come, 1945, where the mission was. Later she had the house where Parker lives. That was ________. She had a little store there where the mission a little. Quick Pick -Up I call it. Red candy and stuff. 

Maxwell: So this lady that owned where Mr. Parker is now, she lived in the mission, where the mission is? 

Shird: No, she had a store there. 

Maxwell: Oh, she had a store there. 

Shird: A little side-street store. 

Maxwell: Was she living where Mr. Parker is? 

Shird: No, no, she was a Spanish lady. She moved that little store. She moved in and Parker moved in hers. So then he bought the place. Then when she was rentin’ that little house back there, it was a one room shack. I rented that house in 1945. 

Maxwell: And who lived in it? 

Shird: Lived in it when? 

Maxwell: When you rented it, who lived there? 

Shird: Me and my wife. 

Maxwell: Was your son born then? 

Shird: No. 

Maxwell: No kids yet? 

Shird: No, no kids. 

Maxwell: Did you cook in there and everything? You had water? 

Shird: Yeah. Yeah, had water. Then we was burnin’ wood. Then later the pipeline, and everything. That was the gas company. When I first come out we were haulin’ wood, firewood. 

Maxwell: Did you have to haul the water, too? 

Shird: No. We had water. Then had gas. 

Maxwell: What about your parents-in-law -they were here then? 

Shird: They were stayin’ right in front of me. 

Maxwell: Was that good? 

Shird: Yeah, we always we stayed, always stayed close together. I jus’ to mean, brother-in-law and his wife he stayed right up the hill. I could jump to him up there. Then me and my brother-in-law and his wife. All the rest is scattered up, <Phoenix>, and every-which-a-way. 

Maxwell: That's all that's left? 

Shird: Right here, right in this, right in this through here. (someone enters, tape turned off and on) 

Shird: Yeah I got ‘em trained really. I don’t have NO litter box. Probably under them bushes. He wants to go out, he comes tell me and come in, get up by the head of the window. I know what he's talkin' about. You see there’s his feed. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Shird: I got a dish over -I go to pour it he has sense enough to try to shake the box. (laughter) Try to make me pour more. 

Maxwell: They’re nice little pets.. 

Shird: Yeah, um um, yeah. He get up on my feet. 

Maxwell: Did you keep any animals when you lived here with your wife? 

Shird: I was a hunter. 

Maxwell: You're a hunter? 

Shird: Yeah. 

Maxwell: That's right! tell me about the hunting. 

Shird: Ah there was different things, deer, squirrel, rabbit, birds a lot. I kept dogs, but I can't have none. Have a lap dog, but I like huntin' dogs. I don't have a fence. 

Maxwell: What kind of dog did you like to hunt with? 

Shird: a hound (?)bird dog. I can train ‘em pretty good. 

Maxwell: What did you train 'em to do? 

Shird: Whatever someone want squirrel dogs, rabbit dogs, bird dogs. Which on e they want to hunt that’s the dog I took. 

Maxwell: Where would you get the puppies? Did you raise them from puppies? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Who would you get the puppies from? 

Shird: From the other dogs. 

Maxwell: Like from your own dogs? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You raised them? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Okay. I know Mr. Whitacker.... 

Shird: Oh, Whitacker....ooh gee 

Maxwell: He liked to raise those, huh? 

Shird: Yeah, I've knew him a long time back. But them dogs Whitacker got is Bark(?) dogs, I had huntin' dogs. (laughter) 

Maxwell: Did you hunt by yourself with your dogs? 

Shird: Oh, no, never by yourself. 

Maxwell: Who'd you hunt with? 

Shird: A friend a buddy and I’d go out. Like I say, I had some smart dogs. You get fouled up they would go home, they'd come back. They'd go home and you ain’t wit’ ‘em somebody gonna go lookin' for ya'. Then the dog will come back to you. 

Maxwell: Did that happen to you? 

Shird: Oh, yeah, got tripped up by an uncle passed.. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? Were you out hunting? 

Shird: No he was in the woods. He was working, but he I went to my aunt’s house and he he didn't come in. I said George didn't come in. I said, "Did he have a dog with him?" "Yeah, well I can find him." By yourself? I said with that dog with him. I’ll find him. So I went and found him, he come back and told him where he was at. So he’s down and that dog keep tryin' to get him up, he’s barkin'. Well that lead me to him. To where he’s at dog, too. (chuckles) you got to act like a dog too. And you know what you're lookin' for. 

Maxwell: Why didn't you hunt by yourself? 

Shird: I went huntin' by myself in the daytime, mostly but mostly at night. Dog huntin' in day, and dog huntin' night, coon dog, possum dog. Day, go huntin' rabbits and birds. 

Maxwell: But why would you prefer to have someone with you when you go hunting? 

Shird: In case -you might fall and take sick or what. They have some smart dogs would go home, and you wasn't with 'em, then they would come back and somebody follow. 

Maxwell: So for accidents. 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You said something about you had to watch out for the game warden? 

Shird: That's when you're stealin' stuff -you really got no license. [You know somebody ain't gonna act right?] (laughter) Somebody gonna be out there that ain't got their license. There again, now, I gotta go get my license. I've got pioneer license. 

Maxwell: What kind of license? 

Shird: Pioneer. I don’t have to buy a license. Just go and get my license over there at the game department. After so many years I have to renew, like rabbit, bird, squirrel I don’t have a tag. Deer, bear, elk, have to buy a tag. 

Maxwell: But, I mean I think a lot of people hunted when they didn't have licenses around here, because they hunted for meat, not for fun. 

Shird: Well, that's meat, that's what we hunted. We huntin’ meat, elk, bear, deer, oh gee. 

Maxwell: Do you hunt all of 'em? 

Shird: Yeah, I’ve been in the [crew?]. We hunted clean up to Kiabab. Somebody tryin' to get that buck. 

Maxwell: What was your favorite thing to hunt? 

Shird: Well I liked with all the big game: bear, elk, deer, lot of fun. 

Maxwell: Do you eat the bear? 

Shird: Folks do eat 'em, but I (chuckles) didn’t eat ‘em. Just get the bear. Grind it up and make a sausage. Folks would eat it, I wasn't crazy about it, but I know what they were doin’ with it. You want stuff like that in the winter. Start your smoke house up, dry that stuff. You ever eaten a dried homemade bacon? No. 

Maxwell: I don't think so. No bacon. 

Shird: No. Those were great hogs from back home. Those goin' to the market, go to the smoke house. 

Maxwell: Did you raise hogs here? 

Shird: Oh, not here. I mean 

Maxwell: Um? 

Shird: Not here, no. 

Maxwell: Where? 

Shird: Back home. 

Maxwell: In <Louisiana>? 

Shird: Back in <Louisiana> and <Georgia>, <Florida>. I been all back. See I was drafted at <Fort Benning> in 1940. I come 20 years old. <Fort Benning Georgia>. In '42 I come home and me and my wife married, I lost her the eighth of this month. I mean sixth of September ‘96. 

Maxwell: You were in the service? 

Shird: I was rejected. (chuckles) I was one of them rejects. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Shird: Didn’t pull the test. Well, I pulled, but I didn’t pull the test so I couldn’t make it in the service. I was rejected. 

Maxwell: Did you want to go? 

Shird: No. (laughter) Don’t wanna go with all them guns. You know what they gonna do. No Mama. See I was drafted, but I wasn’t registered till I come 20 years old. <Fort Benning> <Georgia>. And after I didn't make the service, caught me a train and started to ride and come home. 

Maxwell: When you first came here, was there anyone who helped you get started here or get settled in? 

Shird: They was already here. Had a job. 

Maxwell: So you had a job as soon as you came? 

Shird: Had a job when I got here. 

Maxwell: How about finding a home and all that kind of thing? 

Shird: Well, my mother-in-law was already.... 

Maxwell: So when you came, you first lived with your mother-in-law? 

Shird: Yeah, for a few weeks. 

Maxwell: Had your wife just come out for a vacation, and then she moved out? 

Shird: No, no past. So when she came, they told her to stay on, then I come. That’s the reason she came out. 

Maxwell: Came out to help? 

Shird: No, her mom come, and her grandmother come. She was the baby of the family, so then later the crews would come through, that’s the way I came. The man sent me, that way it didn’t cost me nothin’, he sent me a ticket. 

Maxwell: That's a nice way to come. 

Shird: Yeah it is, so I just grabbed me a handful of train. 

Maxwell: Well, how old were you when your son was born? 

Shird: Twenty-six, let’s see, thirty-six. 

Maxwell: Thirty-six? You've been here quite a while. 

Shird: I come in 1945. 

Maxwell: You said you have foster children? 

Shird: Yup. 

Maxwell: How many of those did you have? 

Shird: Three. 

Maxwell: Did you raise them? 

Shird: No, [they had more up?]. Just run away. I had a step daughter. Yeah, she was just a year old when me and her mom married. Now she's fifty-four years old. 

Maxwell: Wow. 

Shird: Yeah, she's a nurse at a rest home in [?]. 

Maxwell: You and your wife raised her? 

Shird: Yeah. She's married, here. She used to work at J. C. Penney, all these places. 

Maxwell: Did she stay here in <Flagstaff> then? 

Shird: I put her through school, her and her three nieces. Me and my brother-in-law, we put 'em through high school, through college. 

Maxwell: Where? 

Shird: They didn't make it us feel bad 

Maxwell: That's pretty good. 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What college did they go to? 

Shird: Right up there. 

Maxwell: NAU? 

Shird: Right up there. NAU. See, when I come, NAU wasn't but two buildings there. 

Maxwell: Really?! 

Shird: Two buildings on the [?]. 

Maxwell: I’ve had a lot people tell me how they used to hunt on south campus. 

Shird: Oh, yeah! ______ all of this was huntin’ ground, and the graveyard that was city limits. Lock the gate at night and unlock it in the morning. That way we’d go to drink and get locked in. We had to jump the fence. 

Maxwell: Why'd you go in the graveyard? 

Shird: Wouldn’t have no hustlers come by beggin’. There were a little method at where we used to go on a Sunday we’d buy all the drinks and have a that’s where we’d go party. 

Maxwell: Tell me about the parties, what were they like? 

Shird: Oh, they was drinkin', drinkin', drinkin', playin' cards and townball. You don't know what townball is? 

Maxwell: Unt-uh. 

Shird: Playin' with cuck-a-burr. Cuck-a-burr. You take it you run with it. They could hit ya', they put you out with it cuck-a-burr. Yeah had a lot of fun. Wasn’t nothin’. Wasn’t none of that stuff, when I came here. 

Maxwell: Did men or women go to the parties? 

Shird: That’s one of the reasons we’s goin’. A lot of fun, a lot of fun. 

Maxwell: Is that just single people, or young people? 

Shird: Yeah, young people. Yeah young folks. 

Maxwell: What was <Flagstaff> like as far as the town goes, when you came here? 

Shird: There was just _____________. Had a lot of fun. Made pretty good money. But it wasn’t just a regular place, all this stuff built. Yeah, it was a lot of fun but you had to hunt it. 

Maxwell: What kind of fun? 

Shird: Drinkin' and _________ stealin', and sellin’ Indian whiskey, and out runnin’ the police. (laughter) 

Maxwell: Did you do that? 

Shird: I was caught in there. Yeah I messed around and got caught. But I was a good boy and didn’t do but sixty days. But they gave me a ride. They sent me clear to <Tucson>. 

Maxwell: Really, this for selling liquor? 

Shird: Yeah, put me in jail here, took me to <Phoenix>, took me to Prescott, took me to <Tucson>. Then I went up on the road camp. Well see I was smart as they was. I’m doin’ time, but the Forester came in want some water. I go to work. I got out there. I made me some money. And Duncan with fire tools. Band them together and tie ‘em on your Duncan. You lead him up the hill, packin’ the stuff. I’m goin’ to eat. Goin’ for the food. 

Maxwell: They gave you donkeys for it? 

Shird: No, Duncan was a pack horse. 

Maxwell: Oh, Duncan, okay. You had a horse? 

Shird: Huh? 

Maxwell: How many horses did you have? 

Shird: Just the one you’d lead ‘em. Tie your tools. Don’t have to pack that stuff. Got a cook up there, ahead cookin’ them steaks. 

Shird: I just wanted to get out. Wasn’t locked in at night, but they had a look-out tower. You could leave any time you get ready. I knew guys left. They brought ‘em back three times, the watchtower guard. Yeah, I didn’t have a problem. Sixty days they turned me loose. 

Maxwell: Were they hard on people who escaped like that? 

Shird: No they wasn’t hard on ‘em. They’d just punish ‘em. They didn’t have no fence or what. That’s up to you. I didn’t try to run. (chuckles) I knew I had, hadn’t hurt nobody. I’m tryin’ to make some money, and I’m workin’ makin’. I come home, called my wife told her I’d be home. Then I had my hair long and I had it fixed. She come in from work, says, I thought Ben gonna be here. Says that’s Ben you’re lookin’ at. Had all that pretty long hair. 

Maxwell: How'd your wife manage while you were gone? What'd she do? 

Shird: She worked at Monte Vista. 

Maxwell: What'd she do there? 

Shird: Dish.... 

Maxwell: Dishwasher? 

Shird: Uh-huh. Yeah, she's pretty smart. She worked and worked and worked 'til she got sick. Yeah, she was workin’(?) She was just. You talked to Daniel. His wife and my wife. They wasn’t nothin’ but kids. They could work at them places, and Army bases and places. 

Anderson: I'm going to turn this over. 

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

Shird: Where am I gonna read about this in the newspaper? 

Maxwell: We'll let you pick what you want. I hope I'll be able to bring back and let you read a copy and see what corrections you want to make and stuff. 

Shird: It don’t make a difference to me. Just pick up a paper and right there. But this guy, he want, next door. 

Maxwell: Who's that? 

Shird: The guy in 16. He write an article on me. 

Maxwell: He did?! 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh, that's neat. 

Shird: Ya know he just finished college. Come over, Ben I want to know what you want to talk about. I gonna write an article on you. Oh what is it? Tell me what you want me to say. Yeah he wrote an article on me. 

Maxwell: About your life? 

Shird: Uh-huh, about my, workin' round. 

Maxwell: What was it like working for the lumber company? 

Shird: Money, money. (chuckles) That's what I was lookin’ for, we drove $500-$600 in a couple of weeks. That's what was the good part. 

Maxwell: Wasn't that a pretty high wage then? 

Shird: Well, a good wage, but then you had to do a lot of work. Yeah, you had to do a whole lot of work, but you made money. 

Maxwell: Cause it seems to me that it’s a really, really high wage for those days back in the forties. 

Shird: Yeah, but like I say you gotta do a lot of work. That’s why they’re Lumberjack’s cuttin’ all that timber lookin’ at it. You get a ticket the next day you done made seventy-five dollars. 

Maxwell: Wow. 

Shird: It was a lot of work, but it was good money too. 

Maxwell: What'd you do with all that money? 

Shird: Well, it’s scattered around. Had brothers and things back. It’s scattered around. 

Maxwell: Scattered it to your family? 

Shird: Yeah it went to family members. See, I been retired for quite a while, and I'm on disability, and I'm on retirement. I’m on Social Security disability now, I gets a little check from southwest retirement. 

Maxwell: Oh you do? 

Shird: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Oh. 

Shird: A hundred and thirty-five dollars, from southwest. A little over six hundred from Social Security. 

Maxwell: How long did you work for Southwest? 

Shird: Oh, several years. I don’t know, just. We cut, logged Saginaw. I used to work by Tyrrell Chevrolet. It was the big one. 

Maxwell: What? 

Shird: Big sawmill. With that mill and this mill and McNary were connected. That made the job there. 

Maxwell: Well, did you do different things at the different mills? 

Shird: In the winter time we’d work at the mill. Summertime we’re loggin'. Bank log. That’s for the winter. When it was snowin’ we couldn’t get to near out the woods. 

Maxwell: What'd you do in the winter? 

Shird: Oh! Draw Social Security. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: When you were workin' for the mill? 

Shird: Oh, handled lumber. 

Maxwell: You handle the lumber that you banked through the summer? 

Shird: Yeah. It was up to you. You’d draw your social security, or you could work. All the same company everything. There you’d take you’d take seven dollars and go to the store, you’d need a pick-up to haul the groceries home. Now you pick up one little thing, it costs you seven dollars. 

Maxwell: Did you still work there in the fifties? 

Shird: Yeah, I worked, I worked all through there. 

Maxwell: In the sixties? 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: You worked in the lumber mill in the sixties? 

Shird: I worked for the company. 

Maxwell: The company? 

Shird: Yeah. I worked mill in the woods, or what. 

Maxwell: How about the seventies? 

Shird: I've been retired, I was retired. 

Maxwell: In the seventies? 

Shird: Uh-huh, I've been retired quite a bit. 

Maxwell: Well you must have been what -you were twenty-four in '45, then, umh. 

Shird: I believe I was fifty. 

Maxwell: Fifty-some? 

Shird: Fifty-some years. 

Maxwell: When you retired? 

Shird: No, I was young. I retired, oh let’s see, the year of ‘85. I've been retired quite a while. See I got hurt and I got disability. I been retired quite a while. 

Maxwell: How come you retired? 

Shird: I got hurt. 

Maxwell: What happened? 

Shird: Oh, I got hurt on the job. 

Maxwell: What happened? 

Shird: I got hit with a log. So, I just retired. Disability retirement no use to work. 

Maxwell: Was it a tree fall, or were logs fallin’?! 

Shird: Well a log hit me. I been hit, I been in a car wrecks, train wrecks, but I never had a bone broke. 

Maxwell: Oh. 

Shird: Never had a bone broke. 

Maxwell: How about the log? Did it break a bone? 

Shird: No, I never had a bone broke. I was always lookin’ up and out smarted it. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I guess so. 

Shird: Yeah, I see what's happenin' I go for help a tree or somethin'. Car wreck, oh gee. I didn't get scared 'til the next day. Well I went and looked with my glasses six of us in the car. We looked at the car and made more and more [glasses?] and nobody got throwed out the car. I’m out huntin’ my kid, lookin' for him, and my brother-in-law says what you lookin’ for, "I'm huntin' my baby." He said, "You got him in your arms." That's how much I was shook up. 

Maxwell: Oh. So do you have the one son? Did you have any other children? 

Shird: Yeah, I didn’t have no luck with ‘em got several kids out there. Beggars, you know. (someone enters, tape turned off and on) The one got killed in a car wreck. He was nineteen years old. That was my baby. 

Shird: Didn't get in no fights. 

Maxwell: You didn't get in any fights? 

Shird: No, I didn’t get in no fights. Fight for what? What you fightin’ for? 

Maxwell: Were there a lot of fights around? 

Shird: Oh, yeah, those people.... Mostly they lookin’ at folks to get hurt. I know people that got killed right there. 

Maxwell: I heard that someone was lynched. Do you know anything about that, a lynching? 

Shird: No. 

Maxwell: You didn't hear about that? 

Shird: No, I don’t know nothin' about it. What time was it? How long ago was that? 

Maxwell: I don't know. Mr.... Boy, I can't think of his name. Lives across from Wanda and her mother. 

Shird: Oh, Willie McGander? Willie Gander. 

Maxwell: I think he was saying that someone was lynched. 

Shird: That was before my time. 

Maxwell: Oh, was it? So it was before the 40s? 

Shird: Before my time, yeah. 

Maxwell: Sounds pretty bad. 

Shird: Well the son, you talkin’ about Willie Gander. Willie got[?] when I came. I knowed their step-daddy yep, I don’t know I don’t know nothin’ about that. 

Maxwell: Okay 'cause that's a pretty bad mark in the history, wouldn't you say? 

Shird: Oh, yes. 

Maxwell: I'd like to make sure that we get that story in here somewhere. Are there any other? Let me ask you, what would you say the Black community was like here when you came? 

Shird: There wasn't no community then. 

Maxwell: No community? 

Shird: Nah, nothin’. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Shird: Just there wasn’t the people just started comin' in here. See, all of them this stuff wasn't here. The graveyard was there, and it was the city limit. All at once they start buildin’. See this is the fifth house I lived in in the circuit. I mean not the circuit, in the community. Wasn’t none of this stuff. Like I say this was huntin’ ground. 

Maxwell: It sounds like people helped their family though. 

Shird: Oh, yeah, sure. 

Maxwell: Did other people besides family help you when you moved here? 

Shird: Nah, lot of ‘em already had a job. Already had a job when I got here. 

Maxwell: It sounds like there were some good parties, though, at least. 

Shird: Oh, yes, good parties. 

Maxwell: How about a church? Was there a Black church then? 

Shird: Yeah, the sanctified church. 

Maxwell: Riverside? 

Shird: Riverside, knew that guy that built that church, she was a friend of mine back home. 

Maxwell: Do you know when that was built? 

Shird: He’s the one built that 

Maxwell: Who did? 

Shird: yeah, he’s a preacher and his brother was a preacher, but I knew that back in <Oakdale>. 

Maxwell: Oh, really?! 

Shird: Yeah, we knowed one another for I came to the territory. 

Maxwell: When did he build that church? 

Shird: Oh, a long time back. I don’t remember just what year. 

Maxwell: Before you came, or after? 

Shird: No, since we came, we all came out here about the same time. 

Maxwell: Okay, you guys came out here about the same time? 

Shird: Right about the same time. 

Maxwell: So all after that is when the church formed? 

Shird: Yeah. First the Baptist used to be over on 66. 

Maxwell: Oh, really?! 

Shird: Yeah, they moved that, and put it over a trailer and brought it across. 

Maxwell: Really?! Moved the whole building? 

Shird: The whole building, and sit it over here. 

Maxwell: Why did they move it? 

Shird: Well, more territory. 

Maxwell: A little more territory around there? Getting crowded? 

Shird: Yeah. Well, that's one of the reasons they moved. 

Maxwell: Did white people give you any trouble? 

Shird: No, we all friends. Go around together. No, no trouble. 

Maxwell: That's good. 

Shird: Nah, had friends at work, white log cutters, colored log cutters, Indian log cutters. No we didn’t have no trouble. 

Maxwell: That's nice. 

Shird: No, we was a community. 

Maxwell: The community of loggers? 

Shird: Yeah, everybody helpin’ one another. 

Maxwell: How about the boss? What was the boss like when you worked? 

Shird: Oh, he was lazy! (laughter) 

Maxwell: Who was your boss? 

Shird: Clarence Butler. 

Maxwell: Oh, is his family the one that Butler is named for? 

Shird: No, he was a white guy. I don't know what they called the street name. 

Maxwell: He was lazy, huh? 

Shird: Yeah, he used to stay back down, down on the, he stayed on the bus, but I don’t know where the name come from. 

Maxwell: Was he good to the people who worked for him? 

Shird: Oh, yeah, he was my partner. I liked it when he had to go to <Happy Jack>, I'd go with him, and I’d like that. See where the spring was there at <Mormon Lake>. You ever see that spring? Well right up there was a sheep ranch. And that where I make my eight hours. He up to the sheep ranch. I’m sittin’ in the car. I’m turnin’ my time in. I don’t care. 

Maxwell: What was he doing at the sheep ranch? 

Shird: He’s hustlin’ free sheeps and stuff. Yeah, and see my boss left. We'd go up to <Happy Jack> and I’d be glad if he pick me up and ride with him. I’m makin’ eight hours, settin' in the truck. (laughter) 

Maxwell: What about, umh, did you, so you lived in town and you drove out to <Happy Jack> everyday? 

Shird: Yeah, we'd travel, I lived at <Happy Jack> awhile. 

Maxwell: You’d live out at <Happy Jack>? 

Shird: Uh-huh, I lived a while, we done the most transferring. A couple of guys had trucks, crew truck, I mean his own truck. We'd go to leave here in the mornin', at five o’clock be at <Happy Jack> for seven. Leave and come back in the evenin’. We done most back so far. Two, three guys in a truck, pickup, work truck. That's the reason they bought ‘em. At ten or twelve riders at a dollar a piece a day plus his time. 

Maxwell: Yeah, that's a good deal. 

Shird: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So that's how you'd get out there most of the time? 

Shird: That's all we would do all that time. A few days, I didn’t stay out there long. I stayed campin’ a little bit. Then it was according to my job. See I was hooking tall lines and stayed on the camp cause I was the only one accepted. They didn’t want to wait ‘til I get in so I stayed in camp. Then the log crew, crew trucks, well then I’d transfer. See I did a lot of different jobs. 

Maxwell: What'd you think of it when you lived out at camp? 

Shird: Oh nothin’, just which ever one home first, cooked. Oh it’s alright, as long as bears didn’t visit you at night. 

Maxwell: (laughs) Did you have many bears visit you? 

Shird: Oh, one turned the trash over. He ain’t got no business goin’ out. Just sit the can up and make ‘em run. 

Maxwell: (laughs) Could all the men cook okay? 

Shird: Oh yeah, my brother-in-law, married to my wife's older sister. And we buddies, which ever one come home first. See I’m working’ tongs for trucks, and he’s cuttin’ logs. He’d sure beat me home first, so he’d cook. But he could. And he'd come in on a weekend, come in Friday, into town -go back Monday mornin', and come back in Friday evenings. Some transferred. I did a lot of transferrin', go and come, leave here at five o’clock in the morning, goin’ to <Happy Jack> and check out. Go to work. 

Maxwell: What time did you get home when you transferred? 

Shird: Oh, usually home early. Before night. 

Maxwell: That's not so early in the summertime. 

Shird: Well, yeah, we get the summertime; wintertime when it’d be late. Summertime it's still daylight at seven o'clock, we done made it here. 

Maxwell: Well, what determined which job you had at the camp? 

Shird: I did different jobs. I cut logs, worked with dozers, track work or what. 

Maxwell: Well, how'd you come to change from one job to another? 

Shird: Well, more money. I knowed for that job. 

Maxwell: Did you just ask for it? 

Shird: Yeah, there was an opening, they put a sign up. I'd take that job, make more money. 

Maxwell: Okay. 

Shird: See, a lot of different jobs. I was easy to catch on to things. 

Maxwell: Where'd you live after.... Oh, are you worried about your dinner? 

Anderson: I was gonna say, your milk's gonna get warm. 

Maxwell: Do you want me to put the milk in the refrigerator? 

Shird: Nah, that's all right. 

Maxwell: Where'd you live after you lived in the little one-room house? Where'd you move after that? 

Shird: From let’s see where did I move. To dobie quarters. You know where dobie quarters is? Where know where the track. Well there used to be quarters. They called it dobie quarters. You remember Miss [Gomer]? She stayed on the corner behind me. Well you turn there, go onto [?]. 

Maxwell: Oh, you know, I don't think I __________. 

Shird: No you don’t. Well I rented a house from her. Dobie quarters they called it. 

Maxwell: Where'd you go after that? 

Shird: Well, different. 

Maxwell: Lots of different places? 

Shird: I've moved all over this place. This is the third house I've lived in, in Brannen Homes. And I helped build it. Well I cut the logs out. [Oak?] cut logs pretty cross-cut. You know what a cross-cut is? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. I've actually used one of those. Those long, long saws that you keep on your porch. 

Shird: Well, well. 

Maxwell: Yeah I’ve used one of those. Building a road. 

Shird: Yeah. (coughs) 

Maxwell: That’s, that’s a lot of work. 

Shird: Yeah, lot a life, lot a work. 

Maxwell: So you cut the wood out of here in Brannen Homes? 

Shird: Uh-huh. Yeah. Then we cut the logs and pulled the stumps out and refilled 'em. We didn't cut the logs up -the sawmill cut the logs. Contract it, and that’s what they done to build this. We dozed all them stumps out. Dynamite, blowed ‘em out, burned ‘em up fill the hole. Don’t look like no timber been here. You can see the trees. But all this been timbered. 

Maxwell: Was it big timber you were cutting? 

Shird: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: How big a tree would you see to cut? 

Shird: I'd cut . . . well you wouldn’t know. Three 32s in one tree. 

Maxwell: I don't know that. 

Shird: I know. (chuckles) 

Maxwell: What's that? 

Shird: That's a fir tree. That’s how long your log. I'm cuttin' thirty-two. I get the scales. Bring it to the mill, then they cut it in two, and they're still big logs. 

Maxwell: Wow. 

Shird: Tree, could do a lot of things with a tree. I know we was workin' and scaler came in and guy didn’t come in, I said, "Did you see the trees wasn’t cut up?" Said, "Yeah, I saw." Come on. That’s where they at. Bring the load on. And one ‘em got killed. Got hung up in a tree. 

Maxwell: Bet you saw a lot of sad things out there? 

Shird: Uh-huh! Yeah. 

Maxwell: What school did you son go to? 

Shird: Oh, right over there. 

Maxwell: Which one, Beaver? 

Shird: Yeah. He went to Beaver. He . . . Mrs. Johnson, you don’t know her. 

Maxwell: I’ve heard of her. 

Shird: Well, she used to comp. She put him through two classes in one year. That’s her boy. 

Maxwell: Boy, I guess so! 

Shird: Yeah she had an old car. She was a teacher. Down the streets there. He wasn’t at school. Here she come. Robert, what’s the matter? “Nothing.” “Get in the car.” Take him to school. Do two grades in one year. Two grades. Put him through two classes in one year. Two grades. 

Maxwell: That's amazing. 

Shird: Yeah, she would come them kids, uh huh. You ain’t in school here she come with that old car. "What's the matter with ya'? Get in." (laughter) 

Maxwell: Did you ever have any trouble with the school? 

Shird: No. 

Maxwell: Was it good then? 

Shird: I never had no troubles, no. 

Maxwell: It sounds like the teachers were pretty well-loved. I've talked to a number of people.... 

Shird: Oh, yes. 

Maxwell: The teachers really had a lot, too. 

Shird: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Was this town segregated? 

Shird: No. 

Maxwell: So from the start it wasn’t. That’s nice. 

Shird: I don't remember. I remember when everybody was together when I came here, and everybody still together if they wants to be. I didn’t segregate. I don’t know. 

Maxwell: I know I lived in <St. Louis>. That town was segregated. 

Shird: Oh boy. 

Maxwell: It was really different than here. 

Shird: Oh, this is lovely. 

Maxwell: You said you had a good life. Tell me what was good about your life. Shird Ah it’s like I say. I made good money, and played ball, swim, hunt. I never did care too much about fishin’. I made it good. Made good friends. No trouble. I don’t ever remember getting’ in a fight. The whole time. 

Maxwell: That's pretty good! 

Shird: I didn't want to get in any fight. You know my [whole life]. I don’t remember we ever had a fight. I was a little bit, kind of a leader, you know. 

Maxwell: Tell me about that. 

Shird: Well I mean I was like their boss. They knowed they couldn’t whip me, so we didn’t get in no fight, but they did what I say do. 

Maxwell: That’s nice. 

Shird: Yeah, I was kinda tough see. I didn’t have to fight. I tell ‘em what I want them to do, and that’s what they do. Yes sir, I been in this town ever since ’45. I trained a lot of kids to work and what. 

Maxwell: Whose kids did you train? Do you remember their names? 

Shird: (chuckles) Nah, they're all gone, and some of 'em gone on. Yeah, me and Broomfield we been here. Broomfield, we kind a family on his daddy’s side. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah? 

Shird: Yeah my sisters. One of daddy’s uncles and my sister. We kind a married family. 

Maxwell: Huh. 

Shird: Yeah. 

Maxwell: How many of your family members moved out here? Your sister, did she move out here? 

Shird: No, they moved to <California>. 

Maxwell: Oh, so they met back in <Louisiana>? 

Shird: No, they came through and passed on there. 

Maxwell: When they met and got married? Was that here, or back in <Louisiana>? 

Shird: My brother? 

Maxwell: No, your sister and Broomfield. 

Shird: Oh, that was back in <Louisiana>, that been oh . . . That been way on back. 

Maxwell: Your families were connected a long time ago? 

Shird: Oh, yes. 

Maxwell: I see a lot of families around here that are connected one way or another. 

Shird: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: Any other stories you'd like to tell? 

Shird: No. 

Maxwell: About done? 

Shird: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Okay, we'll go ahead and turn it off then. 



