FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Mrs. Ruth Ardrey

Interview number NAU.OH.28.3

Transcription of taped interview with Mrs. Ruth Ardrey. Interviewed on February 3, 1976. SUSAN ROGERS: Susan L. Rogers. Transcribed on August 11. Transcriber: Francis Bigger.

Subjects covered in interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in <Kansas>, 1907 

    Meeting her husband 

    Music education program 

    Coming to <Flagstaff> in 1931 

    First days in <Flagstaff> 

    Monte Vista 

    Lived in house behind Elizabeth Babbitt on N. Leroux St. 

    Wood and coal burning stove 

    Pavement on N. Beaver 

    Bought house at 624 N. Beaver 

    History of the house 

    Changes to the house 

    Depression 

    Credit from Babbitts 

    Losing money 

    College almost closed in 1940s because male students drafted 

    Navy uses college as training center 

    Grand Canyon Easter Service 

    Students in music program 

    Choir 

    Went to <Boulder> so Dr. Ardrey could get degree 

    Honored as co-dedicatees at Homecoming 

    Music Dept. located in Old Main 

    Expansion

    Concerts 

    Community concerts

Tape 1, Side 2

    Symphony 

    Summer festivals 

    First music club on campus 

    Music faculty 

    Faculty and students relations 

    Organist at Federated Church 

    Other music groups 

    Two children 

    Symphony Guild 

    50th anniversary of former music students in 1967

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Mrs. Eldon A. Ardrey, and your first name is Ruth, right? She and her husband were both involved with music in the community, and they came here in 1931, when Dr. Ardrey was hired at the University Music Department. The interview is being conducted on February 3, 1976 at 624 North Beaver in <Flagstaff>, which is her home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City- Coconino County Public Library.

SUSAN ROGERS: Would you like to tell me when and where you were born? How did you and your husband eventually come to <Flagstaff>?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, yes. I was born in <Lawrence Kansas> in 1907, and Dr. Ardrey came to <Lawrence> when he was a high school senior, in preparation to go into the University of Kansas. He was interested in music---both of us were--- that's where we met, and both of us were music majors in fine arts at the University of Kansas. Now, since that time, the University is no longer called the Music School of Fine Arts, because it's too confined. At that time you prepared yourself for a soloist in your particular instrument and then you took all other music courses. One year in a foreign language, two years in English, and the rest was all music. But, that's very narrow minded these days. So, when Dr. Ardrey was asked by Dr. Walkup to create a new fine arts or creative arts here at the university, Dr. Ardrey chose to call it The College of Creative Arts because it was much broader in scope in education---so---when you get out of school, you don't just have degree in your instrument, and hope you can get a job, because you don't anymore. The jobs are few and far between, and, so, it's general education and much more rewarding in many ways. But, anyway, shall I go back to when we came then?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, that's fine.

MRS. ARDREY: Well, we arrived in September of 1931. Eldon had been asked by the president, who was then Dr. Gammage, Grady Gammage, to come and be head of the music department. Dr. Ardrey had been here two years before as a special teacher just after he got out of school---we weren't married yet, but he came to do special work. So, when he was asked to come and be head of the department, he was thrilled to death. He said, "Oh, there is no place like that beautiful West---<Flagstaff>." We were married then, in 1929, and came out in the fall of 1931 and started right in. One funny thing was---I had been raised in the middle west all my life, coming from a nice family. We weren't wealthy. Anyway, when you went to church or to anything special, the women always wore their hats and gloves and their Sunday best. So, I did the day we were to go out and be interviewed by President Gammage. We had no car, of course---this was during the depression days. So we walked from the north end of town out to the college, and had our interview with the President. I thought, "I don't know if I can take this or not." The wind was blowing a gale.

SUSAN ROGERS: It really does sometimes.

MRS. ARDREY: Dust, like crazy and here I was, all dressed up, and I felt like "two cents" when I got out to the campus---nobody else dressed that way.

SUSAN ROGERS: They didn't, huh?

MRS. ARDREY: Anyway, we were put at ease by Dr. Gammage. Then, we started looking for a place to live, and Dr. Ardrey had in mind that we would live the winter in the Hotel Monte Vista. There were no duplexes or special apartments---nothing like that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is that where you stayed when you first arrived in town?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes. We got off the train at a quarter of one in the morning from <Kansas>. And, of course, we had to carry all of our luggage over to the Monte Vista. We checked in and the next day, Dr. Ardrey asked the manger, who was Leo Weaver, and many people will remember him. He said, "Now, Ruth and I would like to spend the winter here, and then we can look around for a place to live. So, I suppose you have reduced rents for the winter?" "Why, I should say not, we don't have to." We were just shocked, because the price was so exorbitant, we couldn't afford it. So, for the next three days, we walked up and down every street in this town, looking for a place to live and we finally found a little house out in back of Mrs. Elizabeth Babbitt's house on North Leroux Street. It had been her washhouse and she had just had it created into a one bedroom apartment, and it was super. It was so clean and pretty. We took it right away, of course. But, when we walked in to see the place and she said, "You see how lovely and clean it is ?" I said, "Oh, I'm so happy." Then, we walked into the kitchen, and I said, "Oh, is that all there is to cook on?" There was a wood and coal cook stove. Well, I knew what they were like, as I had used them on my grandmother's farm, but I thought, oh, my! What will happen to my hands, because I'm playing piano and organ all the time. She said, "Well, my dear young lady, that is one of the finest, newest, wood and coal cook stoves in this town. You'll have no trouble, and there is a little screened-in back porch where you can have the wood and coal piled." Of course, all I could think of was---yes, the spiders will be coming in under the door. I'll never forget that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you end up cooking on it anyway, and did it work?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, yes. I loved it. And the heat. We couldn't have gotten along without that heat, and it was the source of hot water, too, you see. So, we soon became adjusted. It was just a shock at first. And, during that same fall, there were five of we young couples who had been hired at the college---I say college---it wasn't a university then. We were all from the Middle West and various other places. We were all the same age, with no families, and we were all feeling sorry for ourselves. So, we would get together for potlucks once a month---pool our resources---and have a real good time. But, you know, after the first of the year everything changed. We were all so happy, because the people of <Flagstaff> were all so friendly and this made a big difference.

SUSAN ROGERS: While we are still on the subject of houses, do you just want to go on and tell me where you moved after that, and how you finally ended up in this one?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, yes. It didn't sound very nice at the time but it was so typical for all of us. We moved every August, as soon as school was out, from one little shack to another; little tiny houses. There just wasn't any place to rent. Of course, we didn't have any money either. Nobody painted their houses, and that hurt me worse than anything else. I finally said one time "Doesn't anybody ever use white paint?" In <Flagstaff>, they just didn't use white paint. All of the streets were dirt, except for the downtown streets, plus North Beaver Street, up to the end of the 700 block, that was the end of this street, and that was all the paving there was in town. The dirt and dust blew all the time, of course. Then, after five years, my parents came out to visit us. They had been out every year and worried with us as to what we could do about living, and this present malapais house on North Beaver was for sale in 1937. So, my dad arranged for us to get it, and we've been here ever since. Of course, we were only going to stay for three years but we're still here. <Flagstaff> has been so wonderful to us.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know anything about the history of this house? Do you know who owned it or how old it might be?

MRS. ARDREY: The house was built by a former forest supervisor by the name of Monroe, who had lived here several years. It was very practically built, as I say, it's built of malapais, our native rock. The walls are fourteen inches wide, and it will probably stand forever. We've made so many improvements in recent years, so it doesn't look like it did when we first moved in. There was no porch. This living room, I mean this fireplace wall, Dr. Ardrey built one winter. Eventually, he and I spent 2 1/2 years, and we rebuilt all of the kitchen cupboards, but it was a good, sturdy house to work with. It's been our wonderful home in which to raise our children and I'm still happy to be here. I'll never give it up, although he’s (Mr. Ardrey) gone now.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you have anything else you want to say?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes. I just wanted to mention that when we came in 1931 his salary was fabulous, $1800 a year, for nine months. And, the following spring we were expecting our first baby, so, we had very carefully put back every little bit of money we could into the bank to pay for the baby when he arrived in July. The banks closed in <Arizona> in June of 1932. At the same time the state warrants, our paychecks, were no good. They would send them but they weren't cash, and that lasted for several months. Anyway, Babbitt Brothers' Store really saved our lives. My husband just went down and said, "Well, I have a $50 warrant, now could you give me a few small ones so we can pay our utilities?" That's the way we had to live that next year, all the time putting back every extra cent that he could get his hands on towards insurance. It was pretty rough.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you lose all your money in the bank?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, we got about 10% of it back.

SUSAN ROGERS:Credit from Babbitts Well, how did you manage to pay for the baby right then? Did you have to borrow money?

MRS. ARDREY: The doctor was very kind, but it just took time. You know, that happened to be Dr. Fronske. Then, by 1940, the state legislature threatened to close what was then Arizona State Teachers' College, ASTC. The enrollment had dropped so because of the war. All the male students had been taken into the Army, Navy, or whatever. So, we had a total enrollment of 100 students, and most of them were women. But, we were saved by the Navy in 1943 when the Navy sent in some 400 men, recruits, for training and this campus was used as training center. Therefore, they say that our college had 500 people and that's how we managed to survive. That was close quarters, I'll tell you. Of course, we were all so young then, and I guess we thought if it happens, we'll just go some other place. Let's see, getting back to music, which is my main interest. Dr. Ardrey and Governor Howard Pyle, in 1935, started the original Grand Canyon Easter Service, and this was nationally broadcast for several years. During the rest of the war years it was internationally broadcast. That's how that began, and he carried this on for 25 years. Then, because of the pressure of administrative work he had to give that up and turn it over to someone else.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little more about how he actually initiated this, or how he got the idea?

MRS. ARDREY: Of what?

SUSAN ROGERS: The Sunrise Service.

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, well, people had been talking, including the Episcopal Bishop of <Arizona> at that time, about the fact that something ought to be done. The crowds were so large at the <Grand Canyon> and, surely, they had heard in the meantime of Eldon's choir, so the three men got together and decided that they would try to make an effort to see about making an Easter broadcast on a Sunday morning, and see how it would go. Of course, KTAR was doing the broadcasting then. That meant, though, so much work in preparation, building their lines and so forth. It just grew and grew and grew over the years. We would have three to five thousand people sitting around at the Sunrise Service, wrapped in their blankets, sitting on the ground. It was, of course, always such a beautiful thrill, because I think nine times out of ten, the sun rose as it should on Easter morning. It was all so thrilling. Howard Pyle, as I said was governor at the time, went out on a point in the canyon somewhere, one of the major points, he'd walked down the night before. He would then give the sunrise description and the choir would sing in between times. It was quite interesting to us, that through all of these lean years, it seemed that the music department just kept on growing, bit by bit, until we had one of the largest enrollments. We got so, so many students from Northern <Arizona> and the central part, who could not afford to go to the university either at <Tucson> or <Tempe>. They would come here to get whatever education they could, and of course, this has always been known as a teacher education school. And, I think most of them figured, if they could get a teacher education they might make it in this world. But, then, so many got involved with the music department, well, it was just fantastic. Really, that's one reason why the choir was created. This a cappella choir, that Dr. Ardrey created in 1935, was the very first one now in the whole Southwest, not even <Los Angeles> had one. There was nothing on the West Coast. And, of course, he and I had been trained in this particular field, when we were going to the University of Kansas, under Dr. Donald Swarthout, whom many people may remember. Even in his day, he was one of these pioneers. And, then, when we got here I guess you could have called Eldon, Mr. Ardrey a pioneer too. He was so imbued with the beauty of it and the students were, too. Originally, my husband was a violin major and conductor of orchestras, so he divided his time between the two until his administrative work got so heavy that he had to give up both.

SUSAN ROGERS: Well, do you want to go on and tell me a little bit about when you went to <Boulder>, and what you ended up doing when you got back?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes, we went to <Boulder> in 1950 with the idea in mind of getting a Doctor of Education degree. We went every summer for five summers and spent fifteen months up there to finish. It took us all of fifteen months to finish the degree. During that fifteen months when we were there early in the fall we got a telegram from the alumni association here on campus asking us to be co-dedicatees for homecoming. Well, we were so, so thrilled. Eldon got excused from his classes, we bought new clothes and came home. It was a thrilling experience, except for one thing. That is the first year I think, in forty years, that it rained during homecoming. As I say, we had all of our new clothes and we were to ride in a red convertible with the top down. The parade had just got started and it started to rain. And, it just came down in torrents. The Chain Gang had some tarps and they ran alongside our car for a while, holding those tarps over our heads so people could see us and the Walkups were in the car following us, and it got so bad they finally had to roll up the windows. We went through the parade route, nobody saw anybody. Then, the game was scheduled for 2:00, of course, and we all got out there at 1:30. It started to snow. During halftime, we were to be introduced to the public and taken down on the field but it just couldn't be done. So, we just had to stick our heads out of the booth, the booth where they were announcing. They said our names and we waved to everybody and that night, they had a beautiful dance for all of the dedicatees and honorees. It was really quite an experience. Then, we went back to <Boulder> and finished up there and came on back here. From then on, as I say, it's been very, very busy ever since with the creation of all the new colleges. This university was growing so fast and they were trying to reach university status. It did occur in May of 1966.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's go back to some of those early days again now. When you first arrived, where was the music department located?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, in Old Main, in the basement. There were several small rooms down in the basement, under the towers. It was really quite convenient for the time being. I can't think just how many years later, but pretty soon we had just outgrown our space. So, Dr. Ardrey and Mr. Jack Swartz, who was teaching at the time, teaching voice, got their heads together, and decided that the upper part of Old Main should be turned into a music hall, if we got money from the legislature. This was just an old gym, where the basketball games were held all the time, then, when we wanted to hold concerts, on Sunday afternoons or Thursday night, or whatever, rows of seats had to be set up, and taken down the next day. Well, we even had community concerts there too, for two or three years. That was the only source for having a place to put on a program. Anyway, these two drew up plans, which were approved so that what you see now is Ashurst Music Hall. They have a lovely, small hall where programs can be held. The second floor is all studios, private studios for practicing, as well as a couple of classrooms. Then, all around the edges of the auditorium were built studios for teachers. We really felt very elegant in those days. And, of course, it wasn't too long before we had outgrown even that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was that the biggest hall in <Flagstaff> at that time?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes, there wasn't any other place.

SUSAN ROGERS: Were there different community programs down there, then, not just university, but from the community?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, once in a great while, not too much. But, that was about it, and, of course, at that time there were just not any extra activities. The town was pretty small. It was 3,000 when we came and then about 7,000 for a long time.

SUSAN ROGERS: How often did you give concerts there?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, student recitals were given and had to be given because that was a part of the requirement of the music department. These were held at least once a month and were afternoon recitals. But, then, we'd have night concerts and we put on the Messiah for a number of years there. If ever we could get a special guest artist to come that's when the concerts were held.

SUSAN ROGERS: I have a note here on the Community Concerts Association. Could you tell me a little bit about that?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, I can't tell you too much because I do not remember the beginning days. You would have to talk to someone who is active in that right now. Eldon was instrumental in helping them to get organized here but I cannot tell you the exact year. It has been very, very successful through the years. In fact, if we hadn't had that, we would have had no outside artists whatsoever. And, I'm sorry to say, the little community was slow in supporting the concerts. The college people, yes. But, it took a long while to get it established so that people felt like, well, yes, we believe that's worth the money. It's been an uphill fight all the way for all of our special programs.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you remember some of the early artists that you had as performers here or any that stand out in your mind at all?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, no, I can't right off hand. I could look them up for you. I have everything recorded.

END TAPE 1 SIDE 1. BEGIN TAPE 1 SIDE 2

In May of 1963 we closed with Verdi's Requiem and the guest conductor was Roger Wagner and the baritone was our son, Roger Ardrey. Mr. Ardrey was honored with a special tribute in appreciation of his 32 years of dedicated efforts to the community of <Flagstaff>, and at ASC, to promote the cultural growth of music to such high levels. To quote one music educator, "Eldon Ardrey is [Mr. Musicman] of Northern <Arizona>." We thought that this statement was quite a tribute. We've had many guest conductors and artists through the years with the symphony. Then, of course, in connection with that, he began the Summer Festival, also. This last year, 1975, was our tenth year with the Summer Festival, with Izler Solomon as guest conductor. He was our first guest conductor for the first Flagstaff Summer Festival, ten years ago. Well, after he had been here for three or four years he said, "I wouldn't miss this for anything." He also said, "This is the second and can be, a second little Aspen Summer Festival." That's how much faith he had in us. You see, each summer, at least 25 to 30 players came up from the Phoenix Symphony to join us, so we really have a professional outfit for ten weeks, it was just marvelous.

SUSAN ROGERS: Yes, I know. I've heard it.

MRS. ARDREY: In the meantime, we have these various soloists through the years, too. Oh, well, there was Gwen Curatillo from the San Francisco Symphony, or, rather the opera, and Bill DuPre from <New York>, who was a marvelous tenor, and he does most of his work in <Europe>. Ever so many names I could name for you, but I just can't think of them that quickly. We're very fortunate, for this size town, the size of the community and the university, to have these top name people coming in all the time. They just love it, and, you know why? Every one of them says, "Oh, I wouldn't miss <Flagstaff> in the summertime for anything." They'll even take a cut in their pay, just to come for that particular week that they are going to perform. So, we really, really are very fortunate.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, are there any other musical organizations or clubs? How about the first music club on campus?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, yes, the first music club was made up of both men and women students--Delta Phi Alpha, and they held most of their meetings here in our home. Once a month we'd have a potluck supper, and have 'em all come. And, it was a joy to have the students around, they were so enthused. And, of course, at that time for several years we didn't have much furniture. So, everybody just sat on the floor and we built a fire in the fireplace and the students all called us "Mom and Pop Ardrey" during these years; some still do. They often said, "Oh, Mom, if you'll just fix that famous tamale pie, we'll bring the greens for a salad." Then, of course, I'd make some sort of dessert, too. The school was small, and we were, at that time, a bit closer in age to our students. It was a tremendous experience, and, to this day we are still receiving Christmas letters from some of these students who are married and have families of their own,---five, six, seven children. They still talk about those early days here at Northern Arizona University where they were all so happy and learned so much. They felt like it was more of a family life, I think.

SUSAN ROGERS: How many faculty would you say were here when you first arrived?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, you mean the entire school?

SUSAN ROGERS: Well, what about the music department?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, there were about thirteen in the music department.

SUSAN ROGERS: Oh, I didn't think there were that many.

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, well, there were about eleven to thirteen, something like that. Then, for the total faculty---oh, maybe---200, not more than that.

SUSAN ROGERS: It was still small and almost like a family atmosphere.

MRS. ARDREY: Yes, and this is what has been maintained throughout the years. The students have always felt like they could have personal contact with their teachers. And, you know, this is the secret, really of success for so many students and teachers alike. The students especially, because they feel like they are getting almost personal home advice.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, are there any other musical organizations or clubs that you'd like to mention?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, of course, I was organist at the Federated Church, and did that for 35 years.

SUSAN ROGERS: How did you get started in that?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, 'cause they didn't have an organist when we first came here. I was an organ major and after the first year, I think it was, I started in. Someone dedicated one of the first Hammonds as a memorial to our church. Our church had one of those little, old fashioned, I think it must have been a pump organ because I was asked to play the first year we moved here, one Sunday when their organist couldn't play. I was delighted but then I saw the organ. I got along with it just fine, but I had to practice all week to get ready. A funny thing happened on that Sunday morning and I still blush when I think of it. They had their regular little bulletin, you know, with everything listed---a hymn here, so on and so forth--the Gloria, the doxology, and all that. We came to the Gloria, and we hadn't practiced any of this at choir hour so we just practiced the choir number and that was it. So, I played through the gloria, introduced it, and then I started to play, but nobody sang! I thought, what is the matter with them? Finally, two or three choir members and two or three out in the congregation were singing but I was playing the wrong Gloria. There are two and I did not know it until that day 'cause I had been raised on this other one all my life and I played the wrong one. Well, if I could have climbed under the organ bench that would have made me so happy.

SUSAN ROGERS: What did you do, stop in the middle of it?

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, no, 'cause these three loyal choir members---they knew it and they just sang as loud as they could and somehow we managed to get through it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did they still ask you to play for them later on?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes, they did. They finally did hire me and I played for 35 years, and then a Mrs. Cummings took over. Well, let's see, as far as musical things go, that's about it. I have helped with one of the music sororities on campus and that was SAI, Sigma Alpha Iota, and I have them up here at least once a year for a tea, or whatever they want to have. I can't sit in on their meeting because I belong to the other professional music sorority which is national Mu Phi Alpha. There are restrictions and they have their own private practices and so forth, beliefs and what not, but I enjoy working with the girls as far as that goes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you want to mention a little bit about your family?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes, I’d love to. We are very proud of our family, we only have two, a son and a daughter. There's Roger, who is a professional baritone, and at the present time they are living on the Coast. He has an Artist-in-Residence position at Fullerton State University, which means if you have that sort of position, you have to perform a certain number of concerts per year, not just on campus, but wherever you're invited out to sing. Preceding that, he taught for six years here at NAU, and during that interim, he made two trips with the Roger Wagner Choral, one to <Japan>, and another into <Europe> and <Russia>. He's had marvelous experiences. I think to this day, he'd rather sing than eat. He dearly loves it. Our daughter is a very talented artist in her own right. She does paintings.

SUSAN ROGERS: Are these hers? I was going to ask about them, I really like 'em.

MRS. ARDREY: She does so many---well, arts and crafts of all sorts. Most of the things you see that are sitting around the house, like those feathered flowers, and oh, ever so many things, she has created them all.

SUSAN ROGERS: Now, where does she live?

MRS. ARDREY: She and her husband live in <Saratoga>, and her husband, Ralph, is superintendent of 18 public schools in <Redwood City>, which is oh, perhaps 30 miles from they live. It's a very, very responsible position. As I said, we are very, very proud of our children, and they've turned out so well, and have so many talents.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Is there anything else you can think of to talk about, or want to mention, something I might have left out?

MRS. ARDREY: Well, I'm very active in the Symphony Guild.

SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me a little about the guild, then.

MRS. ARDREY: Well, I've been through all of the offices. And, last year, I was chosen as honorary chairman of the Silver Symphony Ball of 25 years, which was quite an honor. It's a marvelous organization and I'm so proud of all the women. We are growing constantly every year, and we have quite a membership this year.

SUSAN ROGERS: About how many?

MRS. ARDREY: What was that, dear?

SUSAN ROGERS: How big is the membership?

MRS. ARDREY: Let's see, we have just under 200 members, which is very good for <Flagstaff>. I have been on the board almost since its inception. It's hard to get people to work on boards,I don't know why, but they just would rather not. I've enjoyed it very much because it keeps me in contact With the women.

Our annual big affair, of course, has been the symphony ball. This year instead of the ball we're going to have a centennial gala on April 24th and this to honor <Flagstaff>'s 100th birthday. So, we're really looking forward to it, and making great plans hoping that a lot of the women will make their own costumes and kind of get into the feeling of the whole thing. We have a beautiful dance band all lined up and it will be held at Little America with dinner and dancing. But, instead of the symphony, I mean, the ball, we decided to do this year, as something special. Then, on the other hand, our other big event for the last two, and this will be the third year, is what we call the "Symphony Stomp", or "Western Stomp", and this has proved to be very successful because this draws in a large segment of people who will not go to a formal affair. But, the Western stomp is more in keeping with the times, it's fun, and they have had marvelous turnouts.

SUSAN ROGERS: Is it square dancing?

MRS. ARDREY: Yes, and they wear Western costumes and they have the traditional things like beans and chili, and everything that goes with it, plus the fact that every member of the symphony board, which numbers about 24 this year, were all asked to make something creative. Then, these are used as prizes and are auctioned during the evening.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where is that held?

MRS. ARDREY: This will be held at the Flagstaff Country Club this year. I believe it will be on February 28th this year.

SUSAN ROGERS: That's coming up soon.

MRS. ARDREY: Very soon.

SUSAN ROGERS: That's the day I'm getting married.

MRS. ARDREY: Oh, is that right?

SUSAN ROGERS: I just thought of that.

MRS. ARDREY: Well, how about that. It's been a huge success, it really has. The first year, when some of the girls wanted to try it, we didn't think it sounded very much like "symphony," you know--guild and all that--but, it's proved to be a tremendous success. You just do have to have new ideas in order to progress and this is what we are trying to do. In October of 1967 there was a special thrill for us at NAU's homecoming. It was the silver anniversary of our former choir students, honoring those from the classes of '38 though 1942. They were a very dedicated group, who struggled through college during the lean days. 56 loyal alums, plus their spouses showed up for our open house on October 6th, which was held here in our home. During that late afternoon, Eldon held a rehearsal, and of course, it was wall-to-wall people, some 90 people were in here. They held rehearsal. Most of these people had not sung a note since they were here 25 years ago. Well! You should have heard the results, for the first 35 minutes I thought that maybe they really can't do it. The next night was the dedicatee banquet and they were to perform. But, Eldon worked with them for another hour and a half, and, all of a sudden, they just blossomed. Needless to say, there was an abundance of excitement and joy, with happy tears. Many had not seen each other since graduation all those years ago. Anyway, after rehearsal, on the next night they performed at the alumni banquet, where they sang to a full house and there wasn't a dry eye. Really, it was so thrilling to see how dedicated your students can be. That’s one thing the kids do.

