FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Dr. A.J. Mackey

Interview number NAU.OH.28.87

Dr. Mackey is a dentist who moved to <Flagstaff> in 1919. He practiced general dentistry until he retired and moved to Middle Verde in 1950. Interview conducted by John Irwin on April 2, 1977.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in Brainard County <Texas> 

    Parents 

    Vestis Jones Mackey, father; Mary Helen Moles, mother 

    Dental School at Northwestern, 1919 

    Moved to <Flagstaff> 

    Dental practice 

    Moved to Middle Verde in 1950 when retired

Tape 1, Side 2

    Discussion about dental practice 

    Early streets in <Flagstaff>, autos, transportation 

    Schnebly Hill 

    Football 

    Restaurants 

    Chinese

Tape 2, Side 1

    Electricity in <Flagstaff> 

    Men’s clubs 

    Water supply to <Flagstaff> 

    George McCormick and deer drive on the Kaibab 

    Fishing, hunting 

    Stone quarry 

    Baseball 

    Lumberjacks (NAU) 

    Family 

    Florence, wife; sons Austin and Malcom 

    Changes in <Flagstaff> over the years

This is John Irwin, April 2, 1977. I'm talking with Dr. Mackey, who now lives in <Camp Verde Arizona>, but who was a former resident of <Flagstaff>.

JOHN IRWIN: Dr. Mackey, I wondered if you could tell me where you were born and who your parents were.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I was born in Brainard County <Texas>. There was no town there at that time. But later on I moved to Kentner, when I was about two years old, and then later on to <Lampasas Texas>, where I graduated from high school. My father moved there so we could get the advantage of education. So my father was Vestis Jones Mackey. He was, oh, born before the Civil War. He was a small child, but exactly where he was born in <Texas>, I don't know. But his father went there when the country belonged to Old Mexico. That's my father's father. And my mother was Mary Helen Moles [phonetic], who was one of the early builders of the state of <Texas> after the Civil War.

JOHN IRWIN: Were your parents ranchers?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Everybody was a rancher or farmer at that time in that country. We knew there were a few storekeepers, and those that ran hotels and livery stables and so forth, but primarily everyone was interested in agriculture, farming or stock raising.

JOHN IRWIN: So you grew up on a ranch yourself?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yes, up until I was, oh, about eleven or twelve. We moved from <Lampasas>, but then my father was connected with farming and ranching almost as long as he lived, in some capacity.

JOHN IRWIN: After you left high school, did you go on to college or to dental school?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I worked a year to see if I could find myself, and maybe get a little money. Then I went to the University of Texas at Austin. Was there for two years, and later on taught school in <Port Arthur Texas>, for two years. By the way, <Port Arthur> was an outstanding school in <Texas> at that time - that was high school.

JOHN IRWIN: What did you teach in high school?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Science.

JOHN IRWIN: When was it that you went to dental school?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I graduated from Northwestern Dental School in 1919, so I went back to <Port Arthur Texas>, but it was pretty low humid there, and I'd had sinus trouble. I had a chance to go to <Flagstaff>, which is.... I'd wanted to get back to <Arizona> since I had first seen it about 1914.

JOHN IRWIN: You were passing through on a trip?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I was staying at the Canyon, [<Grand Canyon>] and I stayed around (unclear). That was the year the Panama Pacific Exposition was there - I think it's also called the World Fair - in <San Francisco>. I think it was about 1914, I'm not really sure, but about 1914.

JOHN IRWIN: That's close enough. So you were in <Texas> and you decided to move to <Flagstaff> after you had gone to dental school?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah, I graduated, and one of the men that I graduated in school [with] had been asking me to come out here. I'd liked <Arizona>, what little I saw, and he offered me a very good proposition and I came out. It was better than what I had there.

JOHN IRWIN: Were you a partner with him?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, I was in the office with him, but he ran his practice and I ran mine. We didn't interfere with each other a'tall.

JOHN IRWIN: You were in the same building, though?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Same building and same office, same telephone and everything.

JOHN IRWIN: But two different practices?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, yes.

JOHN IRWIN: Was that common at that time, to have that kind of arrangement?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, I don't know. You know, it's very difficult to equip a dental office by the fact of the things that they had to have. We was far advanced. We had an X-ray, which was very advanced at that time. Nothing like the X-ray of today. It was a gas tube, known as a roentgen ray. I don't think they understood it, that's why they called it the X-ray. Roentgen is the man that first, you might say, discovered the X-ray. All we'd do is take pictures, whether it was an X-ray or a roentgen ray machine. It's the same. Doesn't make any difference to the pictures it took, the X-rays.

JOHN IRWIN: Were you the only dentists in <Flagstaff> at this time, or were there others?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no, Dr. Hays Nance, and Dr. Porch [phonetic spellings]. I was in the office with Dr. Nance, who later on moved to <Denver>. And Dr. Porch was practicing in <Flagstaff>.

JOHN IRWIN: Whereabouts was your office located in town?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: In the Babbitt Building.

JOHN IRWIN: Did people from all across northern <Arizona> come, or was it just mainly the local <Flagstaff> people who would come?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, you'd have people from the reservation and some from <Williams>. However, they had a very good dentist there, Dr. Muir [phonetic]. And <Ash Fork> from Seligman. And one patient came to me from <Gallup> that I had known before. And from <Holbrook>, some from <Winslow>. They scattered out. Of course the <Verde Valley>.

JOHN IRWIN: You served a large area then.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: People came from a large area. We had a certain amount of the Mexicans, a number of Mexicans. And there were quite a few Indians - more than a lot of people would think. And, of course, the Indians were made up of Navaho, Hopis, and those down in the <Grand Canyon>. I had one fellow from the <Grand Canyon>, down IN the canyon.

JOHN IRWIN: Havasupai?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Havasupai. His name was Marshall. Later on, he carried the mail from whatever we call the top - in other words, from the canyon down into the reservation, in and out. Did that mostly on horseback. Got him an automobile, and after running that for a good many years, I think he was killed in an automobile accident. If I remember, the name was Marshall.

JOHN IRWIN: So you certainly had a lot of people from a huge area.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: That wasn't unusual, because the people, one of 'em was from <Yuma>. (unclear) movie stars used to come over there from <California>, into <Yuma>, and get married. I think he called himself "the marrin' judge." I don't remember his name. He was a nice fellah.

JOHN IRWIN: Did he come up?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: A lot of people spent some vacation time in <Flagstaff>, because it's cool. That is, from <Phoenix> and <Yuma> and many places.

JOHN IRWIN: So you had those people too?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, they had - I'm not trying to say they came especially to ME, but I was the one that was available in that area, and they happened to come through there, and happened to be staying there in the summertime. So we did have a pretty well mixed up people. Then there was the Lowell Observatory. One week, they had people from England and <Germany>, and two other European nations. I don't know what they were now - I just happen to recall those two.

JOHN IRWIN: That's very cosmopolitan.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, yeah. Well, see, Lowell Observatory was very high on the totem pole so far as....

JOHN IRWIN: Prestige?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, no, so far as observation is concerned, celestial observation.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you ever go out, say, to the reservation, and practice your dental work outside your office?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No.

JOHN IRWIN: They always came to you?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: The only place I ever practiced outside my office was occasionally somebody would be out in the country, and somebody would have trouble and maybe we'd help 'em out there. Over to the jail, might want to come over there. One of the fellahs that - I remember his name was Nash.

JOHN IRWIN: The Nash murder?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: The Nash murder. They asked me to go over and see him, and I think Bill Campbell, if that's right. I remember the fellow real well, but I'm not sure of his name. But he was the sheriff at that time, he told me he wouldn't take him out of the jail, wouldn't let him out of the jail. They had me come over to the jail to see him. That wasn't uncommon. I mean, that wasn't an uncommon occurrence. I don't mean for me going to the jail was a regular endeavor, but I mean, it was done by physicians, or dentists would treat what they considered to be dangerous outlaws.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you ever have any problems when this occurred? Or did they have the prisoners locked up?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no, I was right in there with him, talked to him. Had to be in there to treat him, you know.

JOHN IRWIN: They didn't have his hands cuffed or anything?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no. No, he wasn't handcuffed or anything. As far as that was concerned, I never had trouble with any outlaw, and there were some of 'em around, too. I treated them courteously, and you'd be surprised, most of those fellahs, if you treat 'em all right - that is, with MY contact with 'em - they're very courteous, very gentlemanly.

JOHN IRWIN: That's very interesting. At that time, when you first came to <Flagstaff>, did you extend a lot of credit to people, or did they pay you cash, or how did that work?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: We extended a lot of credit. And, of course, use your own judgment about that. A lot of times they COULDN'T pay. And lots of times they wouldn't. Some COULD have, but they'd like to spend the money on something else, you see.

JOHN IRWIN: So you had a lot of outstanding bills all the time.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, yeah, they're still standing out, and they always will. I had one fellah, I hadn't seen him for a good many years, and he had died, and of course I'd forgotten all about it. One day his wife came in and told me who she was. That must have been fifteen years after I had seen him. She came in and told me who she was and that he had a bill there and she wanted to pay it. I had trouble even findin' it. But I told her. She knew what it was, she knew exactly what it was. She paid it. I don't remember her name. I remember who she was, and a lot about her, and so forth. I knew some of her children, but she was just an outstanding woman.

JOHN IRWIN: It sounds as if ... but this was a common occurrence that many people would not pay their bills. How did you ever make a living?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Very slowly.

JOHN IRWIN: Was it with the other professional people in town, the other doctors, the same thing happened?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, yeah, sure. Certainly was.

JOHN IRWIN: And you would never have somebody go out collecting money?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: We did at times, yes. But lots of times the collectors were just as bad as .... Sometimes the collectors were all right. Some of 'em weren’t.

JOHN IRWIN: That's a difficult part of your job, I can imagine.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, if I could see 'em personally, it wasn't so much trouble. But sending bills wasted a lot of stationery and time.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you have an assistant under you, a secretary or a dental assistant?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I had a girl who was more or less as an assistant, but she wouldn't be called an assistant as they have today. She was all right, but then she couldn't make out the - I always made out the statements and I did all the bookwork, all the accounts. And every night before I left the office, I posted everything that day.

JOHN IRWIN: That was a lot of work besides your dental work too.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah.

JOHN IRWIN: What were your hours in the office?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, it's supposed to be eight to twelve and one to five. But I was in there about 7:30. On the door it might have said nine, I don't remember what it said, but that didn't make any difference to me. Get up early and had something to do, I may be there at 7:30. Havin' some lab work to do, I might get up and be in the office maybe 6:30 or seven o'clock.

JOHN IRWIN: That's certainly different from doctors today.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Our fee was so much lower than theirs are today. I saw one piece here awhile back, as I remember, our fee was about a third to a little bit less than they are today, BUT so was everything else. A dozen eggs (laughs) compared to today. I remember telling you about buying a side of bacon for eleven cents a pound.

JOHN IRWIN: Yes.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, everything else the same way. But we got very good suits of clothes at that time for around thirty or thirty-five dollars, what few I got. I never was much to dress up, you know. Just so I was warm.

JOHN IRWIN: A couple of more questions about your profession before we go on to these other things. Were you a member of the state dental society?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh yes, absolutely.

JOHN IRWIN: What was its function? Were you an officer in it?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I was president one year. They'd meet once a year, they had a president, vice-president, secretary, and treasurer, I suppose, and so on. But they'd meet once a year, and then they'd have somebody come in, was a speaker that put on [table?] clinics, to show you some of the newer advancements. The dentists would get together and discuss certain problems that they might have in their own work. I've gotten a lot of pointers from some good dentists in these meetings.

JOHN IRWIN: So you think it was definitely of value to support this?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: One time, as I remember, the entertainment was, maybe they'd have a lunch and have a speaker. And one time they had a big meeting out at someplace (unclear). I heard 'em talk about their golf game before they got out and played golf, or not, I don't know. But nearly always, something was going on educationally in one of the rooms. They generally had it at a hotel, someplace there where they could meet. I mean room, I don't mean bedroom, I mean one of the places that they had set aside for conventions.

JOHN IRWIN: Was there a Northern Arizona society, or did that come later?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: That Northern Arizona Dentist Society, was much later, took effect about - I think the first meeting they had was about 1950.

JOHN IRWIN: Oh, that late?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I'm talking about the Northern Arizona Dentists Society. I think the first meeting - could have been it was organized before then - but the first meeting was, I think, when the whole state dentists society met, I believe at <Grand Canyon> in 1950. We had other meetings before that.

JOHN IRWIN: How was that different from the state society?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Because I had been elected president, served one year as president of the Arizona State Dentists Society, I was the first president of the Northern Arizona Dentists Society. I think before the meeting, the state meeting was held at the <Grand Canyon>, I'd moved down here on the <Verde River>, to the place we had it here. I didn't get to attend it, too much was going on here for me to even leave.

JOHN IRWIN: What year did you retire from your practice in <Flagstaff>?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: February 1950.

JOHN IRWIN: And you've lived in <Camp Verde> ever since?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah, I've lived in Middle Verde.

JOHN IRWIN: Oh, well, Middle Verde.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Middle Verde's about seven and a half miles from <Camp Verde>. That's where I live.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you do any practice down in the valley here after you retired?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, not as such. I helped a fellah a time or two when they had toothaches, if I could help 'em out. There wasn't any dentist here at that time, you know.

JOHN IRWIN: So you'd have to go to <Flagstaff>, or <Phoenix>, or <Prescott>.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, they could go to <Cottonwood> – they had two pretty darned good dentists over there. Yeah, two of them, Joe and Ray Pettridge [phonetic]. Joe was there first, and Ray (unclear) later. Joe was in school at what is now known as Arizona University, when I was in practice. Then I kept up with Joe a little better, more than I would most of the other (unclear).

JOHN IRWIN: Let me pause here and change. [END TAPE I, SIDE 1; BEGIN SIDE 2]

JOHN IRWIN: Dr. Mackey, can you maybe give me a few comments on the differences to you between when you first became a dentist and what dentistry has evolved to now?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, well, it's so.... Basically, it's like engineering - basically. In other words, certain things in crown and bridgework and dentures, basically they're the same, because for fillings and inlays to be put in correctly, there has to be the proper preparation before the fillings are completed. It's like engineering, it's basically the same thing, BUT so far as comparing how they did and what they had to do with THEN and TODAY would be like the engineering of that time, which today has sent men to the moon.

JOHN IRWIN: But it's the same principle.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: The same principle as there, but we didn't always have the knowledge, nor the material to apply the knowledge with. Dentistry today, well, it's tremendous, in comparison to what the schools taught when I was in school. The basic principles were there, BUT the advancement has been tremendous, as it has been with engineering - the chemical engineering, electrical engineering.

JOHN IRWIN: What about such things as the anesthetics that we use? Did you have novocaine and laughing gas? I guess you had laughing gas.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yes, gas, nitrous oxide. It was in use. That would have to have someone else to administer it FOR you. We had no one, there wasn't enough call for it to have somebody administering nitrous oxide where I was. In cities, yeah, they had nitrous oxide. They had started using, first used cocaine for desensitizing for extractions and so forth - cocaine. Later on they had another that's called nucaine, and then there's now procaine, about the same thing. I think the German chemists got the nucaine, brought it out for anesthetics. I've forgotten what it was called. But after <Germany> and the <United States> went to war, they changed the name to novocaine. World War I. But I think the German name was something... and I don't really recall it now. But it's exactly the same thing, but <Germany> was very low on the totem pole. In fact, some people wanted to sign pledges that they'd never buy anything else that was German-made. Oh, they got hot and bothered, you know. And I think that that replaced the German name, that they changed the word to novocaine, which is now procaine, same thing.

JOHN IRWIN: Were the Germans the leaders at that time in dentistry?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, awfully good chemists. They wanted to get away from the poison out of the cocaine.

JOHN IRWIN: So the patients, when you had these other substances, were not in a great deal of pain? I think many people now think that years ago patients were in a great deal of pain.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: You mean they had to endure more to have dental work done?

JOHN IRWIN: Right.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, that's true in a way. But people, honestly, were a lot tougher then. I don't mean that they were tougher in some way, but they had so many hardships that they could stand the rigors of the pain better than a lot of people could. I remember one fellah was havin' - his father - they also had traveling dentists. They went about with a satchel and so forth and a buggy, and they would treat people in the country as they went through the country.

JOHN IRWIN: This was before you became a dentist?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Long before I became a dentist. But I knew one when I was a kid, where I lived there, back in <Texas>. That's the way he carried on his practice. The people that wanted extractions done, they didn't want to bother with - I don't know what he had for anesthetic - they just went ahead and had the tooth extracted.

JOHN IRWIN: Just had it taken out?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah, most of 'em were pretty tough boys.

JOHN IRWIN: One last question. If somebody needed to have major dental surgery, would you send that patient to <Phoenix>, or where would they go?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: They generally sent 'em to <Phoenix>. There was two good ones down there. And then Dr. Blair [phonetic] in <St. Louis>, we referred a case to him. A woman was in a wreck, pretty bad, fractures of the lower jaw and the upper, that would require bone surgery that probably no one in this country, maybe not even in <Arizona> at that time, was fully qualified to do. However, there were two: there's one in <Phoenix>, and I think one in <Mesa>. I know one's name, but I can't recall the other, so I won't name either one of 'em. But... they later on, if they couldn't have handled it then, it wasn't but a few years but when they could have. They were very progressive, those gentlemen. They were not particularly in general practice like I was.

JOHN IRWIN: They were specialists.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah. Of course with us, we'd have to take everything. Our business was to take everything, just like the general medical doctor was in those days. Now, something happens, maybe somebody else would be better in his line, or hospital, and so forth. However, we did do some work in the hospitals when the occasion required. Somebody else, of course, would give the anesthetics, somebody in the hospital - one of the nurses or the doctor, whoever was in charge there.

JOHN IRWIN: I think we can begin now on some of the things you'd like to talk about. What's first here on your list?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, I'd been in <Arizona> maybe around 1914, liked it, and had a chance to come back in 1919, as I'd known Dr. Hays Nance at Northwestern University Dental School, and met Dr. Tom Manning in <Chicago> when he was returning from the service. (unclear) He was on a boat, and they turned him back (unclear) for <France> for a year.

One of my first patients - not the first, but one of the first patients I remember was Charlie. I didn't remember his last name - a big, fine, very gentlemanly fellah, but he was a faro dealer, and he told me, "I'm a professional gambler." I didn't ask him how to play faro, and I don't know today, but he was really a very fine man.

JOHN IRWIN: Where did he play faro?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, I guess the pool halls, I don't know. They might have places at the back of pool halls where they gambled, I don't know. No doubt they did, because that was common, from what people told me.

JOHN IRWIN: You were not a gambler yourself?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, I was a penny-ante poker player with the boys. Now, you can call it gambling or not.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you play this in the pool halls, too, or in private?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no, in the homes. Pool hall at that time was a bad place. Just the bad boys went to pool halls. That's what they thought, you know.

JOHN IRWIN: Even during Prohibition, when they were not supposed to have liquor, did they have liquor anyway in the saloons?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Gosh, I don't know.

JOHN IRWIN: You were never involved with that at all?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No. I did take a couple drinks of moonshine, but both of those bounced out pretty soon. One of 'em made me terrible sick, but the other one didn't stay there long enough to MAKE me sick. That wasn't one of my accomplishments, learning how to drink liquor, no. I might’a acted like I did, telling crazy stories, but not....

JOHN IRWIN: Let's see, what else do you have to talk about?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: When I arrived in <Flagstaff>, I was met by Dr. Nance and Dr. Manning, both of whom I had met in <Chicago>.

JOHN IRWIN: They were both dentists?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No. Dr. Thomas Payton Manning was a physician, an M.D. Dr. Nance was the dentist. There was one block paved, turn-around, was known as the Babbitt block. That was all the pavement in <Flagstaff> at that time.

JOHN IRWIN: Were the other streets graveled, or were they just dirt?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, they had some gravel covering, and they were graded by - they had what they called a grader that was pulled by four horses. The man, I think, drove the team, and another one worked the grader to raise or lower the blade, you see, went up and down the street.

JOHN IRWIN: During the winter, how was snow removal carried on?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: You shoveled your own sidewalk and hoped the other people did. There were SOME delivery trucks, by Babbitts, I suppose. There were SOME automobiles moved, but not very many. Most people put the cars in the garage and jacked up the wheels and put 'em on blocks, took the battery out, and they stayed there 'til the spring.

JOHN IRWIN: So people had horses then too?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh yes, they delivered with horses. I suppose, as I remember, they had some delivery wagons that they delivered that were horse drawn in the wintertime.

JOHN IRWIN: So there were not many cars on the road during the winter?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Very few.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you own a car yourself at the time you came?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no. It was several years later. My wife was going to be confined in the hospital, and that was a long ways over there, and I knew good and well that I'd have to have some kind of transportation to get over there and back. So I bought my first automobile. However, I did know how to drive one.

JOHN IRWIN: About what year was this, when you got your first car?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, gosh, I would say maybe.... Well, let me see, I can't tell you. Maybe 1922, 1923, somewhere along in there. I don't remember exactly, about that time.

JOHN IRWIN: So you bought a car. Did people who owned cars also have horses to use in the winter?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, not necessarily. There were a lot of horses around, there were livery stables around. I don't know whether they rented buggies or not, but I know that they had horses that they must have rented.

JOHN IRWIN: But yourself, if you couldn't drive your car, you walked?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh yeah, just like everybody else. Oh, definitely.

JOHN IRWIN: That's certainly different today.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, yeah. I remember Johnny Love walkin' in from the Ashhurst place, which is further away - Ashhurst Lake is closer. He'd walk into <Flagstaff> and get some groceries and the mail and walk back.

JOHN IRWIN: In the same day?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, during a twenty-four-hour period, let's put it that way. He was a good walker.

JOHN IRWIN: Was that a very uncommon occurrence at that time, or did people walk in if they lived out a ways?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, they'd walk quite a ways. I guess some ten, twelve miles. And there weren't very many just that far out, but five, six miles, something like that. That was nothing. I remember a merchant there in <Flagstaff>, he had a place out east of <Flagstaff>. He used to walk backwards and forwards. Oh, anything in four, five mile, or maybe six or more, why, it wasn't uncommon to see those people walking.

JOHN IRWIN: As far as public transportation went, if somebody wanted to go to <Phoenix>, how would they get there?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, later on, of course, there was automobile.

JOHN IRWIN: If they didn't own a car?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Okay, they had the train. You could drive to <Ash Fork>, take the <Ash Fork> down. You'd get on at <Flagstaff>, go to Ash Fork, get off, and then catch the train through Prescott to <Phoenix>.

JOHN IRWIN: So there wasn't a bus then, too at that time?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no. There was a bus later, see, the fellahs that owned the Studebaker automobile, they'd meet people there and take 'em to - but it was a little later than that - to the Snake dance. They also, along about, oh, about 1920 or '21, somewhere like that, they took a baseball team from <Flagstaff> to <Jerome> to play baseball. We left <Flagstaff> about four in the morning, and we got to <Clarkdale> in time to eat and put on our suits and go out and play baseball and get beat 4-0, and then get back on the bus or the automobile, whatever you call it, about 3:30 in the morning.

JOHN IRWIN: Whew! long day!

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Went down Schnebly Hill then. <Oak Creek> Road hadn't been built at that time.

JOHN IRWIN: It was just a trail?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, I think it was the haul from <Flagstaff> sometime, and so on top, and then load the stuff, then took it from there down the creek. And even then, after it was open.... Well, I say the road wasn't open - I guess you COULD have gotten through there.

JOHN IRWIN: In a car?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah, I think they could have gotten down there.

JOHN IRWIN: In the twenties and thirties?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, in the thirties certainly. What I don't remember - I thought - after eighty-five years old you're not sharp on these dates, you know.

JOHN IRWIN: That's quite understandable.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Anyway, there had to be some way to get down there to fish. I was with somebody else, I don't know. They DID have a road there, through Upper <Oak Creek>. But we went through Schnebly Hill, went by Schnebly Hill. But I think we had to cross the creek. As I remember, we had to cross <Oak Creek> seven times from where you get into the canyon at the - used to be a fish hatchery there - that is, a rearing pond. And some kind of a spring after that. I think from there to <Sedona>, I think it crossed the creek seven times.

JOHN IRWIN: That's a lot of times when the river is high, when the creek is high?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, the road was so that you HAD to cross it.

JOHN IRWIN: So you had to go through it, or was there a bridge?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, no, there was no bridge. You went through the river - through the creek. I'm saying river because I live on the <Verde River>. I guess ... but at <Oak Creek>, I think you crossed it seven times. I think that's the right number of times that you crossed. And you just crossed it, that's all there was to it - whether horse and buggy, or horseback, or what.

JOHN IRWIN: In your notes, you mentioned a great deal about hunting. Would you like to go into that, or wait?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Doesn't make any difference. I remember the high school playing what is called the Normal School, which is now <Arizona> State University - football. They came out about 50-50, sometimes the high school would win, and sometimes the Normal. They didn't have very many games. And if somebody had such few periods that somebody was jarred up a little bit, they didn't put in a substitute, they'd just have to wait 'til the man come to. (laughter) Not so bad, but it makes a good story. But they didn’t have very few substitutes.

And the restaurants, there were several restaurants there, Chinese and Greeks. And in the Chinese restaurants, was the first time I'd seen, went in the restaurant and they had sawdust on the floor.

JOHN IRWIN: Why did they have sawdust?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I don't know, it just seemed like the thing to do. In other words, it might protect the floor. I don't remember about the details.

JOHN IRWIN: Was it good food, the Chinese restaurants?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah, they cook good food. Yes, it was all right. The steaks, very good on the steaks. If they had good meat, they'd give you a good steak. You can't take an old-time bull and make a good piece of meat out of it, unless you cure it for several years. But they'd cook the steaks on top of the stove.

JOHN IRWIN: Were the Chinese, at the time that you came, well respected in town?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah. Oh, some of these jing-a-ma-bob cowboys, you know, they liked to mistreat anything that they think's inferior to them, but then so far as I know, the Chinese were regarded real highly. There's one had a restaurant there, and one that run the Chinese laundry, had some REAL nice children. They went to school, and they were just sharp, and real nice too - WELL liked.

JOHN IRWIN: But, there were not many Chinese in town?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I wouldn't say many. There weren't a great many people at that time. Oh, I’d make a guess maybe twenty, twenty-five, in all. I'm talking about little ones, big ones, and all. I would say something like that.

JOHN IRWIN: Did they socialize with the other people in town?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Fairly well. I know that Chinese children affiliated with some of the other kids. One son was born, and he put on a banquet at one of the restaurants there and invited some of the - I was one of the white people invited there. I was called on to make a speech and I said, "The first time I've ever heard a Texan speak at a Chinese banquet in English." The only way I can remember that is because I got the razz about it so much. I probably wouldn't have remembered it. But I thought they were fine people.

JOHN IRWIN: Let me pause here.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]

DR. A.J. MACKEY: ... a book there. I'm not going to mention about so many of those people that I knew that "came to the mountain." Of course I didn't know all of 'em, but I did know some. The light company, I think it was called the Flagstaff Light Company, at that time that supplied electricity. They burned slabs, possibly some coal. The light was not really steady. In other words, the light would be bright and down, but never really very bright. The lights would get low and somebody yelled, would say, "Put on another slab, George," which meant George Harrington, who was the manager of the Flagstaff Electric Company. Babbitt Brothers had direct current for their store and office, I think, and also for their meat processing plant.

JOHN IRWIN: Did the current come from the same electric company, or light company? They had their own?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, Flagstaff Electric Light Company - I think that's what it was called - they had alternating current, and Babbitt had direct current. There was two newspapers. One was Coconino Sun, by Fred Breen, and one by, I think somebody said Northern Arizona Leader, Craig Pottinger was the head of that.

One day I saw Dave Babbitt, Jr., fishing in a washtub at the corner of San Francisco and Aspen. People would walk by, he'd take that old cane pole and throw a fish real high over his back and people would gather around to see what was going on. I was told that he was going to join the Elks, and this was part of the initiation.

JOHN IRWIN: Was that a common occurrence, to do that?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: That was the only time I saw that done. That was Dave Babbitt, Jr. He was a real nice fellah, he really was.

JOHN IRWIN: Did you belong to many organizations?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, I belonged to Elks, the Masons, and the Rotary Club, and the Game Protective Association. Actually, the Game Protective Association was started by Tom McCullough who was a long-time resident of <Flagstaff>. We got the water from the <San Francisco Peaks>, which ran into a 15,000-gallon reservoir near the present reservoir. The early settlers of <Flagstaff> thought that was enough to last <Flagstaff> for all time.

I remember George McCormick was going to drive deer from the Kaibab Forest from the over-populated range, across the canyon to the south side. Much publicity and money was donated for the drive. Some Indians were included. The idea was to get behind the deer with bells and scare them into the <Colorado>, and across to the south side. The deer about ran over 'em, if they'd go so far, but they had no luck a'tall.

When I first came here, the deer and antelope were rather more numerous than today. Turkeys were possibly a little fewer, but there were lots of ducks and geese. Pretty good trout fishing in <Oak Creek>. But the road was rather poor. Had a lot of perch in <Mormon Lake> and Lake Mary, and also crappies in Lake Mary. And Sunday afternoon, a lot of people fishing around Lake Mary.

JOHN IRWIN: The lakes were stocked, were they not?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah.

JOHN IRWIN: What agency, or who stocked them?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: The Arizona Game Department, I suppose. Sometimes, like elk, they wanted to bring in elk. A lot of Elks Lodges furnished a lot of money to get the elk into the state. And sportsmen from different towns, they'd donate so much, possibly to help the game department get the fish there. I don't remember all the details of the fish planting, however I know that some fish were planted, 'cause I planted some for the game department at the Willow Valley Lake.

JOHN IRWIN: You were quite a sportsmen then?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, I sure liked to fish and hunt.

JOHN IRWIN: Would you go out just on weekends, or would you take a week off?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I’d rather go out weekends. As a rule, we camped out. A friend of mine, we used to camp out a week. But you could hunt deer and turkey. The license cost a dollar and a half, on which you could fish AND hunt. And you were allowed one deer; two turkeys; and rabbits, no limit; and ducks, there’s no duck stamp, you were allowed twenty-five a day; doves twenty-five a day. And if you went to <Verde Valley>, you could hunt quail, you're allowed twenty-five quail a day. (unclear)

JOHN IRWIN: Did you usually get your catch, your quota?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: (chuckles) No.

JOHN IRWIN: That's a lot of work!

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Anybody gets twenty-five quail NOW a day.... I have done that. That was unusual. But I don't think I've ever done that since, I don't remember. If you get eight or ten, that's a good mess of quail. Of course, at that time we had to pull people in and a family, but now, my wife and I get six or eight quail at a time, that's enough for us. I don't try to kill the limit. I don't think I ever did strive for the limit.

Elk season opened first in 1935, and one bull elk. But you had to have a permit that cost ten dollars. November 3, 1935, I got my first bull elk.

JOHN IRWIN: Where did you get the elk?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Down close to the Wallace Ranger Station. That's over on the other forest, that's not on the Coconino Forest.

JOHN IRWIN: Not necessarily planned for, but could you go anyplace in the forest?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: You go anyplace you wanted to at that time.

JOHN IRWIN: And there might be one?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, you knew where the elk were, but they didn't segregate you into Area 5, 6, or so forth like that. The whole state was open. When the elk season was open, the whole state was open. Same with deer and turkey. Of course there weren't so many hunters like today.

JOHN IRWIN: So, anyplace you could find an elk was open to you?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yes, unless it was in somebody's freezer, or on his front porch, hanging up. (laughter)

JOHN IRWIN: How did you handle the skinning when you got it home? Did you have a big deep freeze?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No. During the elk season you hunted in the wintertime. We had places on the north side of the house where we could swing it - hang it out, you know, in the air.

JOHN IRWIN: Outside?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Outside. I'm talkin' about deer and elk now. We never had any of it spoil, never. Never any part of an elk or any part of a deer spoiled. I don't ever remember the same with fish or fowl. We took pretty good care of our stuff. We'd clean it. My wife was kind of a pioneer gal, she knows how to handle stuff and how to fix it. Just excellent.

JOHN IRWIN: So you didn't necessarily smoke or otherwise prepare the stuff?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh, no. I wouldn't have known how. I wouldn't have known how, but this cool weather, if it stayed, you could keep it all right.

JOHN IRWIN: Until spring?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, it didn't last till spring ‘cause I’d eat it up.

JOHN IRWIN: Good meat every night!

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I don't know anything else. The stone quarry? There was a stone quarry there, east of what was <Flagstaff> then. Have you been to that old stone quarry?

JOHN IRWIN: That's where El Rancho Shopping Center is now, I think, or in that vicinity.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I don't know, I'm not familiar with that, but that used to have a lot of stone. The Babbitts' building, the first building they had there, you know, the old (unclear), it was made from this stone quarry there. I think the ... seems like the courthouse. I'm not sure. Is the courthouse brown?

JOHN IRWIN: Brownish-red.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Rock?

JOHN IRWIN: Yes.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well that's no doubt from that old stone quarry. The Brown Palace used to be the most famous hotel in <Denver>.

JOHN IRWIN: Still is.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: That stone was shipped from <Flagstaff>. And at one time the post office building in <Los Angeles> was made from this stone.

JOHN IRWIN: Was this a big operation when you were in <Flagstaff>?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, I don't, as you call operations today. I'll take it would be a big operation, but then they.... People worked there and they got the stone out. I was never there when they were working, but I know, from what people told me, I know about how it was done. You had to use your head, no doubt, and a lot of care, so that they didn't break the stone too much, and so you didn't get broke up too, you know.

JOHN IRWIN: Right. I think you were also going to mention about the baseball team at the armory?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: After World War I, the Arizona National Guard had some French 75s, field artillery guns, brought in...horses. They were pulled by horses, and all the equipment to run it. Well, somebody suggested they have a baseball team. So they had to organize a baseball team, and it was known as the Battery Team, or Battery "A" team.

JOHN IRWIN: You were on this team?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yes. There was some <Phoenix> paper, I don't know, they’ve changed their names a little bit from that time, referred to the Battery "A" team, and we had a pretty good team, the Lumberjacks. And I think Craig Pottinger objected to that name. He was editor of one of the papers. He objected to being called Lumberjacks.

JOHN IRWIN: Do you know why? Was it a derisive term at that time?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: He thought that the baseball players should be recognized for their business. Some were in business, and some were in professions, and some were students. There were not lumberjacks from the woods that composed the team. I think maybe Craig Pottinger got that kind of mixed up. And from that, I think, so far as I know, that was the beginning of the name Lumberjack.

JOHN IRWIN: For NAU?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: For NAU, the team - that is, their athletics. So far as I know, I think that's right. I wouldn't swear to it.

JOHN IRWIN: Did this team play against the college?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, they were a little bit too.... (unclear) They played like <Kingman>, <Williams>, <Winslow>. Did I mention <Jerome>? They had one team come out of <Phoenix>. And I think the <Phoenix> team called themselves, I don't know, seemed like “socks”, some kind of “socks”. I don't remember. They had some good players. One of the players played for <Detroit>, but was crippled and he was out kind of recuperating, I think. And then the next year, one of those pitchers went to <Portland>. The catcher was Lyle, and I think he went to some Class "B" team on the coast, they weren’t the big leagues, you know, at that time. That was the coast league. Coast league had some good ball players. But the major leagues, the National and the American League were in the East entirely, as we call it from here, we'd call it, East. As far as <Philadelphia>, <Baltimore>, <Chicago>, <St. Louis> Browns, St. Louis Cards. <Philadelphia> had two teams: Philadelphia "E's" by Connie Mack. He didn't like to be called Mack, Cornelius McGillicuttie [phonetic]. He was called Connie Mack in the papers, but he didn't want a young upstart to refer to him as Mack - so I was told, I don't know.

JOHN IRWIN: I can tell you're a big baseball fan.

DR. A.J. MACKEY: I sure love the game. Any time it's on TV, that's.... I hardly miss any of the baseball games on TV. Of course I don't travel around the country now to see 'em. I've seen a few in <Phoenix> years ago - you know, training, spring training.

JOHN IRWIN: Would you ever go to <Chicago> to see a game, or anything like that?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No. I lived in <Chicago> for three years, and I saw a number of the games there, and I saw a couple of World Series back there. And after all, it takes time, and at that time - and it took something else, which I was always a little bit shy of, and that's traveling expenses and so on. I could have gone back there and so forth, but then other things would have suffered. Then I was havin' a family to raise. I don't know how good a job I did, but then I think they're all right.

JOHN IRWIN: I should ask you, before we close, about your wife and your children. What is your wife's name?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: My wife’s name is Florence.

JOHN IRWIN: Were you married before you came to <Flagstaff>?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: No, I met her in <Flagstaff>. We married in <Denver>, and it was from 1919 to 1950 I was in <Flagstaff>. Two sons born there, one practiced dentistry in <Yuma>. He went to school, both of those went to school at Northern Arizona U., the oldest one, and played in the band. Then he went to University of Arizona and played in the band there. Then he went to the University of Southern California and played in the band (some confusion about which son played in a college band). And he had a bad knee that he got hurt. He's supposed to be sent to a warm, dry climate when he got out of the army. They sent him from <Okinawa> to... I think he was on his back, they put him low(?) - he came, I guess, to Guam, and then on over to somewhere on the coast. And my wife asked him what his impression was of someplace en route, might have been Guam. He said, "I don't know, I was strapped down flat on my back."

JOHN IRWIN: What is his name?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: His name is Austin J. Mackey, Jr. That's my oldest son. And Malcolm, the other son, he's in kind of, in a small way, a contractor, and he also teaches industrial arts at Northern Arizona University now.

JOHN IRWIN: Oh, he does? Oh. And his name is?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Malcolm.

JOHN IRWIN: I just have one more question, unless you'd like to say something else. The question is, can you describe, off the top of your head, any impressions that you have of <Flagstaff> when you first came, compared to what <Flagstaff> is now? What do you think, besides the obvious changes, maybe the character of the people? (a second or so of blank tape)

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Well, the people were dressed fairly comfortably, but they didn't pay too much attention to their clothes. I'm talking about the man on the street. I'm not talking about the people on the society column or something like that. Of course they dressed stylish as anybody in any of the cities. I'm talkin' about the people on the street. There was a lot of people worked in the woods - LOTS of 'em. And they ran sheep and cattle and some farming, mostly beans, and.... (30 seconds blank tape) Beans, you know, and so forth..., went well. They got paid that one time for not raising anything, to a certain extent, you know. Those details I'm not familiar with, and I don't want to make that as too much of a broad statement, but sometime along the line, the <United States> was oversupplied with food of certain varieties, and they gave 'em money based on the [cost?], one person getting so much for not raising something - some certain crop in which they were familiar with up around <Oregon> and <Washington>. So I am told, and I think by responsible people. But <Flagstaff> always had some good, hale, and hearty people. They were friendly people.

JOHN IRWIN: Friendly?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Oh yeah, always friendly, kind of quiet.

JOHN IRWIN: Were there many different social groups of people? Would they interact a great deal?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: That I don't know. You see, I was never... I couldn’t answer that, I wasn’t included in the program, you might say. Hunting and fishing was things I liked to do the most.

JOHN IRWIN: You preferred being outside?

DR. A.J. MACKEY: Yeah, outdoors. Of course I had two boys to raise, and that takes a little time, you know. You can't go to parties at night and farm out your children very well. We had people who were very good about coming in. I don't think they had babysitters like they have today, you know. But we had neighbors that would take care of them very nicely. I don't know, I never did leave 'em that much, unless somebody came out and wanted to go to a Snake Dance. Then we might. And my wife went along, which she nearly always did, except hunting, the fishing. (brief bobble in tape) She liked to go fishing. Every place I went outside of hunting, why, she was right there.

JOHN IRWIN: So you spent most.... (33 seconds blank tape)

DR. A.J. MACKEY: ... wide running boards in those days. Hooked onto the running board of the car and then they stretch out just to make a regular bed that had springs. (22 seconds blank tape) ... (unclear) flipped the light on and see about 'em, you know, or I could.

(50 seconds blank tape) Unidentified woman: You guys finishing up?



