BOB BOLTON INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.30

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with Bob Bolton today. It's December 16, [1998]. Also present in the room are Karen Underhill from NAU and Lew Steiger. This interview is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. 

Cole: Bob, let's just start at the very beginning, if you could tell us when and where you were born. 

Bolton: I was born in <Columbus Kansas>, in 1926. My parents moved to <New Mexico> when I was eight. We were part of the Dust Bowl crowd, and we were starving to death in <Kansas>, so we moved to <New Mexico> and found out what hunger really was. (laughter) And then I went to school at Moriarty. Then I went into the Navy after high school. After [the Navy] I migrated to <Gallup>. I spent about twenty years in <Gallup>, and that's where I became interested in the Navajos and the Zunis and all the other tribes. I worked for a bus company in <Gallup> for several years, runnin' the bus out on the <Navajo Reservation>. Then I started selling on the reservation for different companies. I finally wound up working for Henry Hillson in <Albuquerque>, an old-time wholesale distributor in <Albuquerque>, a very fine firm that for years had the Navajo clothing contract for the school kids--but I never had any connection with that. My job was calling on traders and in-town businesses, selling dry goods to them.

At that time, all the old-time trading posts carried a complete line of clothing for the entire family. So they had quite an inventory in the stores, of clothing and other merchandise, to supply all the needs of the Navajo people. Most of my traveling was on the <Navajo Reservation>. At the same time, I sold Pendleton blankets for R.M. Bruchman out of <Winslow>. He was a very fine gentleman. I started working for him when he was about eighty-five. He lived to be a hundred and five. 

Cole: When you said you moved to <Gallup> and started drivin' a bus, when was that, about what year? 

Bolton: It was probably about 1948 or 1949. 

Cole: And how long were you a bus driver? 

Bolton: About five or six years. 

Cole: And you actually then drove out on the reservation? 

Bolton: Yes. At that time we had a regular bus service from <Gallup> to <Chinle>, and we hauled a lot of people, believe it or not. We had about four buses running. But that was about the time that--you know, right after World War II, vehicles were very hard to come by. But along in the early fifties, then the Navajos were able to start buying pickups. Then as soon as they started buying pickups, then the bus service started dwindling. But we hauled mail on the bus, and then we hauled freight on the bus. 

Cole: What were the road conditions like? 

Bolton: Well, when I started, the pavement ended at the state line. And in the wintertime the roads became impassable. I remember one time when we hadn't taken mail to <Ganado> for about a week, and we hooked two trucks together and went over the mountain on the frost to get the mail to <Ganado>. Then we came back.

But then in the fifties, they started paving the roads, and things started pickin' up then. But then the roads ended at <Ganado>. For many years, out around <Piñon>, they didn't have a paved road. And I don't think the road was completely paved from <Ganado> to <Tuba City> 'til along in the mid-fifties somewhere. And in the wintertime, the roads were just impassable, in the summertime they were so corduroyed that you could hardly get over 'em. (laughs) 

Cole: So when you went to work for Hillson, about what year was that? 

Bolton: That was about 1963. 

Cole: And if you could describe for us sort of what your route was, going around the reservation, exactly how that would work. 

Bolton: Well, I had the entire <Navajo Reservation>. Actually, I spent about a full four-week period on the reservation, because at that time there were a lot of stores on the reservation. Like in <Ganado>, there were three stores. At <Kayenta> there were three stores. <Tuba City> there were three stores, or maybe even four. Then all the in-between stores: like at <Ganado>, out west there, you had <Greasewood> and Sunrise, then on down to Dilkon. Then there was Wide Ruins and Klagetoh, south of <Ganado>. Over west of <Chinle> there was <Salina> and Black Mountain, Smoke Signal, Low Mountain. Then on back to <Piñon> and Dinnebito. You didn't drive between the stores in just a few minutes. It might take you an hour, hour-and-a-half to get from one store to another one. But the people were very friendly, and most of 'em were very lonesome. And when you got to the store, you had a lot of conversation and catching up on. You never wanted to hit a store at eleven o'clock, because if you only had thirty or forty-five minutes of business, they would always hold you over for lunch, so they could visit with you during lunch. Then there were a lot of stores where I would spend the night. Got just set up on a routine to where you would spend the evening with them, and usually work the store after supper, and then spend the night, and then the next morning get up and go on about your business. 

Cole: What were some of the stores that you regularly spent the evening at? 

Bolton: <Kaibito> was one that I almost always spent the night there. Then Navajo Mountain--always spent the night there. And I spent nights out at <Piñon>. 

Cole: Who were the traders who were at the stores? 

Bolton: At <Kaibito> it was Bob Redd, and then the Kerleys, Al and Mrs. Kerley had the store there. Before them, when I stayed with them. And at <Piñon>, I stayed with Bill Malone there at <Piñon> when he was there. I've known Bill since he was a young man. (chuckles) 

Cole: Would you bring the goods, or would you just put the orders in? 

Bolton: No, I carried a station wagon full of samples. I would show the samples, and they would pick the merchandise out of the samples, and then ship 'em the merchandise. But a lot of times they wouldn't even look at the samples--they would just tell you what they needed and give you the sizes, and we would pick out the merchandise and send it to 'em. And Mr. Hillson had a knack of knowing the type of clothing to pick out that was very saleable, and the people liked, and was very sturdy. He was a good merchant. 

Cole: So would that just be one trip a year that you'd go out there? 

Bolton: Oh, no! every month. Every month I would make a trip. 

Cole: And that trip would take a full month? 

Bolton: Well, no, I would come back into <Gallup> or come back into <Albuquerque> every weekend. No, I just stayed out about four nights a week, and then I'd be home. 

Cole: And did you have other accounts outside the reservation? 

Bolton: Yes, I had accounts in <Gallup> and <Winslow> and <Holbrook>, <Flagstaff>. Part of the time I had the White Mountain area. I had the Lees down there, and then I had the White River Trading Post. Then there was another store over--East Fork Trading, I had that store. Then I went down to Cibecue. But that was mostly for the Pendleton blankets, 'cause at that time there were four or five wholesale distributors out of <Phoenix>, also, that covered the same area. 

Cole: Did the Phoenix merchants cover for Pendleton blankets or for everything too? 

Bolton: No, they just had different lines of clothing. There were not too many Pendleton blanket businesses. There's been Babbitts in <Flagstaff>, and Kimballs and Gross Kelly [phonetic spellings] had the blankets. And before that, Gallup Mercantile had them. And then Bruchman's in <Winslow> had the blankets. 

Cole: If you could describe, maybe when you started selling goods, what were the main things you sold, and did you see a change over time in what they wanted at the posts? 

Bolton: Oh, basically when I first started selling, there were only about four different patterns of Pendleton blankets, for instance. Right now, I think we have about probably twenty different patterns. But when I first started selling, we would sell basically just regular very plain merchandise, like Wrangler jeans and boys' sport shirts and boys' western shirts, and socks, and maybe a store would carry one style of boys' shoes and one style of girls' shoes. The people weren't choosy like they are now. They would accept--well, like we did when we were kids, when our parents bought us shoes, that's the shoe that we wore. That was pretty much the way it was originally. But then they started wanting more stylish clothes, and finally the Navajo clothing contract ran out, because the kids wanted more styles and wanted to be able to chose their own clothes, and the kids would no longer accept what the parents gave them, but they wanted to chose their own clothes. And then the Navajos started getting pickups and getting more mobile, and they wanted to go into the supermarkets and buy clothes. That's when the trading posts started diminishing. The trader needed most of their income in order to support them. When they took that money off the reservation, that made it difficult for the trader. The trading posts started vanishing. 

Cole: When you mentioned the clothing contract, could you explain a little bit more about what that was? 

Bolton: Well, at that time, they had a lot of different boarding schools, and the Navajo Tribe allotted money to a clothing contract to buy clothing for the kids. And the teachers would measure the kids, and they had a chart for every child--their sock sizes, underwear sizes--and then they would send that in to Hillson's, and then they would fill that order and send it back out to the schools for the kids. He had that for many years--I don't know how many years, but probably ten or maybe even fifteen years, and he did a good job with it. He was an expert in his business. But then that vanished, too. And see, Henry Hillson actually sold out to, I think it was the Southern Ute Navajo Tribe, and then they ran it for several years. 

Cole: When you first started traveling to the reservation, what were the living conditions like for the traders? 

Bolton: You wouldn't say it was primitive, but it wasn't just uptown either. A lot of 'em still had outhouses. Most of 'em had electricity, but a lot of 'em were on generators. For a lot of 'em, it wasn't what we would call real modern living. I really admired those people, because they really did a service to the Navajo people. It took a particular kind of person to want to go out there and do that. (chuckles) 

Cole: What kinds of traits did you see in the traders that were out there?--character traits. 

Bolton: I don't understand what you mean, Brad. 

Cole: What kind of a person did it take to be a trader? I mean, were there certain personalities? 

Bolton: Yeah. It had to be a very easy-going guy, because one trader told me one time, he said, "You have these people comin' at you all day long. They've been up thinking all night how they can get to you, and you don't have time to figure out all the methods that they can use to talk you out of more credit, or some of the sad stories that they think up to tell you to get more credit out of you." 'Cause, you see, most of the business was done totally on credit. When I first started goin' out there, it was very difficult to get some of the traders trained to pay their bills on a monthly basis, because they wanted to pay for the merchandise when they sold their wool or sold their lambs or sold their <Piñon>s or sold their cattle. And they gave credit on those sheep and on those lambs and on that wool. And they didn't get paid until they brought in the wool and sold the wool. Then they wanted to pay their bills at this time.

I remember Henry Hillson, I heard him say a couple of times that he told customers, "I have carried you longer than your mother carried you!" (laughter) 'Cause they'd owed him money for longer than nine months. 

Cole: Was Hillson pretty flexible in that area? 

Bolton: Yes, he was. I don't think you can survive today in business, doing business the way that he did it, because a lot of times people would owe him for almost a year before he'd finally get paid and get caught up on his bills. 

Cole: Did you ever get paid in goods, like rugs or anything? Or was it always cash? 

Bolton: I learned very early on to never take a rug or never take <Piñon>s or anything like that, because once you started, you'd ruin the customer, because he always wanted to pay you in that method. I worked for a while for a company out of <Grand Junction> that sold clothing, and they had a salesman that went down there and took a huge amount of rugs and traded for merchandise, and they'd almost bankrupt that company, because rugs were hard to sell. Rugs is a specialty, and you have to really know what you're doin', and it isn't a game for the amateur. But once you started taking trade from the Indian trader, from that moment on, it was always trade. He would never have any cash to spend. 

Underhill: How were you paid by Hillson or Bruchman? 

Bolton: He always paid promptly. 

Underhill: And did you work on commission? 

Bolton: Worked on a commission. I worked on a total commission basis, for both firms. They were both very honorable companies to work for. 

Underhill: Do you remember what your percentage was ________? 

Bolton: Five or six percent. 

Cole: Was one more lucrative than the other? 

Bolton: No, they worked very fine together, because they were noncompetitive. I never had any problem being competitive with either one of 'em, because I had plenty of time to work both of them, and they worked very well together. But back when I first started, see a $200 or $250 order was quite a nice order. But of course we paid probably 30¢ a gallon for gas, and I know I bought one new, very nice station wagon for $3,600. And a Coke was a nickel or a dime. It was just a lot less expensive to travel. When I first started goin' to <Kayenta>, there was no motel. But they had kind of a boarding house motel, where they had a lot of just single beds in this big room, and you paid $3.00 a night for the room. And then Reuben Heflin opened a nice motel at <Kayenta>. I mean, it was as nice a motel as there was anyplace. And the rooms were $7.00 a night, and we thought that was very expensive. 

Cole: You paid then for all your transportation _____________. 

Bolton: Paid all my own expenses, yes. 

Cole: I was wondering, you were talking about you learned to never take rugs or Piñon nuts. Did you learn that the hard way? 

Bolton: I learned that the hard way. I would go out and take Piñon nuts, and it would be amazing, I would always get a price at <Gallup> before I left on that morning, but by night, the price would have dropped, and I would always weigh the Piñons at the store, and by the time I got 'em back to <Gallup>, they would have shrunk. (laughter) So it didn't take too long to learn that I wasn't a <Piñon> merchant. (laughter) 

Cole: What were the living conditions like for the Navajos when you first started selling on the reservation? 

Bolton: Most of 'em were still in hogans. You know, they had the wood stoves. Very few of 'em had anything other than the wood stoves. Then they started getting the gas cook stoves, first, I think. Of course, it progressed from that point. Then all the years I traveled on the reservation, I never had one time when I was afraid or fearful. If you ever had a car problem, usually the first Navajo that went by would stop to see if you needed any help. 

Cole: How would you deal with car problems? 

Bolton: You just had to fix 'em and go on. I think the only time I ever did have to be towed, I was goin' up the mountain from <Ganado>, and my fan belts broke. The nearest place was back across the canyon. So about the first Navajo that stopped, he said, "Can I help you?" And I said, "Well, you want to tow me back across the canyon? That sure would be nice if you would." But he scared the socks off of me because the chain was only about six feet long, and he was drivin' so fast I didn't even dare take my eyes off the road to look at the speedometer. But he got me back across the canyon! (laughter) Usually the first car would stop to see if he could help. By that same token, if you saw someone broken down, you always stopped to see if you could help them, too. So it always worked out for the best. 

Cole: You mentioned that you traveled down to the White River Reservation, too. What were the differences, if any? 

Bolton: Not very much difference. I think the stores down in the White Mountains progressed, or turned modern, faster than the stores out on the <Navajo Reservation>--but it was probably because they could get product out of <Phoenix> faster. Let's see, who was down there? John Lee was down at Lee's Store, when I first started goin' down there. And I think it was real sad when they tore down both of those old stores and built the highway through there. And when I first started goin' on the reservation, a lot of the traders hauled their merchandise out there. They had their own trucks, and they hauled it, because the wholesale houses--I mean, those roads would tear up a truck so fast that the trader, if he wanted merchandise, he went to <Gallup> and got it--or <Flagstaff> or wherever. 

Cole: Who were some of the more memorable traders that you can remember any stories about? 

Bolton: Well, I always remember Jack and Mrs. Lee there at <Keams Canyon>, 'cause they were always very friendly, and nice people to visit with and do business with. I did business with Cliff McGee and Bill McGee for years at <Keams Canyon> and <Piñon>--and their sons. I always like to go up to Navajo Mountain because Mrs. Cameron up there was so nice. She was always lonesome for company, because she ran the store and very seldom saw anyone other than Navajos. And Bob Redd out at <Kaibito> and Al Kerley were real good friends of mine--were for years. Now Stanley Patterson is out there. He started workin' for his uncle over at Copper Mine. And Copper Mine was a big store for many years. I think Copper Mine is where I saw the largest herd of sheep I ever saw. I drove up to the store one day, and it was just a field of sheep. I asked how many there were, and I remember he said there was 2,700 lambs out there, that they were getting ready to run out, to pasture 'em. That was a lot of lambs. But that's how many lambs and sheep that they raised at the time. Most of the traders would have several semi-loads of wool to ship out. Now, as far as I know, the only trader that still buys wool is probably Teec Nos Pos. I don't know of another trader on the reservation that still buys wool. 

Cole: And who's that at Teec Nos Pos, do you know? 

Bolton: His name is John [McCollach]. I've forgotten his last name. That store, for several years, belonged to Russell Foutz. His daughter now is running it, and her husband is running it. And Jay and Loyd Foutz [at <Beclabito>], they might still buy wool. They probably still buy wool. I've known them for a long, long time too. 

Cole: Were there any Navajo traders? 

Bolton: Not very many. You see, they have kind of a family situation where it's very difficult for a Navajo to refuse to help another Navajo--particularly his family. It was usually very difficult for a Navajo to make it in business because of his relatives--didn't feel they should have to pay for the merchandise. It made it very difficult to be able to accumulate enough merchandise to pay for their merchandise. I did do business with several Navajos.

I remember one time this man opened the store at Cottonwood. He was a nice young Navajo man, and I went by his store one day and stopped and told him who I was and everything, and he said, "Well, I'll be needing some merchandise." So you just let it go at that. Maybe he will and maybe he won't. So I come home one night and walk in the house and noticed there was a pickup parked at my house. I drove in the back and went in the house, and my wife said, "Well, you'd better take care of that man, because he's been waiting for you since noon." It was this Navajo, real nice fellow. So he said he wanted to buy merchandise for his store, and I said, "Well, what do you want to buy?" He said he had an SBA loan, and he had $4,000 to spend. He said, "You just figure out what I can buy for $4,000." So I said, "Okay." And at that time, Mr. Hillson helped a lot of people go into business. One way that they would do it, they would just figure out how much money they had to spend, and we would figure out the amount of clothing they could purchase. So anyway, I was real busy at the time, I think it was back-to-school time, and I didn't get it done that night, and I didn't get it done the next day. So in two or three days, I went in the store and they said, "You'd better call them, because Hillson's been tryin' to get ahold of you all day." So I called in and they said, "Well, this fellow's here, and he wants his merchandise, and we don't have an order." (laughter) So I told them what to do, and they figured him up an order and shipped it to him. And it was real funny, because a few days later I drove by the store and I stopped and I looked through the front of the store, and the merchandise was in the store and the shelves were there, but nobody around. So I went on my way, and the next time I went by, I stopped and asked him what was wrong and he said, "Well, it was so difficult, all the things I had to do to get the store going, that after I got everything lined up, we just took a vacation." (laughter) You know, we wouldn't think of doing that! But that was his philosophy, and he seemed to do all right that way, although the store didn't last too many years. I think it's closed now. 

Cole: And then you mentioned working for Bruchman. What was Bruchman like? Who was he? 

Bolton: He worked at stores in <Gallup>, and then he finally went over to <Winslow> and he opened up a trading post there. Then when Pendleton Woolen Mills needed to start selling blankets down in this area, they sent a salesman out of <Portland> to sell blankets. Then at the time, Pendleton blankets were so much more expensive than other blankets, it was very difficult to get 'em established. In fact, when I first started selling blankets for Bruchman, I went in to talk to him about it, and at that time the robes sold for $19.95 and the shawls for $21.95. I said, "It will be impossible to sell those, because I have other blankets in my line for $2.00 and $3.00 each." And he said, "Well, these are different." And so I started selling the blankets for him, and I found that to be true, that they use the Pendleton blankets for special occasions. And although they use 'em for bed blankets, too, mostly it's for special occasions that they buy them. But Mr. Bruchman then got to be a distributor and started selling the blankets. Then over a period of time, then they opened several other distributors. But the reason that they went to distributors instead of selling them direct was because of this problem that the traders only paid their bills two or three times a year. And Pendleton couldn't exist on those kind of terms. And so they got intermediaries there to sell the blankets. And the same thing holds true today, although we have very few problems in collecting our bills today, there are so many small accounts that we sell, it just isn't feasible for Pendleton to sell [to] all these people direct, that we sell [to]. But Mr. Bruchman continued the distributor[ship] for as long as he could do it. And see, he had six children, and all of them passed away before he did. He turned it over to his grandchildren, and then the grandchildren were not terribly interested in the business, and so I got it from Pendleton. 

Cole: And what was Bruchman like? 

Bolton: He lived right in the back of the store. He was a very well-liked, very generous person. During the time that I knew him, I don't think he ever took a vacation. He might have gone to <Phoenix> one or two times. But he basically just stayed there, and he just loved the business. I guess almost every Indian in the entire area knew Mr. Bruchman. They would just come in there and visit with him. I know my association with him, on the last day of the month, he would make his bookkeeper figure up my commission, and before that day ended, he mailed my commission check to me. 

Cole: You had told us that you met your first wife on the reservation. How did that happen? 

Bolton: Well, see, she, during World War II.... See, I didn't go into the Navy until almost the end of the war. I didn't know her at this point. She went to school at <Muncie>. The government had some sort of a plan worked out that you could go to college, but you had to then go to work somewhere--either go into the service and work in the service, or go out and work in the BIA agency somewhere. So she chose <Fort Defiance>, and that's where I met her, at <Fort Defiance>. She was out there working out her "penance" to pay back her college tuition. She worked out there for a couple of years to get that taken care of, and that's where I met her. 

Cole: And how did that happen? 

Bolton: Well, we were boys and we found out there were girls out there! (laughter) That's how it happened! Went out to a dance and met her. Then we were married for twenty- six years and she had a heart attack and left me. 

Cole: So was that like a dance that was just for the nurses, or was it for all the people there? 

Bolton: No, usually the nurses would have a dance once a month. And of course they were girls lookin' for boys, the same as it is today. Had a lot of fun at <Fort Defiance>. There's a lot of those nurses that married traders. Richard Carson there in <Gallup>, and Raymond Carson. There's a bunch of 'em. Tobe Turpen's wife is a nurse. I don't know if she was a cadette or not. 

Cole: I think she was. 

Bolton: Was she? 

Cole: What was your first wife's name? 

Bolton: Roberta Warrick was her maiden name. 

Underhill: How did she like working with Navajo patients? 

Bolton: She liked it. I know she said the first thing they wanted to do when they came into the hospital was get clean. She was always admir[ing] of the way that the women took care of their hair, because, you know, they all have this beautiful long black hair. She always admired 'em for the way that they always took care of their hair. And how most of 'em felt real bad when they had to leave the hospital and go back home. She just loved.... Well, I think all the nurses did, because the Navajos are gentle people, and they're always very appreciative for what you do for them. But of course that hospital finally closed. It's gone now. 

Cole: Did she continue to be in nursing after you were married? 

Bolton: She worked for a couple of doctors there in <Gallup> for several years, and then she quit when we started havin' kids. She stayed at home. Then she worked for a while at Fort Wingate as their nurse out at Fort Wingate. 

Cole: And it sounds like you're still selling Pendleton blankets on the reservation? 

Bolton: Still selling Pendleton blankets. That's basically all we do now, is sell Pendleton blankets. We're the only distributor left in <New Mexico>, and in fact I don't think there's even a clothing distributor left in <New Mexico>. When we started this business we were also a full- line clothing business, but we don't sell anything now, except socks--and very few socks. But we have a line of scarves that we sell, and then we sell the Pendleton blankets. And then Babbitts are in <Flagstaff>, and they have a Pendleton distributorship too. 

Cole: So is it the same routine for you now? 

Bolton: No, the finest thing that ever happened to us was the fax machine. Saved me a lot of automobiles and a lot of gas. (laughter) I still go out on the road about one week a month, and then I make intermediate trips, maybe to <Santa Fe> or <Taos> or somewhere. But most all the orders come in now over the fax and over the phone. And that works out quite well. I go out and visit with my friends. There's still a few stores that want me to call on 'em, but I try to train someone in the store to know about Pendleton blankets, and then have them just fax in their orders or call in their orders.

When I first started goin' out on the reservation, most of the stores had phones, but the phone service might be out for two or three weeks at a time, and it wasn't very dependable. 

Cole: You were telling us earlier about specialty blankets that Pendleton makes. How does that work? 

Bolton: Well, if a person wants to make their own special blanket, they can do so, but they have to figure out a pattern that we can develop to the looms. Pendleton will plan that blanket and get it all figured out to the customer's satisfaction, and then we will make that special blanket. But the mill doesn't want to make fewer than a thousand. But then they've dropped that down now to where we will make 500. But then those are a numbered series of blankets, and they usually cost a little bit more than the regular blankets, because of the cost of the designing of the blanket. But then once that series was made and manufactured, they don't reproduce that blanket, unless the person that bought the blanket the first time wants that blanket reproduced. That usually doesn't happen, because a thousand blankets is a lot of blankets. 

Underhill: What does a sort of standard blanket go for these days? 

Bolton: The wholesale is around $80 up to a queen size is $105. And then five, that's wholesale. 

Cole: How about a shawl? 

Bolton: It's $84.50 for a regular shawl, wholesale. 

Underhill: What kinds of special occasions are the blankets used for? 

Bolton: They're used for everything. They're given away as baby gifts, given away for graduation, and weddings, Mother's Day, Father's Day, Christmas. They're always used for funerals. 

Cole: Why do you think the Pendleton blankets are so popular among a culture that does all this weaving and creates their own blankets? 

Bolton: Pendleton has worked very hard to develop an association with all the different tribes all over the <United States>, and even in <Canada> and other nations. They make a high-quality blanket that the people just like. In fact, Pendleton has produced the Indian patterned blankets back around 1900 when nobody else could develop the formula for weaving them on the looms. And Pendleton has, just over the years, maintained the superiority to where they've been able to produce this high-quality blanket. A lot of different companies have tried to make a blanket that was competitive, and some of 'em are competitive, but they have not been accepted as well as the Pendleton blanket has. 

Cole: On these specialty blankets, when you first started, did you ever have any orders for those? 

Bolton: No, that is something new. That's something that has happened in the last ten years, I would say. Yeah, when I first started selling blankets, usually a six, eight, or ten-blanket order was a pretty good order. Then it's just developed to where now we have the stores that keep an inventory of 100 or 150 blankets. They just continue to sell. Christmas is a big season for us for blankets. 

Cole: And who are some of the people or trading posts you've made the special blankets for? 

Bolton: We made two for Hubbell, we made one for Cameron, we made one for the Ceremonial Association. And we made a balloon blanket for <Albuquerque>. We're still working on one for the Jicarilla Tribe, but we haven't been able to come up with a pattern that is acceptable to everyone thus far. It's real difficult to get a blanket that the people want, that's acceptable to them. We wouldn't want to make a blanket that wasn't saleable, because we want those blankets to be sold out of the stores. Every year Pendleton comes up with one or two new patterns--well, more than one or two-- they come up with five or six new patterns. Then every year they kill five or six patterns. 

Cole: Did you ever sell to Babbitts? Or were they just competitors? 

Bolton: I have sold to some of their stores, when I sold clothing. And I have sold Pendleton blankets to their stores, but basically it's developed down to where they sell to their own stores now. I don't sell to their stores. 

Cole: And how were Babbitts perceived among the other traders on the reservation? Was there any just competi[tion]? 

Bolton: Well, they were kind of competitive, because I think at one time Babbitts owned several stores on the reservation--maybe even as many as six, or maybe even more. And I think some of the traders kind of resented them, because they were able to buy the blankets, of course, at distributor cost, where the traders had to pay wholesale costs. But I don't think there was any great big problem there. And Babbitts have always been a fair competitor. There's never been any animosity between us. 

Cole: What do you see as the future of the trading business on the reservation? 

Bolton: Well, I don't think there's any trading business hardly left on the reservation, Brad. I think it's basically all gone. There's so few stores left, they've all turned into convenience stores, or the community is being supplied by a large grocery store or something like that. Like in <Kayenta>, Kayenta Trading Post is still there, but the other two stores are gone. The old Warren Trading Post is gone. The same thing is true down at <Tuba City>. Tuba City Trading Post is still there, and Van Kureaus are still there, but they've put in a Basha's, and Basha's have taken a lot of the business. But there used to be a huge store there on the corner--Navajo.... What did they call that store? 

Underhill: Navajo Shopping Center? 

Bolton: Navajo Trails Shopping Center, I think. And see, it's gone now. Then the old-time traders, so many of 'em have moved into town, like with Tanners--Don Tanner. Shush Yaz moved into <Gallup>. It's just been very difficult for the trader to stay. They've either had to go to basically cash or leave. <Kaibito> and <Shonto> and Inscription House are still out there, but they're still quite isolated. 

Underhill: What attracted you to being a salesman? That's not always an easy life. 

Bolton: No, it isn't. But probably because I knew a lot of the traders and became acquainted with them socially. And then, of course, when I was runnin' the bus, I became acquainted with a lot of 'em. I just found a niche there and I wanted to fill it and did so. 

Underhill: What makes a good salesman? 

Bolton: I think just being friendly with people. That's all. Being able to converse with people. Being able to walk into the store and take a view of the shelf and see something that they needed and mention it to 'em, and tried to persuade them to put it into the store. I think the major thing is just being friendly with people and being able to converse with them, because all it is, is them wanting to buy from you instead of buy from your competitor. 

Cole: I was curious. You mentioned about how lonely the traders were. What kinds of things would they be interested in talking to you about when you'd show up? Anything in particular? 

Bolton: Well, most of 'em would try to pry information out of you about their competitors. (laughter) That still happens today! (laughter) And they were just interested in things that were going on that they didn't know about, because, see, there was no newspaper, radio reception was terrible, and their contact with the outside world just wasn't that great. It was very difficult, I think, on the women. I know a lot of those nurses married traders, and it was real difficult for them to adapt to the trader's life, where if they were real lucky they got to go to <Gallup> on Sunday. They didn't go on Saturday, because the store stayed open 'til six o'clock in the evening. But the stores all closed on Sunday. If they were lucky, the wife got to go to <Gallup> on Sunday. It was a pretty rugged life for 'em. A lot of the women didn't have washing machines, you know, and they'd have to use a washboard or something to wash their clothes. I remember one trader told me that they worked and they saved and they saved: what each wife wanted was an automatic washer, and it took 'em several months to save up enough money to buy an automatic washer for them to have in the house to wash the clothes. 

Cole: You mentioned they came into <Gallup> on Sundays. Were stores open then in <Gallup>? 

Bolton: No, I don't believe even a grocery store was open on [Sunday], but there were movies to see and restaurants and usually some kind of a community activity goin' on that they could partake in to get relief from the reservation. And then on the west side, they went to <Flagstaff> or even <Phoenix> to get away from the store for a few hours.

Back in those days, every year we would have a clothing show, and we would have one in <Gallup> and one in <Farmington>, where we would invite all the traders to come in, and that was quite an event. Most of the traders would come in and visit with you and see your entire line at those times. Then fewer traders and last time, we finally gave that up many years ago. We'd set up in <Gallup> for a couple of days, and set up in <Farmington> for two or three days. At one time we even went out to <Kayenta> and we'd set up there for a couple of days, and the traders would come in there and look at your line and visit with you. You'd buy 'em a dinner and visit with 'em. They would get to meet other members of the company. Then we always had a big one at Hillson's in <Albuquerque> every year. The show would last probably three days there. We had a lot of people come in from all over the state, would come into the shows. 

Cole: Would you ever have any involvement with a ceremonial in that regard? 

Bolton: No, not much. That was kind of a different program, too. 

Underhill: What was <Gallup> like in the fifties and sixties? 

Bolton: Well, in the fifties, the El Rancho Hotel was almost outside of town. They just had the two streets downtown, and then north and south. Tobe Turpen had his store over on the north side of town. It was just a very small town. We bought land two blocks south and two blocks east of the El Rancho. And there were no paved streets out there at all for several years--probably 'til way up into the fifties, when it was paved out that far east. But <Gallup> was a traders' town, and the traders liked <Gallup>, and <Gallup> always tried to accommodate the traders, for that reason--still does. (chuckles) 

Cole: Would any members of your family ever travel with you out on the reservation? 

Bolton: No, not very much, because the kids were in school. The kids would go with me in the summertime. Then when the kids got older, my wife went with me--but occasionally, not all the time, because you're gone for a week, and it's just hard to get away for a week. I didn't have very many people who went with me. Mr. Hillson would come out once in a while, and we'd go out and try to collect bills. (laughter) 

Cole: Do you have a favorite part of the reservation? 

Bolton: It's probably the <Ganado>-<Chinle> area, out in there, <Fort Defiance>, <Lukachukai>, up in that area. See, at one time, there were three good stores in the <Lukachukai> area. Now Brad is the only one left up there. 

Underhill: Did you ever learn to speak Navajo or Apache? 

Bolton: No. No, it's a very complicated language. In fact, I ran a store one time for about six months out of <Tohatchi>, and I only learned to speak just the limited words. I don't even remember what they called "water" then. I know they called gas chidí bitoo’. Just a few simple words, that's all I ever learned. I really admire the traders who can speak fluent Navajo, because it is a very difficult language to speak. 

Cole: And how did you happen to run a store for six months? 

Bolton: Oh, a friend of mine talked me out of quittin' my job, so I could make a lot of money running the store. And it took me six months to find out I couldn't! (laughter) 

Cole: And then you just went back to your old.... 

Bolton: Yeah, went back to selling again. See, there was a nice store there at <Tohatchi> at one time. At one time I had eleven accounts between <Gallup> and <Shiprock>. Now all those stores are gone. 

Cole: What was the main reason for that? 

Bolton: The coming of the vehicle, to where they had transportation. The Navajos like to travel. You've been [out there]. They're on the road as much as they can be, and they just like to go to town. A store has to make a certain amount of sales before they can stay open, and when it drops down to where they can't make a living anymore, they have to leave. And then I think the tribe started clamping down on 'em quite a bit, and making it more difficult for them to stay. You can't build a store and survive on a twenty-five-year lease. It just isn't feasible. You can't stay. 

Cole: Were you ever a member of the United Indian Traders Association? 

Bolton: No, never was. 

Cole: Did you have any involvement with them at all? 

Bolton: No. I just knew most of the traders that belonged. 

Cole: Do you remember them talking about some of the big issues that happened to 'em, like for example the FTC hearings? 

Bolton: I knew that was going on, but I never did get involved with 'em. I knew that they really cracked down on them over the pawn. But in all honesty, I never knew a trader that I thought was a crook. I mean, you had to get up early to think ahead of those people, 'cause they would put rocks in their wool, and put sand in their wool. (chuckles)

I think one of the funniest stories I heard, there was a trader out at Inscription House, and when I first knew him, he was an elderly man, and he'd been on the reservation all of his life--Stokes Carson--you've probably heard of him. He told me one time, a long time before I knew him, that this person brought in a sack of wool, and of course a trader, you can look and see a sack of wool, and you know approximately what it should weigh. If a sack of wool should weigh 250 pounds, and they threw it on the scales and it weighed 350, they knew they were buying something they didn't want. So he said they took the wool, and they always took it in the back and dumped it to see what it was, and then they would adjust the bill accordingly. And they dumped out the wool, and there was a differential for a Model "T" Ford in that sack of wool. (laughter) So he said he just settled up with the old man, and he just left that part of the car there in the back room. He said the next spring that guy come in and he wanted to buy a sack of seed corn. So he just went back in the back room and he dumped out half of the seed corn and put that rear end back in it and filled it back up with corn. And he sold it to the guy and he said the guy would always come in and just laugh and laugh and laugh because they'd gotten even with each other and nobody was angry! (laughter)

But the Navajos have really quite a sense of humor, and you have to really get up early in the morning to get ahead of 'em. 

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with Bob Bolton. It's December 16, 1998. Also present in the room are Karen Underhill from NAU and Lew Steiger. This is [Side] Two of a United Indian Traders Association oral history.

Bob, you were just tellin' me a little bit about how difficult it was for the traders to try to explain how their business practices worked, to, say, outside entities like people that were looking for traditional accounting. Maybe you could tell us a little bit about the kinds of credit they ran. 

Bolton: Well, they would carry the Navajo from wool season to lamb season. And then some of the Navajo would have cattle, and those would come in a little bit after lamb season during the fall. Almost every store bought wool, lambs, and cattle. They had to, in order to buy the customer's product in order to survive. And then after they got the welfare checks, then they would have the checks come to the store. Those would come in monthly, and that's the way they survived. But for a long time, there was very little money that was on the reservation, because the only commodity was what the Navajo had to sell. Of course they all bought rugs, and most of 'em took pawn until the government said they could no longer take pawn, and then they had to quit takin' the pawn. I don't think anyone was ever cheating. It was just the fact that it was so difficult to conform to all the rules and regulations. Hasn't changed much. It's very difficult for a business to keep all the records that's demanded by different governmental agencies. 

Cole: If you don't mind talking about how much credit some of the stores would carry, you were mentioning some pretty astronomical figures. 

Bolton: When you really found out about it, some little store that wasn't really doing that much business would have $100,000-$200,000 worth of business on the books that had accumulated over the years. Usually half of that wasn't any good. The people had passed on, and there's no estate, there's no way to collect the bill, and it just continues to drag on. 

Underhill: From talking to traders, how would you describe the Navajo economic system, or their perception of the traders and the trader business practice? 

Bolton: I think a lot of the older Navajos were faithful to the trader, and they were concerned about their bill, and they tried to pay their bills, but the economic situation was just so bad that it was very difficult for them to pay their bills. Then later on they started to--they would try to have accounts at two or three different stores, and when that happens, one of 'em would always get shorted. I know when I was runnin' the store at <Tohatchi>, at that time, this trader suspected this person was trading over here. He would go over there and visit and find out, and they would try to stop it. And a lot of times this trader would go over and buy this account out, and bring it back, so that someone would have a way of collecting the bill. I think most of the traders tried to work together to keep their bills collected, 'cause it was tough to keep them honest and to keep the bills collected. Then it got to a point where the trader had to start eliminating the accounts that wouldn't pay, to where now I don't think there's very much credit out there on the reservation. 

Underhill: How have you seen the Navajo culture change over the years that you were out there? 

Bolton: I think it has really changed. I really think a lot of the Navajo people have really gone up in the world, and they're very honorable, trustworthy citizens now. Look at Gordon Gorman, there at <Ganado>, that ran the Round Top Trading for so many years. A very good friend of mine, I think a lot of Gordon. He works out at <Toyei> now. He had to close his store, because it got to the point where he couldn't make a living in the store anymore. Then the big business--there's no way that a trading post can compete with a chain store. You just can't buy the merchandise for the same price. 

Cole: What do you see as the future of the <Navajo Reservation>? 

Bolton: I think that a lot of people--well, Stanley Patterson at <Kaibito> pointed this out to me not too many months ago--he said that with the new government regulations where the people have to go to work, if they want welfare they have to go to work somewhere. He said, "We're losing a lot of people here because there is no work, and they have to move off of the reservation in order to have a place to work." So a lot of people are leaving the reservation. 

Underhill: What are some of your favorite memories from all the time that you spent out there? 

Bolton: Oh, I think a couple of funny things that happened to me while I was driving the bus, 'cause that's where you really get acquainted with the people. One of my favorite stories is I had this very attractive Navajo lady, and she always dressed in traditional. She had about four or five little kids, and they were always dressed traditional--always so clean and bright and shiny--they just shone. And they would get on the bus and she would pay their bill and then when they started to get off the bus, here would go this little dog. And they rode the bus for years, and I never did find out how they got the dog on the bus. (laughter) And I didn't care about the dog, because it was a nice little dog, and they would just laugh at me, and they thought it was so funny 'cause I couldn't figure out how they got the dog on the bus. And I never did figure it out. And I'd watch 'em when they got on the bus. I never did figure out how she got the dog on the bus.

Then another time, the trader at Hubbell's at <Ganado>--I don't even remember his name--but I also hauled laundry and dry cleaning, and he had this Stetson hat, and it was real dirty, and he asked me one day if I could get it cleaned for him. I said, "Sure, I could get it cleaned." So I took it and I put it on the bus, and I put it way back in the corner and blocked it off. So I get to <Gallup> and unload all of my passengers and my mail and take my laundry out, and the hat's gone. And he told me before I picked the hat up that he'd won the hat at a rodeo and it was worth $40. Forty dollars was a bunch of money in the fifties, and I had a family and I didn't know how I was gonna pay for that hat. So I figured out on the bus there were only four passengers that day. I didn't go back and tell him I'd lost the hat, because I didn't have forty dollars. About three days later, two of these ladies that had ridden on the bus got back on the bus. So I told 'em, "Well, I can't put your luggage up front, I'll have to put it in the back." So I put the luggage in the back and opened it up, and here was my hat. They had put clothing around the hat so it wouldn't get crushed or anything. So I took the hat out and put the clothing back. Then for years those ladies rode the bus and they'd get on there and they'd look at me, and they would just laugh, and I would laugh. (laughter) They were always pullin' jokes like that on me when I drove the bus, because they're very friendly, and it was always a great big joke with them. If they pulled a trick on you, they expected you to get even with 'em some way. (laughter) But I sure was glad to get my hat back. (laughter) 

Underhill: When you were a trader at <Tohatchi>, what kinds of things were you asked to do in addition to providing goods? 

Bolton: I never did have to deliver any babies or anything like that, but I know some traders that did. (chuckles) They would ask you to help 'em fix their car or get their flat fixed. Way back early, they still had some of the old wagons, and there was a place in <Gallup> that fixed wagon wheels. I've hauled wagon wheels into <Gallup> and got 'em fixed for 'em. They weren't bashful about asking for favors. 

Cole: What was the name of the bus line? 

Bolton: It was Cresto Bus Lines. Bert Cresto owned it. He ran it for many years there out of <Gallup> after World War II. 

Cole: What would it cost to go from <Chinle> to <Gallup>? 

Bolton: $1.90. Then from <Ganado> to <Gallup> was $1.45. And from <Fort Defiance> to <Gallup> was 90¢. And then from <Window Rock> to <Gallup> was 50¢. Can you believe that?! (laughter) 

Cole: Could somebody go to <Gallup> and back in the same day from <Chinle>? 

Bolton: It was very difficult. The first day, they had a bus that left <Chinle> in the morning, and one that left <Gallup> in the morning. So they usually had to stay overnight. Then when they had the tribal councils, we always hauled a lot of those people back and forth, 'cause there was no motel to stay in, in <Window Rock> at that time. Well, they finally did build a motel, but there were only about fifteen units or something. Most of 'em would ride the bus to <Gallup> and then ride back out the next morning. 

Underhill: It's a step backward, but when your family left <Kansas> and came to <New Mexico>, what was your dad's occupation, or what did he hope to do here? 

Bolton: Just anything he could find to do. One of the first jobs he got was helping build the road from <Edgewood> to <Santa Rosa>, because, see, when we came to <New Mexico>, the road came to somewhere over there. I believe it was <Santa Rosa>, and then it went to <Santa Fe> and came back to <Albuquerque>. One of the first jobs he had was helping to build that road at the Clyde Tingley got built so the road went straight from <Albuquerque> to <Amarillo Texas>. Then he worked in construction, and then we had a farm later on, out west of Moriarty, and that's where we lived, raised pinto beans. 

Cole: What was your dad's name? 

Bolton: Ora, O-R-A, Bolton. 

Cole: And your mother? 

Bolton: Her name was Leona. 

Underhill: What did you expect to do when you were a kid? Did you have a dream or aspiration? 

Bolton: I really didn't. Well, see, World War II started when I was probably a sophomore in high school. And of course then, you had no choice. Five days after I graduated from high school, I was in <San Diego> with the naval training base. That's just the way it was. You went into the service immediately. 

Underhill: And what did you think of <San Diego>, having come from <New Mexico> and <Kansas>? 

Bolton: It was quite a shock! (laughter) I don't suppose I had been west of <Albuquerque> at the time, and I'd never been on a train. We got on a train and went to <San Diego>, I went into the Navy. 

Underhill: And did you go to the Pacific? 

Bolton: Yeah, I went to the Pacific. Should have stayed in, it was a good life, but they had to decrease the forces and there was no way to stay in at that point. 

Cole: You indicated that once your family moved from <Kansas>, that things were even tougher in <New Mexico>. Why was that? 

Bolton: Well, there were no jobs. It was in 1934, right during the Depression. My dad was very fortunate to find a job. One of the things we always did, at that time there was a lot of rabbits and a lot of birds, and we hunted all the time. We had a .22 rifle, and my dad had five sons, and he gave the five of us a .22 for Christmas. It was a single- shot, and if you took a bullet, you had to bring something back. (laughter) 

Steiger: He gave the five of you one rifle, not five of 'em? 

Bolton: No, one rifle for five. And a lot of times, we would catch a rabbit or throw a rock at 'em, because they were quite plentiful, and then we would have an extra .22 shell! But it was a very difficult time. If it wouldn't have been for pinto beans and rabbits, I probably wouldn't be here. (laughs) 

Underhill: And do you still like pinto beans? 

Bolton: I still love pinto beans. Don't each much rabbit, though! (laughs) 

Cole: Was it a dry farm then? 

Bolton: It was a dry farm. See, the irrigation didn't start in Estancia Valley 'til probably the late fifties. All the bean farms had been shut down at this point, because they had that terrible drought in the early fifties. Even down in here there was no water to irrigate--there just wasn't any. I was fortunate to find a job in <Gallup> after I got out of the Navy. 

Underhill: What kept you in the Southwest? 

Bolton: I love it here. After I got married, we went back to <Indiana> one time. We were gonna move back to <Indiana>--stayed two weeks and came back! (laughter) 

Underhill: What is it that you love about the Southwest? 

Bolton: I love the weather. There's just something about it that keeps us here--the blue sky and the people. A lot of friendly people in the Southwest. 

Cole: And if you could go back and change anything about your life or your work, would you do that? 

Bolton: Probably not. I probably would have started selling earlier in my life, because you get to meet a lot of really wonderful people. And there's so many challenges to it. You find someone that won't buy from you, so you keep workin' at it until you can figure out a way to get 'em to buy from you. 

Underhill: Does anyone stand out in your mind who was particularly stubborn? 

Bolton: Well, Leonard Kilgore, that had the Navajo Trails Store at <Tuba City>. He was set up with suppliers, but I called on him every month. Finally, after several months, he said, "You don't give up very easy, do you?" I said, "If I gave up very easy, my kids would be hungry." And he started buying from me, and he became a good friend. Then finally, over the years, he bought everything I had, I supplied his store. (chuckles) 

Cole: Have any of your children taken after your line of work? 

Bolton: No, they haven't. There really isn't a demand for this type of work that I do anymore. I have one daughter that's in <Grand Junction>, and another one that lives in <Puerto Rico>. Neither one.... Well, there isn't any place for it anymore. When I started traveling as a salesman, some of the motels devoted entire rooms to salesmen. And now, I don't know of another salesman that travels as a clothing or shoe or any kind of dry goods salesman. At that time, all the wholesale houses, like <Gallup> Mercantile and Kimball's in <Gallup>, Gross-Kelly, they had full-time salesmen that went out on the road and called on the stores. Then if the trader didn't go in and pick up his merchandise, they delivered it. 

Underhill: How many salesmen did, for instance, Gross- Kelly have working for the firm? 

Bolton: They probably had four or five. 

Underhill: And how many did Henry Hillson have? 

Bolton: He had four or five of us. We had the state divided up. There were just little stores everywhere, that aren't there anymore. There were a couple of little stores right up here on this road, and three or four in <Las Lunas>. All those stores were served by salesmen. 

Cole: And when you used to visit with the traders, did you ever try to pry information out of them about your competitors? 

Bolton: Sure! (laughter) 

Cole: Couldn't help but ask. 

Bolton: You tried to find out how much they were selling an item for, to see if you could compete with 'em, or see what you needed to do to come in line so they'd buy your merchandise instead of your competitor's. But usually the trader would tell you what he paid for that item, so he'd try to get you to sell it to him for less money. (laughter) 

Underhill: And who were your competitors? 

Bolton: Well, we had Isabel Kent Oares out of <Denver>, National Dry Goods out of <Phoenix>, Ledbetter's out of <Phoenix>, and McCreary and Pough out of <Phoenix>. In <El Paso> there was Rio Grande Sales and Sun Dry Goods. That was just in this area. Most of the salesmen were friends. I know when the motels first opened, we would share rooms to keep the cost of traveling down. 

Cole: Do you remember any of them? 

Bolton: Well, Paul Allen and Herb Idleson [phonetic spellings] and Gene DeGeorges out at <Gallup>. They're all gone. Vince Wellsby [phonetic spelling] worked for Hilson. He quit when I got hired, or he quit just before I got hired. He traveled out there for several years before me--a very nice gentleman. We were competitors, yet friendly competitors--didn't have too many disagreements with any of 'em. 

Underhill: How many traveling salesmen jokes have you heard? 

Bolton: Oh, a bunch of 'em. (laughter) I never could remember 'em. 

Cole: That'll be a different tape, huh? 

Bolton: Yeah, that'll be a different tape. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Bolton: Gee, I can't think of anything, Brad. We've pretty well covered everything, I think. 

Underhill: Lew usually has a question. 

Steiger: I can't really.... You guys have done well. I can't think of anything extremely ___________. 

Bolton: I'll have to tell you a funny one on Lij. He was president of the Traders Association and I don't even remember how they did it, but they got a good friend of mine, who's still with Pendleton Woolen Mills, to come down to one of their meetings. I don't know what the big argument was about, but this fellow and Lij got into quite a conversation. Almost once or twice a year this friend of mine at Pendleton always asks me, "How is that Blair guy doin'?" (laughter) 

Cole: Would you go to Dinnebito at all? 

Bolton: Yes. Yeah, Dinnebito was a real good account. But it was on a terrible road. When they had that old adobe mud, once you got into it, it would ball up on your tires. I know several times I've driven into Dinnebito, then suddenly you realize you can't go, so you back up. And I've backed up a mile, or a mile and a half to get back to where you could get turned around. But there would just be two ruts, you know, and there would be nobody else there. Sometimes you could get up there, and there'd be two or three pickups stuck in the mud. All you could do would be to back out and go on your way. I never did get stuck too many times. I was always smart enough to back out and get turned around without getting stuck. 

Underhill: You mentioned you had a station wagon. Was that your car of choice? 

Bolton: Yeah, because you carried so many samples. Later on, I drove a pickup, but I don't know, pickups didn't really get that popular 'til the seventies, maybe. I know a fellow in <Farmington> started using a pickup, and we all thought he was crazy, and then realized suddenly that he had a pretty good idea. Then the rest of us started using pickups with camper shells on it. But everyone drove a station wagon. You know, they made those old big boats that you could put a lot of stuff in. 

Cole: Well, thank you for sitting with us. 

Bolton: I hope I've given you some ideas, or something you can use. 

Underhill: It's wonderful. And it fills a gap. We hadn't spoken to the salesmen yet, so this is really good. (tape turned off and on) 

Bolton: I went down to <Nazlini>--you know where <Nazlini> is, don't you? Well, it's out south of <Chinle> and north of <Ganado>, down in the bottom of the valley. I got out there one day, and this trader was just furious because he was buyin' wool. He suddenly realized that this funny-lookin' gunny sack full of wool had come back by him three or four times that day. So he watched it, and the guy that was in the back room was supposed to be packin' the wool, he would just pitch a sack out and one of his friends would bring it back out and sell it again. So he was buyin' the same wool over and over again. (laughter) They had all kinds of tricks that they could pull on you.

Of course, the trader, he was pretty smart, too, because most of 'em couldn't read. I don't think they really cheated the Indians, they just had to adjust the price to make up for all that sand and rocks and stuff that went by 'em. You can't buy too much sand and stay in business. (laughter) I thought that was interesting--he was buying the same wool over and over. 

Underhill: Thanks for lettin' us put that on tape, too! 


