JOE TANNER, SR. INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.34

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE A]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's March 30, 1999. We're in <Gallup New Mexico> today, visiting with Joe Tanner. Also in the room is Gail Steiger running the camera equipment. This is an interview as part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. [Narrator's wife, Cindy, is also present and makes a comment near the end of the interview.] 

Cole: Joe, let's just start with when and where you were born. 

Tanner: Well, it's Joseph Elwood Tanner, and I was born August 14, 1938, at <Farmington New Mexico>. I'm a great-grandson of Seth Tanner, one of the earliest, if not the earliest of at least the Mormon pioneers, as they came into the Indian country. Seth was quite a pioneer, and what a jewel to have in your family history. I've spent a lifetime just chasing Anglo stories and Indian stories about him. And then my grandfather was Joseph Baldwin Tanner. My mother and dad are Rulel Lehi Tanner and Stella McGee Tanner. They had eight children, and I'm child number five in the play of things. (chuckles) I was primarily raised at <Kirtland New Mexico>, and <Durango Colorado>. 

Cole: You mentioned a little bit about Seth. Was he an Indian trader at all? 

Tanner: Oh, I'll tell you a little. Let's just start with him. I love his spirit and I just had a great thirst all of my life to find out any and everything I could about him and my grandpa Joe. Seth was born in <Bolton New York>. His father was converted to the Mormon Church, and then Seth. So he was completely involved in the whole Mormon migration and experience, from the very beginning. He was born in 1829 in Bolton. His father was a really important man, but I won't go into him, because Seth is the first trader among the American Indians from our family. As he came west with the whole family, he became a reliable of Brigham Young. He was a great fisher, great hunter, great scout, pathfinder, and Brigham relied on him a lot--as he did on everybody. I'm not trying to say that Seth was one of Brigham's favorites, because Brigham certainly needed and relied on everybody. But he learned--Seth--as best as I can figure out--he learned real early, as he went among the Indians, about them, and began to understand them, and began to understand the Indian's reverence for all of nature and all of nature's characters. And Seth figured out at some juncture of time in his early life, he figured out if he became the bear, that would award him safe passage among the Indians. It's kind of like.... I was real intrigued with the movie Dances with Wolves, and that language of movement and sign. Well, Seth became the bear, and his whole history, as I talked to all of the Indian community that knew bits and pieces of him, he was "Mr. Bear," Hosteen Shash. He was the bear. And as I think about him, and kind of translate the tidbits of information that I've accumulated throughout my life about him. I don't care if he was among the Utes, he was a big man and a sound man. He was about six-foot-two, and in our family that's big. (laughs) Tall. Loved to ride a mule. When he was among the Utes, he would wrestle with 'em, growl like a bear, fight like a bear, and that's his whole--that's the whole secret to--not everybody who showed up in the West could peacefully coexist with the Indians. Well, Seth could. He had no fear, because of this great secret that he had. I've studied somewhat the Hopi and the kachina. A Hopi, to be a really successful male elder, if he has learned the complete understanding of three of Mother Nature's other characters, he's a great success. Maybe he chose the badger, maybe he chose the wolf, maybe he chose the mouse. But the Hopi get into those roles of that character. When you're being a bear kachina, you are a bear. So I can just close my eyes and think about Seth as he was in situations, all across the frontier, getting out of situations because of being "the bear," and being able to convey that to the Indian people that he was among.

He was somewhat of a loner. He felt completely comfortable being anywhere in the West by himself. So the Tanner Trail down into <Grand Canyon>, the Tanner Crossing on the Little Colorado, the <Tanner Springs> was one of his homesteads, are all named after him. And what that tells me, even though he didn't keep notes and keep records, those things wouldn't have been called after him--the Tanner Wash, and Tanner Mesa-- there's a lot of things that have his name attached to it. So that means to me old Tanner was there first. (chuckles)He did some mining down in <Grand Canyon>, and he and my grandfather did several mining operations, chasing their needs, and trying to find silver, trying to find.... And I don't know all of exactly what they tried to mine in each of the different places in those really early years. I know quite a bit about what my grandfather did--Grandfather Joseph Baldwin. But I'll get into him a little later. Seth and his brother, after the Mormons got to <Salt Lake>, left pretty early and went to <Barstow> to mine coal. And this was in the 1850s. Seth was so familiar with that Outlaw Trail where they'd bring the horses--I think he knew a lot about it, and used that an awful lot. I hosted National Geographic a few years ago. They were doing an article on wool, and how wool was intertwined with different peoples of the world. And so the article was not just on the Navajo, but the Navajo were chosen as the people from the United States of America whose lives were most intricately entwined with wool. And the first thing I wanted to do was find out, try to guide them to people who really knew a lot about the wool. So I thought of R. C. Gorman's dad, Carl Gorman. I wanted them to go out and talk to Carl. And then I wanted them to go out and talk to Annie Waneka [phonetic spelling], Chee Dodge's daughter. We had a great session with Carl Gorman. And then we got to Annie Waneka's about four o'clock in the afternoon. And of course the first thing Annie says is, "Well, what in the world do you want to talk to me about wool for?! I've told my people from the very beginning 'get those sheep hides out of their hogans, that's what's bringing all the disease.' I'm the champion of getting rid of the disease on the reservation, and those carriers of that disease were in those hides that my people were sleeping on, on the floor. What in the world do you want to talk to...." (laughs) But then we got past that. We had a great session, National Geographic and their people, and myself, with Annie. But Annie Waneka--Chee Dodge, her father--their family has been very intertwined with my family, from every angle I could come at it.The National Geographic people, we got them loaded up and they left, and Annie and I got to talkin', and I said, "Annie, I want you to tell me your whole history, about you. I need and want to know more about your father, Chee Dodge." And she says, "Well, Joe, I'll just start from the beginning, with Chee Dodge. We know who Chee Dodge's mother was." And who was Chee Dodge's mother was a Jemez woman. And in the early beginnings of the Navajo way of life, they used to steal people, "and there were these two Jemez girls, twelve and thirteen years old"--and these are Annie's words--"doing work in the fields at Jemez. This Navajo war chief and his party come sweeping through this field and stole these two Jemez girls. And they took them to live with the Navajo, like was the custom in those days. It's one of these Jemez girls who is Chee Dodge's mother." And I said, "Well, Annie, why don't you know who the father of Chee Dodge was?" And she said, "Well, Joe, what happened was during one of the Navajo.... You have to understand, these were very warring times among the Navajo. And during one of the wars, these two Jemez sisters fled the war zone, down into the mouth of <Grand Canyon>." Then it became more interesting to me, because that's Seth Tanner's headquarters. It's my belief that the mother of Chee Dodge connected with Seth Tanner on one of his adventure trips, and they became husband and wife. Then I think Seth brought her to what's known as <Tanner Springs> and established a place there--a homestead, a camp. There's good water there, and I've done a little study on that.Then Annie went on to-- those were my words--back to Annie. Annie told me that the reason they didn't know too much about Chee was because this Jemez lady had a daughter and a son, Chee Dodge. During the Navajo--when Kit Carson rounded all the Navajos up, these two Jemez sisters and these two children were part of the group that took The Long Walk. Chee Dodge became known as "the boy interpreter." Here's a guy that spoke English, he spoke Navajo, and he spoke this Tewa tongue. On the trail down, Chee Dodge's mother died, and his sister died, so Chee Dodge and the aunt are the two that survived. They came back and <Tanner Springs>, to this day, is in the Dodge family. Annie Waneka went on to say.... I told her my theory, and we talked about it, and she said that was the best theory that she had ever heard of, as far as who the father was. She said, "Well, Joe, I thought when my father--when George Waneka and I got married--here we are at the wedding at my father's home at Crystal--the grandest place on the Navajo Reservation--and here's my father [who] says, 'Annie and George, now your job is to go take care of <Tanner Springs>, because that's the most precious place for me to preserve.'" And she said, "Why was that, with his choice of everything on the reservation, why was that so precious? And now, I agree with you, I know that's probably the reason we have it in our family, and why it's important to us."So I think Seth Tanner was also.... I think my Grandfather Seth, we know a lot about his Mormon history, but my family has never talked at all about the Indian family. But there is a lot of information. As my grandfather, Joseph Baldwin, was growing up, all of the history that I knew until I really became a detective on this, was from that corner. They used to say, "Well, my Grandpa Joe, when he was growin' up, he just didn't like his stepmother." His mother had died, and Seth had taken another wife that was raisin' him. Grandpa Joe would continually run away and live with the Indians. There was all those stories about Grandpa Joe and his running away and living with the Indians. Well, I know that all he was doing was going and living with the Indian family. 

Cole: When you call them the Jemez girls, were they Navajo? 

Tanner: No, they were Jemez. They were from the Jemez Tribe, which is over near <Santa Fe>, and that's where this war chief stole those two girls, brought 'em back to this place and they were raised. Now, the aunt, Chee Dodge took care of her, even ended up building her a great place at his place at Crystal, and he took care of her. Annie said, "Some day I'm gonna take you up to Jemez and introduce you to all the rest of the family," because I guess he had made those connections. So anyway, that's another facet of Seth Tanner--and this is only my theory, but I've substantiated it from so many directions, particularly as I started really studying my Grandfather Joe. And that was the core of my.... My Grandpa Joe was the greatest guy. He could understand and talk most of the [region's].... he could speak something to communicate with everyone he met. He spoke English, of course. He spoke this language of the Tewa. One of the verifications.... I always thought he could speak Hopi, and I always thought he could speak Zuni. And one of my most important early silversmiths that I worked with was a guy by the name of Sol Ondolasi, and I was talking to Sol one day, and I told Sol, "I'm really wantin' to find out my grandfather's trading among the Zunis." "Oh, yes, my family," Sol said, "was very involved in making things for Joe Tanner." I said, "Well, he spoke Zuni." "Oh, no, he spoke the language of the Tewa." So as I have researched what I have on Chee Dodge and what I have on Seth, and what I have on Grandpa Joe, the languages that they were most familiar with--my mom tells a story about when Chee Dodge used to come out and spend a week with her and my father at <Tsaya>, early in their marriage, and with my Grandpa Joe, whose homestead was really close by. She said my dad would get so pissed at Chee Dodge and Grandpa Joe because they wouldn't talk either Navajo-- which he understood and could talk--or English." And he'd [say], "Why the hell those two won't talk so I can understand 'em, I don't know." Well, they were just talking this language of their mother. So that was one of the verifications there. My Grandpa Joe--Joseph Baldwin Tanner--when.... I'm equal parts Tanner--my Grandpa Joe's wife was Foutz--and so I'm equal parts Tanner, Foutz--and on my mother's side it's McGee and Hunt. So I can't do anything but be an Indian trader. (laughs) It's just in the roots, it's to the bone. But my Grandpa Joe and his wife, when the government discovered that all the settlers at <Tuba City> needed to be--it's kind of like the Hopi-Navajo land dispute-- they all had to be removed because they said Chief Tuba didn't have the right to allow them to settle there. So the government bought all of the Mormon people out. They gave 'em land exchanges and money, and my Grandpa Joe obviously had the most valuable, most precious place there at <Tuba City>, because he got the biggest settlement of any of the other settlers. So our first trading post was established near <Tuba City>, and it was Seth and Grandpa Joe's--they were equal partners in it. And that was part of what ended there. 

Cole: What time period did they start the trading post? 

Tanner: That would have been.... The Mormons settled there in 1872, and I think they were forced to leave about 1890. I don't have those dates on the tip of my tongue, but it was likely in the eighties. I comfortably say that my family has been continually trading among the Navajos since 1872. And I think I could go earlier than that, but don't--that's the date I use, is when they for sure settled there and started their homestead. Then my Grandpa Joe moved over to the <Mancos> and <Cortez> area, and <Shiprock>. He ultimately ended up having a trading post at <Mancos Creek>. Then at <Shiprock>, he owned the Hogback place that the Wheelers now own, that is one of the oldest places on or near the Navajo Reservation. At Hogback my Grandpa Joe had made it so easy for... both he and Seth, but particularly my Grandpa Joe-- he just has made it so easy for all of us, all the family that has followed him. He loved to party, he loved to get together, he loved to shindig. I'll tell you what, this guy, when he showed up at your house, it wouldn't be twenty minutes until he'd say, "I believe that fat kid and that long-legged kid.... I'll tell you what I'll do. Let's put the heavy-set boy about forty feet ahead of the long-legged boy, and let's run 'em seventy-five yards, and I'll bet on either of 'em." (laughter) Just to get some fun goin'. And it was the same with horse racing and chicken pulls. I guess when he bought the Hogback Trading Post, he hosted a huge party and there were over a thousand Indian people who came for that big shindig when he.... He owned that store a shorter period than anybody, any owner ever did, but had the biggest party (laughs) that ever happened on the reservation.

He was a linguist, just like Chee Dodge. Both of 'em were very involved in the early politics of the region. When the Navajos had their big uprising on <Beautiful Mountain>, it was Grandpa Joe Tanner that was the liaison from the Army and Shelton at <Shiprock> carried the message up to the top of <Beautiful Mountain>. There's a great story about when he was goin' up the trail to talk to the Indians who were on the warpath, he was on his horse and the Indians kept telling him, "Stop, or we're gonna hafta shoot you." And Grandpa just said, "It's in God's hands. If this horse keeps goin', I'm supposed to come talk to you. If he turns around, then I'm not." Uncle Wheeler, who used to live with us, said that Grandpa told him all the time he was spurrin' that horse on the side that the Indians couldn't see. But he got up there and he talked 'em out and saved a lot of bloodshed. So he accomplished that.Grandpa Joe just really loved the art. He was instrumental--he was one of the earliest guys.... The Navajos mostly had great silver by this time, and were embracing it and enjoying it. But it was not added with turquoise. I say all the time that my Grandpa Joe Tanner was instrumental in the marriage of silver and turquoise. 

Cole: Approximately what time period was this? 

Tanner: Well, his career was.... I think he was born in 1868--Grandpa Joe was. And he was at the height of his career at that great opportunistic time, when all of these early traders were trying to figure out ways to--what were the goods of trade? The obvious one, the Navajos had the hottest commodity in America. In the West, before the white man ever showed up, the Comanches wanted their blankets, the Utes wanted their blankets, the Mexicans wanted their blankets. That weaving art was the obvious most sought-after thing, whether you were an army soldier, or whether you were.... We found some of the greatest old wearing blankets in some of the Spanish land grant estates along the Rio Grande. Some of the earliest and best ones that have been found have come from there. All of these guys, whether it was my Grandpa Joe, or whether it was Cotton in <Gallup>, or Moore at Crystal, or Hubbell--they were all just trying to figure out ways that these people could best make a living. And turquoise and silver became one of those important things. And my granddad was toe-to-toe with those--my Grandpa Joe was toe-to-toe with Hubbell and Moore. Back to lovin' the party, he was real involved in the first Gallup Indian Ceremonials. He was real involved in the fair at <Shiprock>. We've got great early photographs of the booth those guys had. This all really happened fast. They turned this whole thing into a trade. I'll tell you, the Navajos are such enterprising, hard-working people. They don't need the government to do anything for them. I think the greatest hour of the Navajos, and these people that worked with them, was those years from when they were released from <Fort Sumner> and given a few head of sheep and lots of bayeta trade cloth. And that's what those earliest and best blankets are.... You know, the ravelled stuff, those are the pieces that are bringing the mega-bucks, and so sought-after. I'll show you a little later, I've got a picture over here by Willis, and I kiddingly say that this old Navajo war chief that Willis painted, he's having a ceremonial smoke. Right beside him I've got this red coat soldier--an old weather vane that's been made into a lamp--and I tell people all the time, "This is how Navajo weaving really got started. This is the old trader's story. This war chief sittin' there thinkin', 'How in the world am I gonna keep my little girl warm this winter?' And then he gets this great idea. 'I know, I'm gonna shoot me a red coat soldier. Have the old woman ravel up his jacket and make her a blanket to keep her warm this winter.'" So I've got the ravelled bayeta trade cloth rug there, and the weather vane, and Willis' picture. [chuckles] That's how it all got started. The government gave Dr. Joe Ben Wheat [phonetic spelling], from the University of Colorado, who's been one of my great gurus to learning as much as this old cowboy can learn about old Navajo weaving. He's documented the tons of bayeta trade cloth that was given to the Navajos as part of what they were trying to do, both at <Fort Sumner>, and then continued to be brought as an important trade item by Hubbell and Moore and my Grandpa Joe and anybody else that was involved at that time, trying to put everybody to work. Grandpa Joe started mining turquoise down between <Bisbee> and <Morenci>, and he had a really important turquoise mine down there. And what he would do is he would mine the turquoise, then he would bring the turquoise up to the bead makers. And they were Navajo bead makers, Hopi bead makers, Santa Domingo bead makers, and Zuni bead makers. The technique of trade was that half of what was created out of the turquoise belonged to the bead maker, and the other half belonged to Grandpa. And so he'd leave 'em an important stash of turquoise, and when he came back at a designated point in time, he would sit there and Grandpa got first pick, the bead maker would get the next pick, and they would just satisfy it that way. And then of course Grandpa would try to then buy the bead maker's piece, and sometimes he had success and sometimes he didn't. The Zuni, the bead makers were always traders themselves. And this was a great commodity, a great jacla, the earring that goes on the bottom of a necklace, a really good one of those was fair trade for the best steer in the herd, or thirty head of ewes. So they've always had great value. The treated ones don't have that value today, but the real ones still have great value. So Grandpa Joe would take those then and everyone in his experience knew that when they seen Old Joe Tanner comin' down the lane, there was somethin' in his bag of tricks that was a thrill for anybody to trade for. And so he made it so easy, because one, the languages that he spoke, the rapports that he established. He did quite a lot of--he was an herbal medicine practitioner, so there's great stories about Grandpa Joe. One that I love to tell is he left <Shiprock> one time and was headed out to <Crownpoint> where his homestead was, and this Navajo family had just married off one of their daughters and they had moved out to near the same area. And her family asked Grandpa Joe, "Please stop by and check on the kids and see how they're doin'." Nellie Arviso [phonetic spelling] who was the daughter that the parents were concerned about, said when Grandpa Joe got to her front door, both her and her husband were just deathly ill with the flu. And she said, "That man just came right in our door and stayed with us for two- and-a-half weeks until he had us both nursed back to health, and away he went." So he was never too busy not to care for the folks that he shared life with.And they called him "Little Bear" or Shash Yaz. And so if you noticed, my son's poem to his dad that Cindy brought for you to read last night, one of the things that Jonathan thanked me for was teachin' him how to be a bear. (chuckles) And so that's a family tradition of ours. We had a great reunion here a few years ago. We took the whole family to all the different homesteads, and that was a really great experience.But Grandpa Joe hosted a lot of competitive--went to a lot of the fairs and sold the goods. But he was pretty.... The last thirty years of his life, he wasn't so much involved in a trading post, as he was involved in this turquoise mining and bringing it to market. The maddest that he ever got at my parents, my dad and mom had gotten married and they'd started their marriage down in <Phoenix Arizona>, and Dad worked for a dairy company down there, but he wasn't really happy. They had my oldest brother, J. B., down there. They saved enough money to buy 'em a good Model "T" and they struck out from <Phoenix> to come up here--not necessarily to stay, but to just come up. Mom hadn't got to see her mother since J. B. was born, and they wanted to come, and Grandpa was here in <Gallup>, trading. He just talked 'til he was blue in the face to try to talk them--my mom and dad--into goin' in the Indian art business at that point in time. But my dad was a sheep man to the bone. They talked to Grandpa, Grandpa got upset with 'em, mad at 'em, and he didn't even speak to 'em for.... (laughs) His grand plan was to have Dad and Mom go into the art business with him here in <Gallup>, which they never did. But they continued the trip on over to <Farmington> to see her parents, and Dad got involved in a trade and traded his Model "T" for a down payment on a part-interest in Montezuma Creek Trading Post. So he got started in the sheep business. You have my mom's interview about most of their career, so I'm not going to go too much into what they did. I guess I'll start talkin' about my early experience. I was born at <Farmington>, and got to know my Grandpa Joe pretty well, and go with him a little bit. I'm named after both of my grandpas. My Grandpa Joe was Joseph Baldwin Tanner, and my Grandpa McGee was Elwood. So that's where I got my Joseph, and that's where I got my Elwood, named after both of my grandpas. I grew up pretty much at <Kirtland New Mexico>, and then going.... I just have always loved to be involved in the trading. From the time I was just a child, if Grandpa was going someplace, I'd bawl and cry to go with him. After we lost him, my dad and his brother had this idea to create a big sheep ranch at <Durango Colorado>. My dad and uncle had Aneth Trading Post at this point, and this big ranching property at <Durango>. My mom in her interview didn't talk a lot about that part, so I will a little bit now. Dad's idea was to buy the Navajo sheep. There's always been a problem with 'em, because in a batch of Navajo sheep you'll have the little starving dogie lamb that weighed 30 pounds, and then you'll have the pet lamb that weighed 120, and then everything in between. Some of 'em's tails were cut, some of 'em's horns were cut. You know, they needed to be groomed and fixed. And so my dad was a sheep man to the bone. He loved the sheep business. That was his passion. What he'd do is, they'd buy the bulk of 'em, or as many as they could, take 'em up to this big ranch, and start organizin' 'em and cleanin' 'em up. Then Dad bought a property right over the mountain from the ranch, right along the old narrow gauge railroad system. And what they'd do is, just clean those sheep up and shape 'em up. My mom and dad started their own highway. They put in a service station, and Stella's Cafe, and a little motel. The service station with the cheap cigarettes, and Philips 66 gasoline. And so I kind of grew up bein' a gas jockey there at the service station. But my dad always stayed involved with a lot of Navajo families-- particularly down near and around his homestead and his trading post at <Tsaya>, which he had sold by this time. But they didn't buy the accounts receivable, so Dad still had to go down to the reservation and trade. But there at <Durango> we had a hogan and this service station, and mom's cafe and the little motel. And Dad would, in the summertime he'd always have a weaver there weaving. I just, from the very beginning, just always loved the art. I learned to appreciate Navajo rugs in our home. I was one of the best "keeps" marble players that there was, and had one of the best collections of marbles because we'd put.... This rug here, we'd put the marbles in the center pattern of the rug, and then we'd use the border as the border, and then we'd play marbles for keeps. But I guess that's when my love for Navajo weaving really got started. At that point, whenever Dad.... Bein' the middle child, I had the choice of all relationships with my dad, because I was kind of the middle child. The earlier ones, he was so busy tryin' to make a livin', that he didn't spend too much time with 'em. But he could never--on the day that he would go down to Indian country--and it would usually be a two- or three-day trip--he would say, "Well, I gotta go to Indian country." And he'd say goodbye to the family that night. Well, when he'd get out to get in his pickup, there I'd be. He could never tell me (laughs), "No, you can't go." So I got to go with him on all of those trips that he made down to Indian country. And we'd just go, we stayed right with the Indian families that we visited. We'd just roll our bed out and stay right there in the hogan as we were making the rounds and doing our trading. So that's when I really got a taste for what I wanted to make my career. And I've just always known that I wanted to do this hands-on trading. From the very beginning, I've had this great love affair with Navajo weaving, and what it is. As we would take those pieces back that he would trade for and sell 'em at the hogan, I got the hands-on experience from there. And then I got to thinking, I really want to.... My dad being out of the trading post, I think when I was in the eighth grade--the summer between the eighth and ninth grades--I went down and I worked the summer to learn the trading business from Raymond Blair and Pappy Whit [phonetic spelling] that owned.... My older brother, Bob, was working for them, and so I hired on as a summertime helper. That was my first trading post experience, is when I went down there that summer and worked for them. I learned a bunch about trading, a little more about fishin', and a little bit more about table tennis. (laughs) At the end of that summer, my folks sold the place at <Durango> and we moved to <Phoenix> for Dad's health--he had emphysema. And he thought that if he got down to that lower country it would help his health. And so he sold our place at <Durango> and we moved down to <Phoenix>. I went [to school] one year in <Phoenix>, and that didn't help Dad at all. They only leased this motel, so they got out of their lease and we moved back to <Cortez>, and my father bought Montezuma Creek Trading Post again. At that point in time, I had finished my sophomore year of high school. I married a girl by the name of JoAnn Barkley [phonetic spelling]. We left there and went down to Montezuma Creek Trading Post and worked there a short while. I wanted to really learn the whole story of trading, and Jewel McGee had worked for my father at the very beginning of his career at one point in time, and so Jewel agreed to bring me out to <Red Rock>. And Troy Kennedy was just, at that point, kind of Jewel's apprentice trader. And I went out there and that marriage didn't last at all. JoAnn and I separated and that marriage was annulled quickly, but I stayed at <Red Rock>. I was just spellbound by Jewel McGee. Jewel McGee was, in my opinion, and still is, just the perfect Navajo Indian trader. And a great trader is like a great banker in a community. If he's successful, not only is he successful, but all the people he touches are equally successful. And of all the trading characters that I've ever met, Jewel McGee was and is the fairest, most straight-shootin' trader that I've ever met. He helped upgrade the livestock business. So I worked for Jewel along with Troy. I kept telling Jewel, "Jewel, I need a trading post. I want to get in the business." "Well, you're doin' just fine." See, I'm the ripe old age of seventeen here. (laughter) I'd been there for about a year, and Jewel's brother, Melvin McGee, had Tosito Trading Post. Tosito, they had the trading post, and then the brothers Roscoe and Melvin and Jewel had a whole series of trading posts over on that side. Well, Melvin was working at their cattle ranch. They had a collective cattle ranch where they'd buy the stock. Melvin was haulin' a load of water, but got run over by the truck and killed. And a few days after the funeral, Jewel came out to <Red Rock>. I was cookin' breakfast--I never will forget. He came in and he threw a set of store keys on the table and he said, "Well, kid, I bought you a tradin' post." (laughter)I went out to Tosito.

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Tanner: So I think it'll just be too small a company for her. (laughter) 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's March 30, 1999. We're in <Gallup New Mexico>, visiting with Joe Tanner. Also present in the room is Gail Steiger on the sound and camera equipment. Joe's wife, Cindy, is listening in, too. Just when the other tape ended, Joe, you were telling us about being seventeen years old and taking over a trading post. Tell us what was that like. Were you scared, or was it exciting? 

Tanner: Well, it was, like I say, Jewel came out to <Red Rock> and he said, "Well, here's the keys to Tosito, here's how to get there. Go get started. You've learned a lot, and we'll make sure that you...." And so I went there on a working interest. I got over to Tosito, and there were some Mormon missionaries that lived there at the trading post--not right in the trading post, but they had their trailer there. So I had some pals to go with. I'm not sure Jewel even came out. He was that kind of guy. He just knew who to place his bet on, and you knew you'd better hold up the confidence. I got out there, and I was scared to death. But between the Mormon missionaries and my neighboring trader, Charlie Herring [phonetic spelling], who had the Toadlena place up above.... It seems to me one of the first things that happened was somebody brought a steer in, and at <Red Rock> I had shipped the lambs. For sure my job there was....I'm going to regress back a little bit to <Red Rock> in just a minute, because a couple of significant things happened while I was there. But Charlie Herring, I called Charlie and he gave me some ball park things, and I bought the steer. That was the first nervous purchase that I made. Tosito was a good store, and I'm going to go back there in just a minute, but I want to talk a little bit more about <Red Rock> when I was there. That's one of the places that I really cut my teeth on Navajo weaving. I really appreciated the weavers that were there. They were mostly weavers of the pictorial, the sand paintings. There were several really great weavers that Troy and Edith Kennedy, along with Russell Foutz, took to that whole museum of another Mr. Kennedy. The collection was coordinated by Russell Foutz--Troy and Edith Kennedy. Most of those weavings in that big collection that they built a whole museum around, I think somewhere--I forget where that's at. But I met and learned and knew those weavers really well, and I was very interested in that, and I knew a little bit about how to load sheep. Really funny, Cindy and I took a trip the other day. I don't remember if I told her this story or not, but it was right after my then wife JoAnn and I got to <Red Rock>. It was lamb season, and we handled a lot of lambs. Jewel had a big livestock business. I never will forget, it was my job to load the lambs, and there were two semi-truckloads of lambs that needed to be loaded. I went out and loaded one load, and the other truck wasn't there. Man, I was the stinkiest cuss in the world! So I had to go in and I changed all my clothes and took a shower. Then the other truck showed up! I did it all again and showered again. But while I was at <Red Rock>.... Navajo trading has gone through such incredible--I still think of myself as a teenager--but thinking of the things that have happened, while I have been in this business, it just--the changes that have taken place! My brother J. B. and I were talking one day and he said, "Damn, Joe, you really know a lot about the trading history." And I said, "Hell, J. B., we've lived half of it! All we have to do is be a little bit of a student as to what happened the other numbers of years."But while I was workin' at <Red Rock> Trading Post, we sold a number of old Studebaker wagons, that it was my job to put 'em together. That was the mode of transportation, and that was just in the fifties, but there wasn't a lot of pickups. Everybody had their wagon and their team and that was the mode of transportation. But while I was there, we decided to change the trading post from the bullpen counter, where all of the things for sale were behind the counter, and you would wait on three or four people at the same time, and you had a pad in front of each of the people makin' their choices, because that was the big social occasion, was to come to the trading post and do your buying. Well, while was there, we made that change of converting it to help yourself grocery store. And I've got great pictures. I've got two shots to share with you: before we remodeled it, and then several shots after we remodeled it. So that'll be good for your archives, to have that immediate history. And there's a good picture there, too, of one of the Navajo weavings that I have on the wall behind the couch when we redid the.... 

Cole: How did the customers react to that change? 

Tanner: They loved it, they liked it, and took to it like a duck to water, and it worked out real well. We kept the dry goods.... What we did was, the old trading post, and then Jewel and Troy built an extension on the front of the--it was a long narrow building anyway, and they doubled the size. And where we went out in front, we put in the dry goods, and then we put an auto supply department in with all the supplies there, as well. But that's the thing I wanted to go back to <Red Rock> with. I was there when that change took place, and when I went over to Tosito, that was still a behind-the-counter mode of trading. It stayed there.... I didn't end up staying there too long. We immediately--you know, Charlie--and then Jewel was as close as the telephone, for sure. The store took right off real good and we did well with it. We got into the railroad sign-up where we were furnishing workers, the workers would go out and work and send their checks back. Even while I was still at <Red Rock>, I began to start doing some tax work for the Indians that were making significant money. We had a guy at <Red Rock> by the name of Kato Sales [phonetic spelling] that was one of the Navajo uranium miners that made some good money, and then a couple of the husbands of two of the important weavers were miners. Kato Sales had his own mining operation, and then these other two fellows. So I did their tax returns for them. And that was one of the things that has really become a giant in my career, is this income tax preparation service. And I'll get into that more as we talk about Navajo Shopping Center and other businesses that I've been involved in. But there at Tosito I bought a few rugs. The store was growing and expanding. My brother, J. B., had this idea that he wanted to try in <Gallup>. He had leased the old sales barn at <Gamerco> at <Gallup>, which was what we made into what's then and now known as Navajo Shopping Center. We started that as a family business. J. B. and Don started it. They had just been going, up and running, and starting to get some things done at my first visit. I came over and they'd bought a couple of Navajo rugs, and I bought them from them, and took them and sold them to Don Watson at <Cortez Colorado>. And I just couldn't get it out of my mind. And they had offered me a deal to come be a partner in Navajo Shopping Center, and do it as a family business. I went and talked to Jewel about it, and he said, "Well, son, I've never been one to stand in anybody's way. I hate to see you go, but I just wish you good luck." So I'd saved a little bit of money and had a little bit that I had earned, and I invested that in Navajo Shopping Center. So I left Tosito and we started Navajo Shopping Center. By this time I'm nineteen years old. (chuckles) 

Steiger: What were some of the ways you could fail in the trading business? You said you were worried about how you would do there. What were the pitfalls, what did you have to look out for? 

Tanner: Well, you always had to be concerned about stealing. The Navajo is the greatest gambler, the greatest.... And I shouldn't speak for them, but it's my understanding that from that vantage point, it's not a sin to steal--it's a sin to get caught. And it's a challenge to tricks. Martin Link [phonetic spelling] tells a great story about the Navajos when they were rounded up and were at <Fort Sumner>. That's some of the beginning of the first silversmithing or metalsmithing. They were issued copper coins to get their allotment for food. Well, it didn't take the Navajos long to figure out how to make those copper coins to double their rations. They kept wondering how come they kept running out of supplies, since they had figured out if they gave everybody so much, they would have enough to go around, and this is what each.... But then they would run out before the tokens were all in. That's because the Navajos were knocking off the coins. So you had to always be careful with that.My dad--one of the stories that he tells, he kept wool for the weavers in the back room. Wool was worth so much a pound that you were selling it for. And he would, just for fun, put other things that weren't worth as much per pound as the wool, back in the warehouse with the wool. And the Navajo would go back there and they would pick out the wool that they wanted, and they would put a few of the other things in, and my dad would just simply weigh them and collect in that way. But everybody was--it was a win-win situation, and I think that conveys a little bit of understanding. It was more fun to take it and have a secret, even though you were paying for it. And maybe both people knew what was going on, it was just the game. (laughs)You had to be careful not to overextend people. And it's back to this perfect banker situation. You had to know when credit is an ally or when it's the enemy. I think that was the most important thing. And just the stewardships, the safekeeping of things--not to have too much of it, or not to have too little of it, the balance. Never mind that it's a small business, the choices are even more important as you make them, because a mistake in a small operation is harder to absorb than a mistake in a bigger operation. So those were the pitfalls.And then I think the other thing for a youngster like I was.... I got most of my growth really early. I was almost this big when I was that age. I didn't grow much from the time I was fifteen. I got all my growth real early. One of the challenges was they'd try to make fun of you and challenge you in that way, so you had to learn how to be a people relations type of person real early. So that was one of the things that you had to be very careful of. But the rapport with people is the one that's all important--the respect one for another. And I think that's been my great secret weapon all of my career, is I like to say there's a hole that needs to be dug, and it's my job to get the hole dug, but I can get some help. And I've always said I don't know how to hold a shovel, but I know how a man should look when he holds a shovel. (laughter) And that has been the great secret to the art that I've handled throughout my career. 

Cole: Do you have any favorite customers or anything from that period when you were at <Red Rock> and Tosito? 

Tanner: Oh, I have great Indian friends from all of those years. When I learned how to talk Navajo at <Red Rock>, we did have tape recorders, and I just simply-- Jewel and Troy had this wonderful old Navajo guy--his name was Louis King. How I really learned my Navajo--I don't talk as good Navajo as my older brother, J. B., but I talk good show business Navajo or trading Navajo. But when you get into religious discussions and gambling discussions and politics, I can't measure up to him. But this Louis King taught me a lot of my Navajo. And then the weavers. I've just been spellbound by the Navajo weavers. These great weavers: you give them a challenge and an assurance that their efforts will be rewarded, and they go on that fast to get that picture in their mind's eye as to what they're gonna weave. And when they get that lock onto that image that's going to come through them, and start at it and achieve it, I've just been in awe all of my life of that great talent. So I have many, many really good weaver friends, and a number in the livestock business, too. That's the wonderful thing about my business as I look back on it, is this rapport with human people. On the one hand, I experience the great zeal of the creation of the piece and have a part in that, and then to take that piece to the collector that's going to embrace it, and the things that those people do. You know, the common denominator between our friendship is the creation with the person that's making it. And then embracing it. The person that ends up owning the piece of course wants to know as much about that piece as he or she can, so when you can be that bridge.... But the icing on the cake is you get to know the way the people who collect, have enough money to collect, and how'd they earn that money and what do they do. So this friendship starts just with the media that you trade in. 

Cole: What were the living conditions like for the Navajo when you were starting out? 

Tanner: Almost without exception, no running water, no electricity, just a fine hogan, and usually a winter place and a summer place that they would have. Most of their lives were very entwined with their livestock. Just absolutely one with the earth, in that setting: the dirt floor hogan, the traditional open roof, and you roll out the bedroll and you stay right there in the hogan. It's a really efficient home center.But just all of the trailer houses, the non-hogan modes of living, they have all evolved since 1950, for the most part, and that's all been within my career. 

Cole: One more quick question about this period, and then we move on. You talked about playing games and tricks. Were there any good tricks that were played on you when you were.... 

Tanner: Well, I think the biggest challenge was when I first went down to <Montezuma Creek>. There was this great big guy.... I'm a nonviolent man. I was a nonviolent boy. I was a nonviolent child. (laughter) And there was this big smart aleck kid that was just bound and determined to make a fool of me down there at <Montezuma Creek> when I was first getting started. He would ask for.... And there was a whole storeful of people. He would ask for the little sack of potatoes just over there on the right. And I would get that, and he would say, "No, I didn't mean that one, I mean the other one." And then he'd ask for the can of Pet milk, and he didn't want the one in front, he wanted the one in back. Just bein' a jerk. The first thing he got was this bag of potatoes, and I exchanged three different little bags of potatoes before I got the one that he wanted, and it's sitting up on the counter in front of him. This went on and on and on. I'm waiting on--like I told you earlier, you don't just wait on one, when you're behind the counter, you have this little pad and you've got about six or seven different tabs running at a time. So I'm down here, waiting on this gal, get her what she wants, and I come back down here, and I'm about three steps away from him, and he just has my blood boiling anyway. I get this lady I'm waiting on, a box of matches. And I look over there, and he's over the counter, trying to reach another bag of potatoes. That was something you just couldn't tolerate. (chuckles) So I was reaching for the matches and seeing him, so I'm already in a windup position, and I hit him with a haymaker and knocked him out into the bullpen and he knocked over the stove in the middle, it was goin'. I'm in the middle of him, and I have him outside. And he's bigger than I was. And that's the only time in my whole trading career that I hit anybody or even had that kind of.... And we became real pals after that. He just was testing me, I guess. (laughs) I remember that. I guess I don't remember any other real tricks that were played on me. (laughs) 

Cole: Do you have a Navajo nickname? 

Tanner: Yeah. My brother J. B., when we started Navajo Shopping Center, he was known as "the ladies' man." It just kind of become a family tradition, and I got dubbed.... J. B. was the absolute ladies' man, I was the tall ladies' man, and then I've got a brother, Ellis, that they called him the short.... My name is ‘Ayéhé Nééz, or "the tall in-law." And Ellis' is "the little short in-law." And boy, he advertises a lot, and I used to. I'll get into that a little bit as I talk about my Gallup career here. But "the tall thin in-law." I'm not so thin anymore. "The tall thin in- law."So we're at Tosito and I have gotten out of Tosito. I brought my money to Navajo Shopping Center, and my brother J. B.'s idea was to create, for the first time, a marketplace for the Navajo, and any other tribe that might want to come--a place where you could sell anything that you produced, for cash. And then on the other hand, we'd put the other hat on and try to sell them anything that they bought, for cash. And this was one of the most successful, the biggest operation of its kind that had ever been done. We started that thing out on a wing and a prayer, but everybody--my mom and dad, all my brothers, myself, my Uncle Don that had the flour mill--put money into it. We split the pie. J. B. was the largest stockholder. My brother Don and my mom and dad were the next- largest, and then I owned 10 percent of it.We started this place out, buying lambs, steers, rugs, pinons--but everything they produced, we tried to create a market for, and find a willing buyer. And so it was a brokering thing, to keep up with it. Took a lot of money, but this thing took off just like a house afire. We did so much business so quick, made so much money so fast--didn't manage it very well. My brother J. B. had a drinking problem and a gambling problem, and so did my brother Bob. We made lots of money, we spent lots of money.But what happened was just dynamic. And I've got some great pictures of that to share with you, too-- that, in its infancy. We would take and.... Like in the grocery department of it, we would butcher our own sheep, right there at the facility. There wasn't any government laws then. And this old sales barn had a big corral, like most sale barns do. And we'd buy these butcher ewes, and then like on a Saturday--just to give you an idea of the volume of this place--we would bring thirty head of sheep down at a time, into a little corral just outside the.... Here's the meat case in the store. The back door was this corral where these sheep were. I struck a deal with the Navajo ladies that would come and butcher. They got to keep the insides and the head. I'd bring the mutton in and I had days there that when I was runnin' the meat department when we first started, where I would cut and wrap and sell a hundred head of sheep on one busy Saturday--with no help. It was mostly just.... You know, it's hot. We had a walk-in, but it was mostly just quartering them. I'd cut off the arms, sometimes the ribs, you know. But I have cut and wrapped and sold a hundred [sheep in] a one-person operation in a day. In the meantime, we had one of those chicken rotisseries, and we would cook the chicken on those rotisseries and sell them, and that was all gone. I did have a little Navajo gal that would wrap. It's really funny, we had two checking stands in that old help-yourself trading post, and this place is just full of merchandise. You'll love the pictures when I show you, and they can be a part of what we're showing. But that operation.And then the other thing was the pawn business in <Gallup>. We started loaning money on jewelry pawn. We started taking saddles. But we had $150,000 worth of pawn loans before you could blink your eye. And ever since that operation, there's just never been enough money in <Gallup> to keep up with the pawn business--that is the banking system in our town. Ours was the first huge big operation, that one where we really had the volume. Now the father of the pawn business in <Gallup> is Bill Richardson. He has a huge.... There's several other operations that are very close to Bill, but Bill's definitely the biggest pawn dealer today. But the pawn business was really interesting.The facet of that business that I really got involved in, of course, because of my passion, is the art part, the Navajo weaving. I stuck a deal with Gil Maxwell, with Dude Kirk, the old Kirk Trading Company, that they would tell me what they could pay, and I would try to buy the pieces where we could just roll 'em and make a 10 percent margin. I remember days in Navajo Shopping Center that I would have as many as thirty women standing in line, all day long, bringing their rugs up to sell to me. 

Cole: And you were paying cash? 

Tanner: Paying cash. We paid cash for everything. And what I would do, I would take it out of the sack, look at it, say "howdy," put it up on the counter, and put the cash right beside it. And I'd tell them this was my offer, this is what I could do, and they'd either take it--and mostly they would take it--and we just bought literally tons, I think. I don't know anybody that's bought and sold any more Navajo rugs than we did there at Navajo Shopping Center, and then collectively, the group that kind of spun off from there has done since. 

Cole: What kinds of prices were you paying? if you don't mind. 

Tanner: The big volume was--we bought Gallup throws, which is a cotton warp tourist rug--we bought those for $2.00 to $2.50. We bought single saddle blankets for $5.00, double saddle blankets for $10.00. And it was just really unusual to have a rug come in that we would pay.... And you have to understand, we were buying them, so we were obviously paying as much or more than anybody else, because we had the volume coming. And thank heavens for the market that we'd created to keep the money rolling. But $250 would be about the outside for the best piece that came in. 

Cole: What kind of a piece was that? 

Tanner: Oh, I remember a particular piece that Clara Sherman, who was a Two Grey Hills weaver, brought in. That piece is four feet by six feet, and it's a classic Two Grey Hills, and we paid $250 for it. I remember that one, because that's one that we kept. But the saddle blankets and throws--well, there's just a good balance of everything that came.And then the dead pawn began to happen. These beads that my grandfather had traded, all of a sudden they weren't worth much. They were going dead on us by the boxful. That was the one place we weren't keeping up with it. [I] always remember, I went down to <Tucson>. Armand Ortega had a big successful operation down in <Tucson>, and I took a boxful of that stuff down and told him, "Armand, I just need to leave these with you. Just help me get all that I can get. Half of it, we'll split it. Just get the best you can." So it was that bad. A set of jaclas that my grandfather sold for the best steer in the herd, all of a sudden it wasn't bringin' fifty dollars, and it should have been bringin' a lot more--it was worth a lot more. But it was just one of those unfortunate times. I wish I could have kept it all! (laughter) 'Cause now they are worth the best steer in the herd, because they've become so hard to find. And unfortunately, that's where a lot of the wealth of the individual Indians has--the stash of important jewelry that they had, a lot of it is gone, and/or buried with them. The personal jewelry that Navajos have at this point isn't what it was at one point, because of the [disciplines?] on treated turquoise and phony stuff. They're like so many other people--they'd rather have the cubic than the diamond, if they have to pay for it. They've gotta wear something, so that's what they can afford, and so that's what they have now. But that was a really important part of that, the pinon business. But it's right at that point in Navajo Shopping Center that.... I have a cousin by the name of Len Tanner. He was into the tax preparation a little bit for some of the operations he'd been involved in, and I had been involved in that before I came to town. We had this brainchild that we would file the tax--Len Tanner and myself--we filed a tax return and then give the Indians credit because we knew the refund was right behind it. And that has just become a huge business. So we became the HandR Block of Navajo country. And today that's a huge, huge operation. <Gallup> is a community of 20,000 people, and we file 35,000 sets of income tax here. And what that means is people from a lot of places--for a town of 20,000 people, you probably normally would have 6,000 tax returns filed, or maybe 8,000 tax returns at the most. Well, here it's almost double the number of people that live here. So it's become a really big, important, multimillion dollar business in <Gallup>, and two of my family are very involved in it today. One of 'em is my brother Ellis, and the other one is my cousin at TandR Market, that file most of these returns. And Dave Elkins at Navajo Shopping Center is a significant player in it too. So that's a brainchild that evolved from those early years at Navajo Shopping Center. 

Cole: What was the time span that you were involved __________. 

Tanner: It was a very short time.... 1958 to 1985 in the tax program at <Gallup> and <Farmington>.... [but] we started Navajo Shopping Center about 1959, I believe-- 1958 or 1959--and I sold out in 1962. So it all happened really fast. Probably the biggest deal in my experience that never happened was my brothers J. B. and Bob were guilty of some misuse of funds because of the drinking and the gambling. We were in some financial trouble, and so we called this big meeting. I had the creditors all talked into taking stock in the corporation for the debt owed. And the creditors were all just an amazing group of people. We had someone involved who knew a lot about the livestock business. We had someone involved as a creditor--all these are creditors that I'm talking about. We had someone in the accounting business. We had someone in the insurance business. We had two people in the livestock business. We had three people in the food production business. These are people that we had scrambled to borrow money from. Well, if my deal would have been accepted that week, we would have had the biggest business ever to hit this town that didn't owe a cent, and I had all this talent at the table. But the loyal opposition, one of my brothers, jumped ship, and the Elkins Group that now has it, they threatened J. B. and Bob with jail time. So they folded, and they offered a settlement to the creditors, and the creditors took it. And then we all left town and scattered. If I could have held it all together, it would have been a great coup. (chuckles) But we all went our separate directions.I sold out of Navajo Shopping Center then and leased a property on the Zuni Road. But while I was still at Navajo Shopping Center, and I'm nineteen- and-a-half or twenty at this point, not old enough to drink in a bar, but I'm big and I look like I should be able to. So I'm down at Pete's Club, drinkin' beer and tryin' to loosen up my arm from wrappin' that hundred head of sheep (laughs) or whatever it was that I had done that day, and I was havin' a beer and I had a nice turquoise ring on. This is while I'm still at Navajo Shopping Center. And this old boy sat down next to me, and he said, "You kinda like that turquoise, huh, partner?" And I said, "Boy, I love turquoise. My grandfather used to mine turquoise. I just wish that I would have been my dad and I'd been a generation sooner." He said, "Well, I know where there's some turquoise. I shoe horses for the horse racing circuit. I get out to <Nevada>, I've done some prospectin' out there, and I have found an outcropping of really good turquoise out there in <Nevada>, and I'd partner with you on it." I said, "Well, what does this take?" And he said, "Well, if you'd give me a little money, the next time I'm through that country, I'll take a couple of days off and go mine a little of it, and I'll bring it to you and show you." So I'm a hotshot kid, you know. I reached in my pocket and gave him (laughs) a hundred- dollar bill and I said, "Well, just see what you can do with this." He said, "Oh! Fifty would have done. This hundred will do me just great." So away he went. I don't think I even asked him his name. About six months later, he showed up with a coffee can with some of the nicest turquoise that I'd ever seen. I still have a ring that I wear sometimes out of one of the stones. It was a nice spider web.So I sent my brother Jerry--I bought a little caterpillar compressor, just a little unit--it wasn't three yards. A cubic three yards was about the size of the whole unit. I think I paid $5,000. It had a little jackhammer with it, and it was a poor boy operation. Mining turquoise is a tough way to make a living, but that was my first partnership in a turquoise mine. They went out there, we made the claims and started mining and we got some really good turquoise out. And so I started making some jewelry. There was a guy by the name of Sol Ondolasi, and he was Zuni, and he was married to a Navajo lady by the name of Catherine Wilson. As kind of a sidebar from my job at Navajo Shopping Center, I started making a few pieces of jewelry with the two of them with some of my.... We'd better stop. (tape turned off and on) 

Steiger: Two silversmiths that you were working with? 

Cole: Catherine.... 

Tanner: Yeah, okay. I took some of this turquoise, and Catherine Wilson and Sol Ondolasi were married and good friends of mine--friends of my grandpa's as a matter of fact, Sol was. A lot of my information on my Grandpa Joe I got from Sol throughout his lifetime. But we started makin' a few pieces of mostly silver jewelry. Trimmed it with a little bit of gold. I got involved in the Navajo Fair at Window Rock, and while all this was happening is when I sold out of Navajo Shopping Center, as well. I actually traded out. I wanted a price.... They had already forced J. B. and Bob out, and my mom got out at that first juncture of time. I wasn't ready to strike a deal, but I was handling the art part of the business, and so I offered to take weavings and rugs and stuff that I had traded for, in trade for my stock. And so I actually traded out of Navajo Shopping Center and got out, but immediately leased this building out on the Zuni Road, and was already involved with the turquoise trade. And because of Sol and his introduction at Zuni, had an entry there, and that's why I selected the building on the Zuni Road. And Sol and Catherine and I immediately made entries for all of the categories for the Navajo Fair, the competitive awards. We had eighteen entries in that first competition that we went to, and won seventeen blue ribbons and one red. And we thought, "Well, this'll work!"I started going to Zuni. Because by this time I had some turquoise coming in from this mining operation, and it was pretty darned-good stuff. And then there was a mining operation out in <Nevada> that was called one of the oldest continually operated mines in the history of turquoise mining. It was a mine called Lone Mountain Turquoise. Well, a guy by the name of Rocky Wilson owned that mine, and he hadn't operated it for about three years, and this mountain was a honeycomb of old workings. This property has work on it from prehistoric times. My brother Jerry was disenchanted with the mining and he didn't want to do it, so he left and I still had this partner of mine out in <Nevada>. When I went out to check on the turquoise, well, then we went over and I met Rocky Wilson. And we went over and looked at the Lone Mountain operation. Rocky didn't want much to lease it, so as I was out there, I was looking through the dump. As I looked through the dump, it looked to me like there was a lot of small turquoise that was never salvaged. So instead of deep digging and deep mining, I opted to have my partner, Lyn Odison [phonetic spelling], we just took cement mixers and screens and completely reworked all of the old operation, and it was the absolute perfect stone for the Zunis to use, because they don't like big stones anyway. And so we started mining this--or salvaging this, I guess I should say--and I started going to Zuni as part of my grocery.... I had a miniature Navajo Shopping Center on the Zuni Road. It was a convenience store, and I took a little pawn, and I had a meat department. I bought livestock. I did all the same things, I just didn't do as much of it as we did collectively at Navajo Shopping Center.But the Zunis kept coming in with stuff that they couldn't sell. They were making all the wrong kinds of jewelry. And I had, by this time, gotten to know a lot of shakers and movers in the art world. My best friend and best customer at Navajo Shopping Center was a guy by the name of Al Packard from <Santa Fe>, that always had one of the most successful Indian stores in the Indian art business. I talked to Al Packard, I knew the Fred Harvey people, knew Manny Goodman in Old Town Albuquerque, and I have an uncle, Bill McGee, that had a great store in the <Scottsdale> area. And then this Armand Ortega down in <Tucson>, and several other people in <Tucson>. I just went and asked all of them, "Well, if the Zunis made something.... They're apparently making the wrong stuff. You don't want this. What do you want?" I had stuff with me that I had traded for and that wasn't what they wanted. So they began to show me what they thought would sell. And then I began to do sketches of what the Zunis could make and had made. So I would take these sketches on my next trip, and I started getting orders for Zuni jewelry. What I would do then, is have Phil Woodard, [who] has Indian Jewelers Supply-- he would cut up the silver just the way I needed it. I would get the orders for all the different kinds of things that the market wanted, and then I had this little profit and loss statement that I gave each one of the Zunis. So I literally started door-to-door. Instead of having a place at Zuni, I would work at my store in <Gallup> 'til noon, and then what I would do is go from there, pick up the silver orders from Phil, and take the turquoise to Zuni, and give the Zunis, I'd say, "If you'd make twenty of these and ten of these and five of these and four of these, I'm going to pay you $150 for these items. And the materials, the silver and the turquoise and the shell cost you $80, and you're going to make a net of $70." And they were just tickled to have the work. So I'd give 'em a profit and loss on each one, and I started doin' that. My pattern became, what I was doing was, I was spending until midnight or two or three in the morning, sometimes, at Zuni, getting the things made. And then I would take it to these buyers and sell it to them. And this thing just took off. I was doing just an incredible volume, but I was eatin', sleepin', and drinkin' it.

