GUY ARCHAMBEAU INTERVIEW

Northern Arizona University Indian Oral History Project

NAU.OH.36.25

Mr. Guy Archambeau taught about 10 years on Navajo and Hopi reservation. Interviewed by Cherry Ray on March 25, 1981. One tape, approxiately 30 minutes.

Subjects covered in interview

    Mr. Archambeau born <San Bernardino California>, moved to Hopi Reservation 

    Education 

    Parents- father Sioux, mother- Hopi 

    Beginning of teaching experiences 

    Other work experiences 

    Comments about levels and tribe worked with 

    Comments about Tuba City Public School- colleagues, students, class room size 

    Comparisons to Non-Native American school 

    Goals of Indian education of Mr. Archambeau 

    Comments about assimilation 

    Comments about other teaching assignments of Native Americans 

    Comparison of schools 

    Success with tribes 

    Comments about paternalism 

    Comments about termination 

    Students' opinion of reservation 

    Students' home life 

    Comments about contact with students in off-duty hours 

    Comments about participation 

    Personal experience 

    Comments about bi-cultured education 

    First college trained Native American 

    Mr. Archambeau's first grade teacher- Elizabeth? Bert Ruston-Hopi 

    Comments about Red Power 

    Personal experience 

    Comments about career choice 

    Comments about counseling Native Americans 

    Summary of Indian education 

    End of interview

[BEGIN SIDE A]

Cherry Ray: My name is Cherry Ray [phonetic]. This taped oral history is being made for deposit in the Northern Arizona University Special Collections Room. It is a part of a research project directed by Dr. Philip R. Rulon, associate professor of history at NAU. The purpose of this study is twofold: first, to obtain historical information on the education of Native Americans in the Southwest; and second, to obtain insight into the effectiveness of bicultural and cross-cultural programs for Indian Americans. The project is funded by the Institute of Southwestern Studies of Northern Arizona University. Today, March 25, 1981, we are talking with Guy Archambeau. He has taught on the Navajo and Hopi reservations for about ten years. He is presently attending Northern Arizona University.

Will you give me some biographical data about yourself?

Guy Archambeau: In terms of what?

Cherry Ray: Where you were born, what your parents do, what your nationality is, your education.

Guy Archambeau: Hm. Okay. My birthplace was in <California>, a place called <San Bernardino>. We lived there just for a brief time, about one or two years, and then we moved out here to northern <Arizona>, to a place called <Oraibi>. And there I stayed for several years--I don’t remember how many--probably up to about sixth grade. And that was on the <Hopi Reservation>. We stayed there until my father got a job in <Tuba City>. And there we moved, and I remained there, going to school, until my eleventh grade. Then I left and went to <Window Rock>, graduated from <Window Rock>. And then I traveled around, visiting relatives here and there in <Arizona> and <California>. Ultimately ended up going to school, getting a college education, graduated from NAU, bachelor’s here. Got a master’s in educational administration, and trying to complete the coursework in the doctoral program here, and then [unclear] instruction.

Let’s see, my parents. My father is Antoinne Sioux [phonetic]. And that’s more commonly known as Yanktone [phonetic] Sioux. They’re from next to the Missouri River in a small community area called Greenwood, which is on the Yanktone Reservation. My mother is Hopi, Tobacco Clan. She’s from <Oraibi>, and that’s who I am, Hopi and Sioux. My father’s always been living out there on the reservation for all these years.

What else do you need?

Cherry Ray: Okay. That’s all. When and how did you get into educating Native Americans?

Guy Archambeau: Originally, I was a major in business administration. But then one time I went back to <Tuba City>, got married, and was just working at the school. The superintendent suggested that I join a program called Teacher Corps, and I went into Teacher Corps. After a couple of years, I was given a degree as a teacher. And that’s the beginning of my experience from teaching Indian children.

Cherry Ray: What other type of work have you done?

Guy Archambeau: Mostly the beginning of [rider jumps?], made sales down in <California>, did the usual labor work around <Tuba City>, different jobs like CETA jobs, but they weren’t CETA then--they were just employment jobs, labor type. Also, later on, worked as a legislative liaison for about two years, traveling around the country, visiting different states, different schools, different educational organizations, getting their input on educational issues. Worked at a university in <Las Vegas>, helped develop a CADA 1 [phonetic] program for Paiute children. Worked as an adult ed instructor for about a year or so. Those are just some of the things I can think of offhand.

Cherry Ray: Okay, that’s fine. At what level did you teach, and what tribes have you worked with?

Guy Archambeau: I’ve tried to work from first grade up to about eighth grade. I taught about four different grade levels within that range, just trying to get experience with all those children, trying to understand how they were. And so I’ve worked from primary up to junior high, in different areas, from language arts to primary/kindergarten kids. Self-contained classrooms, mostly.

Cherry Ray: What tribes?

Guy Archambeau: The majority have been Hopi and Navajo.

Cherry Ray: Tell me something about the school that you worked in, like when it was built, how many teachers there were, what were your colleagues and facilities like?

Guy Archambeau: The one that I went to school in?

Cherry Ray: The one that you taught in.

Guy Archambeau: The last one I taught in was Tuba City Public School. It was a public school at <Tuba City>, grades from K to 12, population of about maybe 1,800 students in total, I suppose--maybe even 2,000. Composition of the school was probably essentially Navajo, with about 85 percent Navajo, with the rest of ‘em being other tribes, and maybe non-Indians. The school was a standard, typical, American school that had no relevance to what is going on out there with the children. The school was unable to provide an education, if you want to say that--if you try to base the performance of the children on standardized tests, you would find that the children do not achieve grade levels at all, all these years, although teachers and administrators said, “We’re doing the best that we can.” Classic remedy, the fault had to be someplace else.

Cherry Ray: What were the colleagues like?

Guy Archambeau: The colleagues believed that what they were doing was the best that they could do. And I believe that that wasn’t so.

Cherry Ray: Were there a variety of different races?

Guy Archambeau: In terms of racial composition, over the years it has changed. Initially, it was predominantly non-Indian. And gradually, over the years, it has increased significantly, to the point, I would say, that at least 40-45 percent of the staff is Indian, which is probably a ratio not achieved by any other school on the reservation. So in that sense, it’s improving.

Cherry Ray: About how many students did you have, average, in the classroom?

Guy Archambeau: Probably around twenty-four.

Cherry Ray: So they were relatively good-sized classes?

Guy Archambeau: Average-size class, yeah. I was always getting big classes here.

Cherry Ray: How did this school compare to a non-Native American school--basically non-Native Americans? Such as like in the pay you received, or the books that you’d use, some of the materials that might be used. Do you think you have more, greater advantage?

Guy Archambeau: The basic curriculum of the school, as I said, is equivalent, identical to the curriculum that can be found off the reservation. The only accommodation for American Indian students has been through the Title VII bilingual programs, and the Title IV cultural materials programs that are available. And there, they do contrast with the other schools off reservation, in that they do provide instruction now in the primary grades to those children who speak their native language predominantly. So it is the intention of that kind of a program that children who learn in their first language first will ultimately progress much more rapidly, very much better.

Cherry Ray: When do they switch them over?

Guy Archambeau: They switch them over when they get to about the fourth grade, so that they should probably receive English instruction by that time, completely.

Cherry Ray: Do they receive English right along with, or do they separate it?

Guy Archambeau: In the primary grades, they provide-bilingual education consists of two components: one, an actual native language component, and one, an ESL [English as a second language] component. But ESL doesn’t begin ‘til about first grade, maybe even second grade. Kindergarten is basically just Navajo or whatever. But it’s generally Navajo, yeah.

Cherry Ray: What were the goals of Indian education when you started teaching?

Guy Archambeau: My goals, or the school’s?

Cherry Ray: The basic school goals.

Guy Archambeau: The school goals said that we were supposed to ultimately provide education to which Indian children can make a choice as to whether they want to enter into the white man’s world or stay out there on the reservation--which really wasn’t much of a goal.

Cherry Ray: What were your goals?

Guy Archambeau: For the children?

Cherry Ray: Uh-huh.

Guy Archambeau: My goals were to ensure that the children still maintained a closeness to their own heritage. However, those kinds of goals, in the early years, were constantly thwarted. One could not achieve that in the kind of curriculum that you were expected to teach. So it is impossible. So you could say those are your goals, but you never accomplish them.

Cherry Ray: I see. What did you think about assimilation, or where they would try to get into the white man’s world? Did you see any strengths or drawbacks to either one side or the other? Did you see advantages to one side or the other?

Guy Archambeau: There are disadvantages and advantages. Assimilation does not happen by planning. It just happens. It depends on the kinds of experiences you have--what kinds of home life situations you have. If your parents are willing to mingle a little bit more than other parents, if the parents that you have are interested in white things, if you travel around a lot.... If you travel around a lot, you probably will see many more non-Indian things, might become interested in them--in the material things, mostly. It’s somewhat inevitable. We have not figured out how to prevent it. It’s almost impossible when you have television around. It’s impossible when you have to send them to school, that basically has required assimilation. If they stay home, then they wouldn’t be assimilated. But somehow I’m sure that there is a way that school systems as a whole can change themselves so that they know exactly what they’re doing, how they are affecting the culture. Most schools have not sat down and analyzed carefully how they are impacting upon the culture of the children. They do not look at it very carefully. They just say, “Oh, we’re gonna give ‘em a triage, and we’re gonna teach it in a special way to prevent them from becoming assimilated,” but it’s got to be done more analytically. You’ve got to watch very carefully, and it’s really difficult.

Cherry Ray: You bet it is. What other teaching assignments have you had with schools that were predominantly Indian?

Guy Archambeau: Hm, let’s see. The [unclear] School in <Las Vegas> was mostly Paiute children, and that is through the Clark School District. We just worked with Paiutes of that area, the colonies. Then I worked at the Keams Canyon Boarding School for about three years. That was essentially Navajo, again.

Cherry Ray: How did these schools differ from, say, <Tuba City>, and maybe the methodology? Any comparisons that you could make?

Guy Archambeau: They’re quite equivalent. I said so a long time ago. I said they all are the same, and that’s still essentially so.

Cherry Ray: Basically the same?

Guy Archambeau: Yeah.

Cherry Ray: Did you feel that you had more success with one tribe than another?

Guy Archambeau: No. I did not look at those children in terms of tribes when I got them into my classroom.

Cherry Ray: They were just individuals?

Guy Archambeau: They’re individual students who I needed to work through their cultural [unclear].

Cherry Ray: What effect did paternalism have on the education of Native Americans?

Guy Archambeau: Huh, that’s a big question. Paternalism. Paternalism can probably be seen through all of--in all aspects of the school. Paternalism, to me, is a word that defines an attitude that individuals may have towards another culture, another people. And eventually a system can have that same kind of a feeling, expressing itself by the way it wants to teach those children. Paternalism doesn’t allow--it didn’t allow, for a long time, the American Indian leaders/educators to make their own mistakes, to determine their own directions. It has always felt that outsiders knew better how to--knew best in how to develop programs or how to implement programs, knew what was best for them. And any contribution we made was always smiled at.

Cherry Ray: When and where did you first encounter the idea of termination, or the withdrawal of BIA help?

Guy Archambeau: Probably the last ten years, something like that. But for a lot of us younger ones, those of us who weren’t actually political tribal leaders never did have someone come to your door and knock at it and say, “Hey, this is termination time.” It’s just a historical subject that is easily brought up, and told to us that in the past the government had wanted to stop providing services, to eliminate the reservations. And I think that occurred back in the forties and fifties, and even before then. It’s only been in recent years that some tribes have been able to egress the termination. And so far we’re holding onto what we have in the different tribal areas, gaining a few bits and pieces of land.

Termination is a word that comes up even nowadays when you talk about states’ rights. States look with envy upon the natural resources that many reservations have. So it’d be nice if reservations could be eliminated so that probably they can take that, take the resources. So there is termination in the future too.

Cherry Ray: Has this affected the teaching? The termination process-do you think it’s affected the way that people have been teaching?

Guy Archambeau: I could not say.

Cherry Ray: How did your students feel about living on the reservation?

Guy Archambeau: They knew no other way, knew no other way.

Cherry Ray: Did they live at home or in dormitories?

Guy Archambeau: Keams Canyon Boarding School--dormitories. Tuba City Public School, they lived at their own homes.

Cherry Ray: What contact did you have with the students in your off-duty hours?

Guy Archambeau: I saw ‘em. Since I was always there, we were always visiting different people and participating in different kind of things. So I did see them.

Cherry Ray: You were always in contact with them?

Guy Archambeau: Someplace around there, there’d be kids around there, taking them someplace. I guess with those who don’t belong to the community, you don’t get a chance, you just stay in your one spot and drink your beer and watch your TV, and then see the kids the next morning, that way. But I always saw them.

Cherry Ray: When and how did you learn of the concept of participation, or the right of Indians to help form the decisions that help shape their lives?

Guy Archambeau: When I felt--it was a personal kind of a revelation, I guess, through some bad experiences with my people getting discriminated against, violently, physically attacked--finally saying that was’nt right. I was basically an angry man and angry person when I was in my twenties, and so the American Indian Movement, some of the other things, aspects of movement organizations appealed to me, because I felt there was no need for us to sit around and just watch other people direct our lives. And so I just, along with others, joined a lot of these organizations, and said we need to actually, physically, take over and do these things.

Cherry Ray: When did you hear of bicultural or cross-cultural education, and what changes occurred in the curriculum as a result of it?

Guy Archambeau: I couldn’t exactly pin a time--maybe the last.... Hm, I don’t know. It’s not been too long. I’m trying to think back in the years when I was at <Tuba City>. Somewhere around 1970, when I knew it was important. I knew there was a need to bring in the culture in a special way. And through in-service programs, through readings I acquired, through going to conferences, I heard about these things. And I actually developed a cultural curriculum for the school district some years ago, revealed to me what bicultural was, which was to me a combination of essentially refocusing in on what the children are, where they come from, using that as a basis for instruction, along with some of the non-Indian, non-tribal cultures. To me, that’s what it is. And also actually using the language, speech.

Cherry Ray: Who was the first college-trained Native American teacher that you had contact with?

Guy Archambeau: Elizabeth Wendt [phonetic].

Cherry Ray: Was she effective in her position? What did she do?

Guy Archambeau: The reason I say that, she was my first-grade teacher. She flunked me, so in terms of success, I don’t know. I did not pass first grade. But she’s the first person I knew who had a college education. After that, I couldn’t tell you. If I give a name, probably Bert Preston [phonetic]. He’s a Hopi. And there may be somebody else, I’m not sure.

Cherry Ray: When and how did you learn of the Red Power concept?

Guy Archambeau: When I was angry, in those angry years. I was here on campus, and another friend of mine and I, and a few others in a particular course, happened to be all together at the same time, and we just were sitting around, discussing, having a few beers, talking about things, and we’d say, "Why shouldn’t we do this? Why should we allow these things to happen? Why don’t we do something about it?" So one summer we decided to work against the Flagstaff City Police, work against the Powwow, and began to push for things that we felt were more important, based on our own intellect, rather than on somebody else’s.

Cherry Ray: In retrospect, are you happy with the career choice that you’ve made of teaching and going to school?

Guy Archambeau: Sort of, yeah. Yeah, I have to be if I’m trying to get a doctorate in curriculum instruction. But there are so many other things to be done, besides just being a teacher, and being just an administrator. There are many other ways that you can lead. And so more than likely I would not be satisfied with just shutting myself off, to just being an educator in the formal sense. I’d probably want to do other things, open other areas in Indian education or in Indian leadership areas.

Cherry Ray: Do Native Americans call on you for counsel?

Guy Archambeau: I’ve had several. They usually come in the evenings.

Cherry Ray: Are they students themselves?

Guy Archambeau: Sometimes students, sometimes fellow faculty members, sometimes just other people who know that I--they think that I have a bunch of knowledge. And I don’t say that, I just help them answer their own questions.

Cherry Ray: In conclusion, would you summarize where you think Indian education is at present?

Guy Archambeau: Indian education is at a crossroads simply because we do not know the effects of the new right’s effect upon the country. We know that Indian education is governed by the amount of money that’s sent to us--at least people think that. They think that we must always depend on money to teach our children. If the more conservative this country gets, then more than likely the more stingy they are going to be in giving out resources to Indian education, to Indian people, to any minority group. We have to be strong enough to overcome those temporary shortcomings probably. It’s to the point where it’s going to affect the number of graduates you’re probably going to get out of the university who are going to go back to teach. It’s going to affect the number of staff we’re going to have on the reservations. And so it’s going to affect quite a bit. To me, it’s an uncertain time.

Cherry Ray: Okay, thank you. That was very interesting. This is the end of Tape Number 5.



