BETTY RODGERS INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.39

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's July 14, 1999. We're visiting with Betty Rodgers, who's going to tell us about her life history and her experiences in the Indian trading business. This is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. [Lew Steiger is running the recording equipment and makes a few comments.] 

Cole: Betty, if we could just start with the beginning, when and where were you born? 

Rodgers: I was born at <Lukachukai>. We were on the eastern part of <Arizona>. It's kind of in <New Mexico> and <Arizona> both, the mountain range. And then from there, my Navajo family then, after I was a few years old, came to <Kayenta>, where the Wetherills established their home. They were the first traders there, and they built a nice little trading post there for the Navajos to trade and stuff, you know.

And then I was taken from my Navajo people. Then, the government just went out and just took kids to put 'em in school and so on. I don't know why they picked me. I was just a baby. But I was placed at <Tuba City> is where we were all placed at that time. They had a matron for the girls and one for the boys. I was there 'til I was about four--goin' on four, I imagine. They were very mean to us. When we'd run away, or even speak a word of Navajo, they'd just more or less beat us. But anyway, I never did like it there. They just treated us like prisoners or something.

My mother then came to visit the Navajo kids, because she thought the world of the Navajo people, just like they were her own, and so on--or she was just a Navajo herself, really. She came over there and found that they were treating the Navajo children real bad--the boys, too--and they were just beatin' us and such as that. So she thought, "Well, this is gonna stop!" So she went to Washington and told the president what was goin' on among the Navajos, and so she put a stop to all that. Everybody at <Tuba> then was fired and ran off and everything else, 'cause they just knew that if they were gonna abuse the Navajo people like that, they just didn't need to be there. So when I was goin' on that summer, then, a lot of the Navajo kids.... I don't know then, really, how they did. They didn't just send 'em home like they should, like go to school and then you'd go home in the summers. But they didn't do that with us, they just kept us there at <Tuba> and just treated us real mean and fed us slop and all kinds of stuff. So Mother put an end to all that, 'cause she just knew that they were really being very abusive to all the children. So finally everything....

Her daughter then--we called her Sister Wetherill-- so she became matron to the Navajo girls, all us Navajo kids. She took care of us, 'cause she spoke the Navajo language pretty well herself. She lived among the Navajos for so many years, 'til she learned our language. So she would come there and took care of us and all that. So when summer came, my foster mother then, Mrs. Wetherill, said, "I think I'll just take this little girl home." And that was me. I thought. "Oh!" Of course I was kind of shy and scared, you know, of the white people then. She asked me if I wanted to go home with her, and of course I didn't just right off say yes or nothing. She just said, "Well, you can just go home with us any time." So after a few weeks or so, one day she had sent for me, and there was her nephews, sons-in-law, and different ones were driving trucks, you know, going through--carrying mail and carrying supplies and different things through the reservation then. So she told these guys to pick me up. So I just.... One day one of 'em--Kilcrease [phonetic spelling] was their name--and Dallas was the young man that came. He said, "I'm takin' this little Navajo girl home. I'm taking her to Mrs. Wetherill at <Kayenta>." So (chuckles) I thought, "Well, I guess it's all right," so I just went with him. And so it took us, oh, just a few days to get there, because of the muddy roads, you know. Then, the roads were just dirt roads. Oh, we'd get stuck and get in a terrible rainstorm and get in the mud and get stuck. Oh, gee, we had a heck of a time gettin' there, but we finally made it. And that's when I started living with the Wetherills then. That was way back when I was four years old. (chuckles) That's how I started living with the Wetherills.

Well, they raised me then, and took care of me, and treated me just like one of their own. She didn't have no children of her own, young, just a kid like me. Her kids was already grown men and women. She had the boy and a son. So I stayed there and she had another Navajo girl. Her name is Frances and she lives in Show Low now. So it was her and I that were raised by Mrs. Wetherill. She tried to raise other Navajo kids, but they either died or didn't want to live with them or something. But anyway, we were very fortunate, me and her. And I lived with the Wetherills until I learned new.... All kinds of great people. There were all kinds of artists, writers, painters, and movie stars. So many people like that, that I had met from the time I was growing up there, and it was really something, being with those people, because my foster father then used to take 'em on trips to the Rainbow Bridge, and he'd make a ten-day trip out of it, of course. It took that long, going to the Rainbow Bridge, and, oh, just different parts of the reservation that was interesting, like <Monument Valley> and <Betatakin>, Keet Seel ruins. Oh, they used to just marvel over that country, and go to all those places, you know, and seein' things. Of course, all on horseback.

When we got of age to go to high school.... We went to grade school right there at <Kayenta>, we had a teacher there that taught. We could bunch up a bunch of little Navajo or white kids or white or Indian or whatever--about ten, always took about nine or ten of us to make a school, you know. So they hired a teacher there. Well, in fact, a woman that was a teacher--she and her husband moved to <Kayenta>--and he worked for the government there. We had it made then. We had this wonderful person that came there and taught us all of our grade years, 'til we finished the eighth grade. Then we took correspondence for our first year of high school, which was right there at <Kayenta>, 'til we finished that, my sister and I. I called her my sister, being she and I were raised together.

So then we had to go to somewhere to go to high school then, and we went down by--my foster sister was living in <Mesa>, and so she volunteered and wanted to take my sister and I there, so we went to Mesa High then, and started our regular high school years. My sister, of course she graduated from high school. And me, I met my husband, and that was the end of my high school year. (laughs) So I didn't finish school. But anyway, they were such wonderful people.

Then from there, I met my husband, and we decided to build a trading post on the reservation. So that's when we went to Cameron. My husband found this spot, and he thought that was a good place to have a trading post. There were a lot of Navajos there all the time. Of course the trader at Cameron, he didn't like it at all for us to have a post there, you know. 

Cole: Who was that? 

Rodgers: Hubert Richardson was his name. So he had this little trading post there. Well, it wasn't little, it got bigger all the time--and it still is big now. But anyway, he never did like us bein' there. But we went ahead and built anyway, and had a lot of Navajos trading with us and so on, all those years. And then I raised all five of my children there, and they just ran all over the country there. That's where they grew up, rather. And that was in 1945, when we first started our trading post there. Now, the dates, I might have 'em wrong, but somewhere around there, anyway. We had the trading posts and we ran them all those years. Our children were in the same situation that I was when I was a child. We taught 'em until they were grade school age. So we went to <Flagstaff> then, and put 'em in school there. But anyway, the Buck Rodgers Trading Post kept a-goin' all the time. That's the way my life was. 

Cole: How did you meet Buck? 

Rodgers: Oh, he was at <Kayenta>. He was haulin' freight and carrying mail and all that stuff for <Kayenta> Trading Post and different places around there. And he hauled freight, and that's how I met him, and that was in 1934 or 1935. No, let's see.... Now, see, my dates are.... I can't even think how that goes now. Well, for goodness sakes! Yeah, late thirties, it was, when I met Buck. 

Cole: So you were back from Mesa for the summer? 

Rodgers: Oh, yeah, we came home every summer. Then my sister went on back to Mesa and graduated from high school in.... Let's see, it was 1933. My foster sister then was killed in a car wreck, and so we had to move, didn't get to go to Mesa anymore, because no one to take care of us, to be with. So she died in 1933. In 1934 and 1935 is when I knew my husband. And then my sister just went back and graduated from high school, and then Sister died in 1933, so she came home. (pause) I can't think what else is.... 

Cole: Did you ever work in Wetherill’s trading post at all? 

Rodgers: Oh, yes! 

Cole: What kind of things? 

Rodgers: Just taking care of the dudes. We took care of people, waited tables, and cleaned their rooms and all that kind of stuff. There was really nothing to.... A lot of work, I mean, but it wasn't--they just had rooms. The house was built with a long hallway, and there was rooms, about three on one side, and then there was another long extension built, and there was three rooms there. And we met Zane Grey. That's how I got my name, "Zane." 

Cole: Oh, really? 

Rodgers: Yes. I knew Zane Grey, his daughter, and his wife, his son. They came up there and he went on trips to Rainbow Bridge with my dad. And he wrote a lot of his books about my foster father, John Wetherill. Oh, I just knew all kinds of great people like that, you know, and it was really fun to be around 'em, know 'em like I did. I don't think I learned anything in school--I just learned my education by bein' around great people. 

Cole: Do you remember any of the others? 

Rodgers: Oh, yeah! There was Harold Bell Wright. He was a great writer. Knew Jimmie Swinnerton, who was a "Krazy Kat".... No! that's Little Jimmy, a cartoonist. Then I knew George Harriman [phonetic spelling], who was a "Krazy Kat" cartoonist, and "Skeezix"--he wrote "Skeezix." And oh! I just knew so many people: movie stars like John Wayne and all those people were around then--Henry Fonda. Of course that's later years. When I was a young girl, they weren't even thought of then. Or they might have been, or just startin' out or something. But I didn't know them like I did--just in the last twenty years, or maybe, yeah, thirty--twenty or thirty years, I guess--later I learned, I knew about them. I'm eighty-three! (chuckles) 

Cole: You're doin' real well. 

Rodgers: Yeah, gettin' old. That's why my memory isn't so good anymore. 

Cole: Did you ever get to go along on the trips? 

Rodgers: Oh, no. No, Dad would take off on his pack trips and stuff and be gone for about thirty days, and come home and get ready for another long trek. So that's all he did, run back and forth. For about thirty years he did that. 

Cole: And that was John? 

Rodgers: John Wetherill, uh-huh. 

Cole: Describe him for us. 

Rodgers: Well, he's an old-timer. He came from <Pennsylvania> as a young man. Then he came to <Mancos>. My foster mother, she traveled from <Nevada>.... Oh, heck, I used to know the little town where she was born and raised. She came through in a covered wagon with her parents, through the reservation, went down through <Tsegi Canyon>, and went right up that canyon and went on over to where she established. Then she went over to <Monument Valley>, and her first trading post was at <Oljato>. Mother went on into <Mancos Colorado>, is where she went. That's where she grew up 'til she was about ready to.... As she went through the reservation, she thought to herself, "I'm comin' back here one of these days and build me a trading post, and this is where I'm gonna stay." She did that, all right.

So she came back from <Mancos>--she and her kids and her husband--and they came across the <San Juan>, came into <Oljato>, and built 'em a little trading post there. And they traded with the Navajos there 'til 1908. She came in 1902 to <Oljato>. Then her husband went to Gallup. They had to get their freight and supplies and everything from Gallup. So they had to freight from there, go over there with a team and bring back their supplies and everything. So one day they stopped where <Kayenta> is now, up on kind of the side of a hill. And there was lots of water runnin' out of a spring, just runnin' down the little side of the hill. So when he went back over home, over to <Oljato>, he told Mother, "Oh, I found the best place in the world. You and I could have really a wonderful trading post." And he said, "There's lots of water there." See, they didn't have any water over at <Oljato>. They found a little place right close to a wash where they kind of cleaned out to get water, just enough to drink and that's about it. And he said, "This is where we're gonna go, is over to this new place at <Kayenta>. I want you to go get everything all packed up, and we'll go." So they did, they packed up all their stuff and went over there to where they built their trading post. Do you know where the Wetherill Inn set up on the hill? That's just the hill. Underneath it, they go around the road, and there's a trading post there now. And right back of it was Mother's old place of business, home and everything. It just makes me sick to think that they did away with all that. They could have left something in memory of my foster parents. All there is up there about the Wetherills is a burial up on the hill, now. 

Steiger: Who did away with it? 

Rodgers: Oh, those people that run it. 

Steiger: The new owners? 

Rodgers: Yes. Yeah, they could have at least left a building of some kind in memory of them. That's where they first established their home. The Navajos then--old Hoskinini was the last chief of the Navajos, and he just fell in love with my foster mother. He thought she was just the greatest person in the world. So when she was over there at <Oljato>, I have pictures of when they first met the Navajos. They were just comin' in, in droves, and they thought that they were gonna come to kill 'em and stuff, you know--like they did over to <Oljato>. That's where she met Hoskinini. And she walked out there, when she saw them all gathering out there, and Mother didn't have no more fear of those Navajo people than nothing. And so she said some Navajo words to 'em and walked out there, and God, they about fell (laughter), they just about passed out, because a white woman, you know, speaking their language, they just couldn't figure it out. So she started talkin' with 'em, and tellin' 'em where she was from and why she was there, and all that. As soon as Daddy come back with all the supplies and everything-- that's the flour and the sugar and the coffee and all that good stuff, and canned goods and different things that they had for the trading post--why, they just thought.... Mother then said she was gonna have a big meal for 'em, or powwow for 'em. And so she got several different Navajo women to make the bread, and they butchered a beef--or bought a beef from a Navajo. And they made a great big ol' pot of stew and all that good stuff. And so these Navajo women made fry bread and all that, and they just had a big ol' feast out there. And that's how she got acquainted with all the Navajo people so well. She just walked around among 'em and talked Navajo to 'em and stuff, and they just thought that was so great. And she did the same at <Kayenta>. When she got over there, why, she had to meet all those Navajo Indians, you know, 'cause she didn't know none of 'em from Adam then. She got acquainted with all of 'em, and they just fell in love with her and they thought she was the greatest person. She became their lawyer, their priest, and their counselor-- oh, just everything. They just thought she was the greatest person. Whenever they had problems or anything, they were always over there, wantin' to have her settle anything that was botherin' any of 'em, you know, and divorces and anything like that, you know. She took care of everything for 'em, and it was legal to them, of course. And she just lived among 'em for fifty years, just doin' that kind of stuff. 

Cole: Did they move over to <Kayenta> like in 1910? 

Rodgers: Well, 1908 is when they went to <Kayenta> then, and established there. And that's where they've been for fifty years, with the Navajo people, Mother had. 

Cole: And originally they just built a trading post? 

Rodgers: They had a trading post there, and they just got bigger. Trading post as well as a dude ranch. 

Cole: Do you know when they built the dude ranch? Was it right away? 

Rodgers: Well, it was right there, then. The whole thing was all built together. And then they made the trading post, and they dealt with the Navajos as well as taking care of the dudes. So everything was just right there, all together, all those years. So one day they had a bright idea that as they were gettin' older and my husband and I were already settled at the Buck Rodgers trading post, and there were others.... Frances, and she got married and left. Of course their son, their own son and daughter, they were already married and left there years before. And so they really didn't have anybody but just the two of 'em, besides a partner they had, that did a lot of the work for 'em and stuff, you know, takin' care of.... And he cooked for 'em, and he done all kinds of stuff for 'em. (aside about rain) Well, anyway, that was my life, ____________. 

Cole: You were sayin' your foster parents had a great idea. Did they sell Wetherill Inn? 

Rodgers: Oh, yeah, they.... Well, Mother was kinda ill, and they were gettin' pretty old, so they decided to sell the trading post. And they sold it to the Bennetts. I forget what his first name was. Anyway, that was all in modern years, of course. But he was running the old Warren Trading Post up about a mile, I guess it was, up on the hill from where the old <Kayenta> establishment was. So they sold that place to this Bennett guy. Then after that, whatever happened to it, which was he sold it then--he sold it to part of.... Their son's runnin' the business. 

Cole: Blairs, yeah. 

Rodgers: Blairs, yeah. They sold it to them. And I don't know who's runnin' it now. 

Cole: Where did your parents go? 

Rodgers: Oh, the folks left then, and they went to <Skull Valley Arizona>, down by Prescott. And they went off over there, and then Mother passed away. Their son then was supposed to be takin' care of it, and he got to be an alcoholic, so that was the end of everything for them.

But my husband and I kept runnin' our place of business, even during the war, when there wasn't hardly anything to buy, you know. So we went over to.... Well, my husband owned a little farm ranch, a ranch home--took care of that place for some people. And we just couldn't make any money with our trading post then, so we just left some people to take care of it for us there at the Buck Rodgers--take care of that for us, and we just went over around <Flagstaff>, the other side of <Flagstaff>, and took care of an old ranch home for a man, and took care of his stock, and oh, whatever else he had around there: chickens and I don't know what-all. So we did that for part of the forty--well, during the war. 

Cole: Describe your trading post in <Cameron>. What was it like? 

Rodgers: Oh, nice. It was nice. We had a trading post, and then later years we decided to have a café in there. So we had a little café. And my husband decided he was gonna have some cabins, so he built some cabins. So we took care of the tourists as they came through, and had a little place where they could eat. That went on for about, oh, until we sold it.

And then we had another place of business up here at <Vermillion Cliffs>. He decided he wanted another place, so we bought the <Vermillion Cliffs>. Then we had eighty acres there of deeded land. So as time went on, we just took care of the trading post. Then we had some of our kids run the other trading post, the Buck Rodgers. Oh, my husband was somethin' else! He decided he wanted another place of business, so he goes to that place, Antelope Hills, just this side of <Flagstaff>, down the bottom of the hill this side of Flag. So he built that place. Darn him. I don't know about him. (laughs) But he liked just to have a lot of businesses, I guess. So that's what we did. And he passed away in 1975, and I've been alone here ever since. It's my life. 

Cole: What was he like? 

Rodgers: Oh, he was an old cowboy from <Texas>-- wonderful guy. 

Steiger: Was it your idea to start a trading post? 

Rodgers: No, it was his. And my foster father, John Wetherill, he kept encouraging Buck. Well, then, having a place of business on the reservation, a white person--then, it was very touchy, because if the Navajos liked you, why, it was fine. If they didn't like you, they'd tell you about it. Well, the Navajos really didn't know my husband, and me, being a full- blood Navajo myself, why, they just didn't know about it. They just didn't know whether they wanted that white man in there or not. Well, I guess they didn't. They gave us heck all the time we were there. But I'd just go tell 'em off when I felt like it. Yeah! I said, "I'm just a Navajo, and I'm just as good as you are, a full-blood, and I have a right on the reservation." So that was the end of that! They didn't bother us anymore.

I think it was Mr. Richardson down there. He thought the Navajos, the ones he liked, could always come in his trading post and get what they wanted and everything. Besides that, Mr. Richardson was not on the reservation. That place was just apart that never was on the reservation. I don't know how you call what kind of land it was, but anyway.... So he really had it where we couldn't even do anything for a long time. But after the Navajos realized that they couldn't run me off--they tried--they just said, "No more," and that was it. So I stayed there as long as I wanted to, and if I wanted another trading post, I got it. But I never wanted no more businesses on the reservation-- heck with 'em, I was tired of fightin' with 'em. 

Cole: Did you folks have to get a lease from the tribe? 

Rodgers: Oh, yeah. Yeah, you had to get a lease, so many years. When that expired, you had to go get another lease--renew it, if you wanted to stay there. But me bein' a Navajo, I could stay there forever. But they didn't have that much sense to know. They really gave me a hard time, I'll tell ya'. But I stayed there as long as I knew it was right. 

Cole: Was most of your business there from tourists coming through, or from the Navajo? 

Rodgers: Well, both. Mostly--in the summer, of course, the ones that were goin' through in the summer, they were always stoppin' there. They ate there. We always had a lot of nice, good business. Then we started Antelope Hills, which is way another--I guess it's twenty-five, thirty miles back, just down below the hill there. You've noticed it as you came through. 

Cole: Yeah. 

Rodgers: Yeah, that used to be ours. But we just had cabins and the big café there, and later on, a bar. We ran that for about four or five years, and we got tired of that, so we sold it, and then went to <Vermillion Cliffs> where we had already bought that place and ran that place. We had a bar there, and a café. And then I thought it was about time we were retiring from all these darned cafés and stuff, so my husband and I then decided to get over to the deeded land, eighty acres. So we decided we'd start sellin' that land, so that's what we did: sold two, three acres to different people. Now it's just that place just the other side of <Vermillion Cliffs> where you see all the trailers and everything. And all those guys now, they are river--a lot of 'em are working with those river companies there, that go down the river. And the others are--oh, they just wanted a home there, so we just sold 'em by the acres to those different people. So that was the end of that. My husband died, and so here I am. 

Cole: Do you remember what year, about, you bought <Vermillion Cliffs>? 

Rodgers: I didn't tell you no years, did I? Oh, yeah, it was in.... Well, my husband, when he was freightin' through the country, then, he met these people--Maggie and Rielly Baker [phonetic spellings] were their names--that ran <Vermillion Cliffs>. And that place was just built out of cardboard and old raggedy material, like old lumber and all that kind of stuff, you know. But that lady, she made the most wonderful pies and all that. She always got the truck drivers all interested, they stopped there all the time. They ate for fifty cents! They spent the night there for fifty cents, and that's all she charged 'em. So one day when my husband went by their place, my husband said, "Rielly and Maggie said, 'Oh, we'll be so glad when somebody comes along here and wants to buy this place. We're gettin' so tired of it, you know.'" As if it was such a big thing! Anyway, for nothing, why, she said, "Why don't you buy it, Buck?" And he said, "Oh, now, I just might do that." (laughter) Like a dummy, he sure did. So he bought that place from Maggie. He said, "Besides this place of business, there's eighty acres here of deeded land that you can have," she told him. And oh, gosh, he thought that was a big thing, you know. So we bought that place. And then we just done the same there as we do all of our other places. We had a motel there, and of course my husband and dad [did] a lot of fixin' and all that. Had a Navajo over there that done the rock work--came down. So they did the rock work, stoned the walls. Buck put, of course, decent material in there, like plyboard and good lumber. It's still standin' there today, just the same as it was when we had it. I don't see anything that's different about it, those guys that run it now. Just as long as the food was good. My husband always fed everybody family-style. We had a long table. Tourists or anybody, just come in, "Oh, why don't you sit down? We've got food here." So they'd just sit down and eat like they were one of the family. They just thought that was the greatest thing in the world, you know, the tourists. So that's what we did. That was in the forties, fifties, sixties, and up to the seventies, and then we decided to get away from all of it, so we started buildin' our home on the deeded land. That's where my husband and I were when he passed away.

So, that was the end of my life--end of my business life, I mean! (chuckles) I just came up here in 1975. Let's see, 1977 I moved up here to Page. Yeah, my kids wouldn't let me stay down there all by myself, so I could have such a beautiful little ranch home. My son and his wife, I've had 'em come down from Montana-- that's where they were living. So they came down here and they've been here ever since. Told 'em they could take care of the ranch home and live there. So I just gave it to 'em. They sure made a beautiful place out of it. You'll have to come down sometime and go over there and let you see it. It's really nice. 

Cole: What's your son's name? 

Rodgers: Joe. Joe and Sharon. Yeah, they're gonna move back down there pretty soon. They're lettin' some people that always brought their trailer from <Florida>, have it parked there. He works for the river rats up at Cliff Dwellers, about a mile from Vermillion. Now they're just livin' up there. So Sharon said, "Well, you guys just stay in my house and take care of it." And that's what they're doin', just takin' care of the house and livin' in it just like it was theirs. They thought about sellin' it at first, but now I guess they've decided not to. I said, "Oh, Joe, I just don't like the thought of you even thinkin' about sellin' it. It's been such a wonderful place for all of us." And we always have a family reunion there every year. My other son in <Texas> is Tom. So we're gonna go down there this next year, next June, and have a family reunion at his home, down in <Lubbock Texas>. So that's the way we've been doin' with them every year.

Now, what did I leave out? Ask me some more questions. 

Cole: Were either you or Buck ever members of the United Indian Traders Association? 

Rodgers: No. 

Steiger: I've got a question. When the government took you away from your natural parents, did you ever get to go back and see 'em? 

Rodgers: No. 

Steiger: You completely lost track of 'em? 

Rodgers: Well, yes, until about, oh, 1937, 1938-- 1938. My Navajo mother came to see me. She came to <Kayenta>, and she came in my foster mother's home. I guess I was up at my little house, takin' care of my baby and stuff. I went down to see Mother most of the time through the day. So I walked in the house and I saw this Navajo woman sittin' there on the couch as I walked by--walked right by her to find Mother, see where she was. So I met her in the dining room, and she said, "Betty, do you know that woman sittin' in there on the couch?" And I said, "No." I just figured Navajo people come and go in Mother's home all the time, you know. I said, "No, I don't know her." So she went in there with me and said, "Well, that's your mother, Betty." And I said, "My mother?!" "Yes, that's your mother." So she got up and stood up and I went over there and put my arms around her, and she cried. Of course she was just some other Navajo woman, is all I knew, you know. I had my baby, so I got better acquainted with her and everything. So I let her hold Betty, who is my oldest child--she lives over here. She's sixty years old now, Betty is. I said, "Here's my baby, you can hold her." Oh, she was so proud of that! And she was sittin' there and cryin' and holdin' that baby in her arms and all that stuff. She talked to me and told me.... Well, we were tryin' to figure out how many years I had been away from her, you know. Of course I had to have Mother Wetherill tell me what year and when and all that stuff--the years. And I couldn't, 'cause I didn't remember then. And now those are all way back years to me. But anyway, I had fun visiting with her and everything. So she spent the night. She had her little camp outfit, she and her other kids had brought her there. We got acquainted with them. So they camped out in the yard that night. She decided to stay, I guess. She was there for a day or two, and we visited and talked. Then I couldn't speak the Navajo language as I did later. I just decided I'd better learn the language back, because I couldn't.... I could understand it pretty good, but I just couldn't carry on a conversation with anybody. So I got along with her fine, and she told me where she lived and how long it took her to get there to <Kayenta> and all that stuff. So we had quite a visit.

Oh! I told her to wait until my husband come back. He was in <Flagstaff> gettin' freight and haulin' mail, and I told her all the things he was doing. And she was surprised to see he was a white man. (laughs) Anyway, she got along with him, and I told her to come up to my house where I lived. So we went up there. I fixed 'em some food, and that's where they spent the night, out in my yard. My house was about as big as a cracker box, then--just about as big as this one room! (laughs) We didn't have any money to build nothing. But anyway, that was the starting out of my life with Buck and my baby, Betty. So that was the end of my story, unless you want to think of something else I've left out. 

Steiger: Just comin' back to the government takin' you away like that. Was that typical? 

Rodgers: Yeah, they were just doin' that. 

Steiger: They wouldn't return kids to their parents or anything? 

Rodgers: No, they didn't even bother about it. No. And they give us hell when we even spoke (

Steiger: The language.) Yeah. "You came here to learn, to learn the white man's way," they'd say to us. Why, here we were just ignorant little babies from the reservation. Heck, scared of 'em and everything else, you know. And that's why a lot of the Navajo today, the elderly Navajo people, said, "That's the reason we were afraid of the white people, because they were mean to us." That's all they knew then, you know. 

Steiger: And then Mrs. Wetherill came and she saw what was goin' on at <Tuba City>, and she went all the way back to <Washington>? 

Rodgers: Yes, she went to <Washington>. She told whoever was the president then. 

Steiger: So at that time she went on the train to <Washington DC>? 

Rodgers: Yes, she went on the train. 

Steiger: Just to do that? 

Rodgers: Yes. She says, "They're not treating my Navajo people right on the reservation at <Kayenta> where I'm established. And I want it stopped, now." So it was stopped. Everybody got fired, kicked out-- everything. 

Steiger: And after that it was better, as far as school goes? 

Rodgers: Oh, yes! They started treatin' the Indians like human beings. We got treated better, we got better food. [Before] they gave us rotten old apples and stuff like that to eat. The food was absolutely rotten, and they made us eat it or get beat to death. Yes! That's the way they treated us. Yeah, when Mother Wetherill came to visit, she went over to the boys' dormitory and one boy was gettin' beat. He was just bein' horse whipped. He was tied to the bannister, and he was being beat. Mother went in there and she said, "What is the meaning of this?! Stop it right now!" she said to them. "Right now I want it stopped!" And they looked at her like, "who in the heck are you?" you know. She said, "Is this what goes on all the time around here?" "Yes, this boy ran away, and he had no business doin' that. And he won't try to learn anything." And oh, this man just raved on. "Won't try to learn anything." "Well, this isn't the way to treat him, just because he did all that." And said, "Just seemed like that's the only way," the guy said to Mother. Man! she just plowed right into him. I never can think of his name. Tried to tell somebody about that the other day, and I just couldn't think of his name to save me. 

Steiger: So the year that happened, that was.... 

Rodgers: Way back in my young life, which was way back in, oh, I must have been about.... Well, I was there at <Tuba> when I was at least three, two-and-a-half or three years old. 

Steiger: So that would have been in the twenties? 

Rodgers: Yeah, early twenties. And I just turned eighty-three just this last June 15, and I had a heck of a time tryin' to figure out when I was born, what year, and all that stuff. Just goin' by Mother Wetherill’s records, I was baptized at St. Michael one of those years. So I got Father Berard [phonetic spelling] was this old gentleman's name. So they found some of his old records, and they finally found one of me. They said that I was either born in 1917 or 1916. So I just took 1916. (laughter) Well, my foster mother said I was born in 1915. I always went by her record. But I knew that that was the only way to really know, would have been from Father Berard, because he christened my sister and I there then. So I thought that was the only record, really, I had. Of course I could have made the government over at <Window Rock>, today, go through all the darned files and really know what year I was born. I don't even have a birth certificate. Today I don't have one. So that's what I go by. 

Cole: So you moved up to <Kayenta> probably about 1920? 

Rodgers: Yeah, when the Wetherills took me in. All the early twenties, all through the twenties, I was goin' up to <Kayenta> and back and forth, for a year or so. We used to laugh.... Don't you turn that on, now, when I tell you this. .... 

Rodgers: But anyway, back and forth. And then one day when I was about four--goin' on four or was four-- why, Mother said, "Heck, we might as well just keep her here, and we'll just take her. My sister wanted to keep me, and Mother wouldn't let her. She said, "No, you have your own family to start, and you don't need to be bothered with a little Navajo kid. And Fannie needs a partner anyway," so she took me in the family. That was her other Navajo girl. Mother took her when she was eighteen months old.

[END TAPE SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole, it's July 14, 1999. This is Tape 2 of an interview with Betty Rodgers. Betty, before I forget, what was your foster mother's first name? 

Rodgers: Louisa Wade Wetherill. 

Cole: I forgot to ask you that earlier. 

Rodgers: And just John Wetherill was Daddy. Daddy John. All his grandkids called him Daddy John. They didn't want to ever be called "Grandpa" and "Grandma." Isn't that funny? (chuckles) So that was always Mama Lou, was her name. Louisa Wade. 

Cole: And then with all your years in the trading posts and stuff, what kind of changes did you see happening? 

Rodgers: Oh! Well, we turned it over to my daughter in.... Oh, heck, I don't remember the year. Well, anyway, the trading post burned down. You know, as you came by, you can see the new building there at Buck Rodgers. It burned down and she built it back up and started again. And then her lease had gone out, so she wanted to have a new lease, and those dumb idiots over at <Window Rock> wouldn't let her have it. Did you hear I said dumb idiots? (laughs) 

Steiger: Got that clearly. 

Rodgers: I hope they know that's the way I felt about 'em. I wouldn't ask 'em for nothin' ever again. 

Steiger: (inaudible, regarding equipment) I remember.... Now, just to make sure, my memory of the Buck Rodgers Trading Post was it's where that Speedy Store is now? 

Rodgers: I guess that's what they call it now. 

Steiger: There on that hill, that new convenience store? 

Rodgers: Yeah. 

Steiger: That was a big store, wasn't it? 

Rodgers: Yeah, it was pretty nice, you bet. We built cabins to it, too, you know. And the whole works burned down. 

Steiger: When you started, was it that bullpen kind of deal where there was three counters around, and you had to hand the customers all the goods? 

Rodgers: Yeah, over the counter. 

Cole: Has that changed over time? 

Rodgers: Well, now it's just a store, regular store like you go in Basha's and all those stores around here now. It isn't a trading post like thing at all. I mean, they don't have rugs hangin' on the walls to sell and all that kind of stuff, like we had. Jewelry in the showcases--no, they don't have any of that no more. Not in that place. Everything's commercial. 

Cole: When you would trade with Navajos, would the women usually do most of the trading, or the men? Or was it a mixture? 

Rodgers: Usually women. Yeah, it was always women, 'cause they did throw a rug that they had just made on the counter, or throw an old sheep pelt up there on the counter, and stuff like that then. It was really an old trading post. We tried to deal with 'em just like back in the old times. We even bought wool from 'em. And all their makings, all their stuff that they wanted to sell.... They didn't make jewelry much then. And then pawn, of course, they'd bring in their beautiful jewelry, you know, they wanted to pawn for so much money for now, 'til they had time to pay you back and get their jewelry out and such as that. We had a little pawn shop to put all their stuff away in a safe- like thing. So we just kept 'em until they decided they wanted 'em, and we'd give 'em so many days or weeks or months or whatever, to keep it for 'em until they were ready to come back and take 'em out. We always bought lots of wool from 'em during shearing time. Of course they did away with a lot of the wool that they had. A lot of it they kept to make their own rugs and stuff with, you know. And pieces of jewelry that maybe they had kept for years they would bring in and sell to us. We were always happy to get old jewelry from 'em, because a lot of white people like that old stuff, you know. When they'd have a bracelet or a ring or something that they decided they didn't want anymore, we just kept it and put it in our showcase to sell if they didn't want it anymore. I think they're supposed to get all their jewelry then. The government's, or <Window Rock>'s policy to keep any pawn for sixty days. And you could make a deal with 'em by sayin', "Well, I'll keep it a month, or two months, or a year, or whatever, you know." We just done everything our own way. We never did pay any attention to what the government would tell us how to run it, or <Window Rock> would tell us. So we just got along with the Navajo people just great, and they all thought the world of Buck.

Then, like I told you, when they tried to run me and my husband off, why, the Navajo people just had a fit about it. So there was always a councilman from every district, and so we were down there, had a meeting, why, they'd all go to <Window Rock> to be on the council and say what they wanted to say and make their laws, whatever they think is right and so on. And we always had a lot of Navajos tell them that, "We want Betty and Buck there. We like 'em, they do us right, and they're honest with us, and we think a lot of 'em," and so on, you know. They just go on like that. So that's what saved our necks a lot of times. (chuckles) But if they don't like ya', why man, they'll boot ya' out. 

Cole: Did you ever have a Navajo nickname? 

Rodgers: No, they always called me Betty. And Buck. They always liked our names. That's the only way they called 'em. But Mother and Daddy, when they came in the country, they never did have a name for Daddy John. They always called him Hosteen John. And Mother was Asdzáásts’ósí. Mother was real slender then, when she came in. She didn't have a waist about any bigger than that, way back in the old days, and long dresses and all that stuff. That's the way she was dressed when she came to the country. So that's how they got their names. And my mother's son, Ben, was called "little boy," Ashkii yázhí. And Sister was.... What did they call Sister? At’ééd yázhí, "little girl." Yeah, Ashkii yázhí and At’ééd yázhí-- Little Boy and Little Girl. So they got their Navajo names. There's a lot of traders on the reservation that had Navajo names. They always named 'em by what they looked like or what they did or something. (chuckles) Always funny. But they always called mother Asdzáásts’ósí. She was a real slim woman. 

Steiger: Does that mean "slim woman"? 

Rodgers: Slim woman, uh-huh. They always called Daddy John just John. And Mr. Caldwell, who was their partner, he was a tall guy, and they named him Lagonah Nayez, "tall white man." Now, what else do you want to know? 

Cole: I was going to ask, would you say there's certain characteristics that make a good Indian trader? 

Rodgers: Oh, I don't know. They're just not any different than anybody else, I guess. I just never have paid attention to any way that they might--other than just learning the language themselves. A lot of those guys did that, and learned it real fluently, which was nice. You get along better with the Navajo people if you could speak the language. A lot of 'em did. They were just bound and determined to learn it, and that's the way they did. 

Cole: Do you have another question? 

Steiger: I ought to, but I can't.... With your husband, I remember I was just a young boy there at <Vermillion Cliffs> in the early seventies. I remember we were all in awe of him, we were kind of scared of him. He struck us as bein' somebody that you wouldn't want to get him mad at you. 

Rodgers: Who? Buck?! 

Steiger: Yeah! Yeah, we were. We were kind of intimidated by him. I mean, we thought, "Boy, you don't want to make him mad!" When you remember him, what do you think about him? What were his strong points, just as a trader. 

Rodgers: I don't know what you'd be afraid of Buck for! God, he was a very handsome man. 

Steiger: He was! I don't know, we just.... You know, he never gave us any reason to be afraid of him, but we just had this sense of, boy, you don't want to _________. 

Rodgers: Well, that's the way he looked all the time: a cowboy hat, and wore the regular denim clothes all the time. 

Steiger: As a trader, was he real involved in the livestock end of things? 

Rodgers: Oh, yeah, he'd rather take care of cattle than.... We had a few cattle up there. Who were you related to? 

Steiger: Well, I worked for Fred and Carol there at Arizona River Runners. I was a little swamper. As far as who I'm related to, my dad was Sam Steiger. Right there underneath John Collier.... (laughter) But I remember you guys. Fred and Carol had just taken over the bar there. I remember you guys would come in and have a Coke or somethin' like that in the afternoons. 

Rodgers: I'll be darned. 

Steiger: And I remember Stan a lot. I remember he'd come in a lot. 

Rodgers: My son? 

Steiger: Uh-huh. And ____ and those guys would come in a lot and visit. 

Rodgers: Yeah? I'll be darned. Yeah, Fred and Carol, they sold the place to my daughter. My daughter, Roma's, in-laws. What the heck were their names? Nona and Don Seeley [phonetic spelling]. They sold the place to them. 

Steiger: I didn't phrase that question very good. I guess it doesn't really.... If you were going to describe your husband to your grandkids, how would you describe him--to any of your grandkids that didn't get to see him. 

Rodgers: Yeah, just always tell 'em he was a tall handsome cowboy. (chuckles) You must not have known much about cowboys, to be afraid of Buck. God, he's too good-looking to be afraid of. (laughter) 

Steiger: Oh, we weren't afraid of him, but it just struck us that we didn't want to make him mad. 

Rodgers: Yeah, I guess. I don't care what you say about him, that's the way he impressed ______. 

Steiger: Oh, no, I didn't mean we thought he was mean or anything. He was impressive, that's what I mean. 

Rodgers: Yeah, well.... My son Stanley looks just like him. He's down in <Phoenix> with his wife right now. She had a tumor on her brain. Went down and took her down to get the pressure off. She had terrible headaches, back of her head, and she was just plumb deaf in her left ear. 

Cole: That's too bad. 

Rodgers: So they drained her ear yesterday--Morray [phonetic spelling], her daughter, said--and she's better now. They should be comin' home tomorrow, I guess--either today or tomorrow. 

Cole: Anything else you'd like to add? Any other favorite memories? 

Rodgers: Oh, I could sit here all day and tell you my life--I mean, a lot of things that's happened with my foster father and his trips and what they did and all that stuff, but I don't think that's important. (chuckles) 

Cole: Any other questions, Lew? 

Steiger: I can't think of any. 

Cole: Well, Betty, thanks a lot for letting us.... 

Rodgers: I think what I've told you is all the main part. I hope it's interesting. 

Cole: It's real interesting. 

Steiger: I'll turn this off here. 


