Allen Wilson

29 October 2007

Sound file:  "Allen Wilson 7.mp3" 63:04min.

Interviewed by Lew Steiger

For the River Runners Oral History Project

Grand Canyon River Guides

Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, 



STEIGER:  This is the River Runners Oral History Project.  This is video master Tape 7 of an interview with Allen Wilson.  <Gold Beach Oregon>.  It’s October 29, 2007.  We’ve been talkin’ about some of Allen’s other rivers, and so that’s what we’ve kind of moved on to.  We just finished talkin’ about the Niagara, and now we’re gonna talk about [unclear]

WILSON:  The other interesting trip that I got to do was down to Central America, the Rio Patuca in <Honduras>.  Hugh Wingfield, the guy that got me goin’, basically, in the Colorado River, was also prone to traveling to Central and <South America> to explore and search for gold.  And he wound up going to <Honduras> in the early years before I went with him, to work with a guy who was dredging gold out of some of the small streams in the central part of <Honduras>.  And he discovered, while down there, this river, the Rio Patuca, was probably a keen place to go for a raft trip, and maybe possibly a commercial raft trip.  So Hugh set out to get a group of people together, which was family members and different folks to participate in this first trip that we did.  And we built a knock-down frame in the San Francisco Bay area, where we just bolted all the pieces together, and we flew two snout tubes down, and this box of bolts and steel, plus a lot of supplies, everything that we would need that we couldn’t really buy down there.  We just put all this stuff together and....  Did I say fly down?  We drove down.  We left from <San Francisco>, and almost exactly a week later we arrived in <Tegucigalpa Honduras>.  We took turns driving, and I have to admit that Hugh drove a lot more than I did probably, but we drove twenty-four hours a day 'til we got there.  And it was in what I like to call the Batmobile.  I don’t remember now what kind of a car it was, but it was packed.

STEIGER:  It was a car that had all this stuff?

WILSON:  It was a car, yeah.  We had it packed clear to the ceiling, to the very back of....

STEIGER:  You had two snout tubes?

WILSON:  I’m trying to figure out how he did that.  The snout tubes he flew down, they were shipped down, and we had to go get 'em at the airport.

STEIGER:  He actually flew 'em down.  My God!  Those were heavy!

WILSON:  I don’t know what that cost was.  Well, they were over 400 pounds, the two of 'em together.  I don’t know what that cost, but the rest of the stuff we took down....

STEIGER:  All the frame stuff?

WILSON:  Well, you know, he had a big cardboard box.  The frame stuff, I take that back, that came along on the flight with the tubes.  But then we had the car packed with all this other stuff.  It’s starting to get a little clearer to me now.  Yeah.  And the car was totally packed, and it was well overloaded.  But anyway, we crossed into <Mexico>, and that was actually fairly easy to do.  But the hard part, that we didn’t think too much about in driving down there, was all the little check stations, and all the armed people along the way, that we would run into.  And you had these check stations which could delay you for an hour or more sometimes.  So in the middle of the night, even during the day, if we’d come to one of those things, you would stop.  And if nobody came out, he’d just drive right on through.  The drive was not necessarily too significant, other than the fact that we did it, and that when we got to <Guatemala>, we backed up to one of these loading docks that they have for a big truck, and they unload everything, or they take a look at everything.  Well, when we got there, they looked in the car and they were just shakin’ their heads.  They didn’t want to look at all this stuff.  And so when they found out we were planning on going to <Honduras>, they went, "Well, if you do that, then we have to send a guard with you."  So we wound up having a third person in the car, which there wasn’t room for the two of us, really, in there.  But anyway, we complained about that, and they just said, "He’s gotta go."  And we had to pay his bus fare back, which was less than five dollars, from one end of the country to the other.

	And so we wound up--he took us through this big mountain range, and it was really spectacular.  And we wound up probably at 6,000-7,000 feet, crossing over into <Honduras>.  We got there like at two o’clock in the morning--the border--and this guy, the guard, saved our ass twice on this trip.  The first time was we had an alternator go out, and he got it fixed for us in <Guatemala City>.  And then when we got to the border to get into <Honduras>, he got out of the car, and he went over.  It was just a shack, and when they turned the lights on, you could see light between the boards.  I mean, it was pretty remote and a pretty rural type of a condition.  He starts beating on the walls and yelling at these guys.  One guy came out in his underwear, and the guard started just jabberin’ at him.  They took a look at our passports and did the stamping they had to do, and we just went on into <Honduras>.  We left him there, Hugh gave him a good tip, and away we went!

	And so we got into <Honduras> and eventually got down to <Tegucigalpa> and found a place to stay, a cheap hotel there, and got set up to do our trip, which was--I forget, I think it was like 120 miles on what would have been a main road, except it was a narrow two-lane road, pretty rough, some of it dirt, some of it blacktop.  And we put all this stuff on the top of a bus, what would be an old American school bus.

STEIGER:  A public bus.

WILSON:  A public bus, yeah.  This old American school bus.  And it really was, it was an old American, Bluebird school bus, had a big rack on top, and you could just put things up there, keep puttin’ 'em up.  So we put both the snout tubes up there, and then we put this other 150-pound box of parts up on top.  And we had a lot of other stuff.  I mean, when they came to pick us up, it took an hour to load it all.  When we took off, there was one turn in this main road that everybody had to get off the bus and get out of the way, as the bus driver crept around the corner.  And there’s a spot where the front bumper and the back bumper actually touched the road.  They were pretty afraid of it turnin’ over there.

	And then we got to this little town called--I don’t remember the name of the town, but we transferred everything to like a Volkswagen bus, and we piled it all on top of it and drove from there, about twenty more miles to this little town called <Catacamas>.  And <Catacamas> was about six miles from the river, and we wound up, there was a pickup....  Actually, the transportation system down there was totally phenomenal.  You could go anywhere you wanted, and there was public transportation to do it.

STEIGER:  Because nobody could afford a car.

WILSON:  Nobody could afford a car, yeah.  And it was slick, it worked great for us.  And we loaded all our stuff....  The public transportation from there out to beyond <Catacamas>, to where we were going, was a little pickup with two-by-four corner posts and a little rack on top you could throw stuff on and inside of.  And so we loaded everything on that, and drove out where there was a mission, and we lived next door on the river there, next to a native family that was watching this part of the pastureland for this missionary that was down there.  We were there about a week, getting the boat put together and everything, rigged up and ready to go.  And then Hugh went back to <Tegucigalpa> and picked up all the people who were coming, and they rode by bus out to the put-in, and we took 'em down the river.  I think it was an eight-day trip.  I can’t remember for certain, but the only map, I think, was a Russian map of the country.

STEIGER:  So it was in Russian?

WILSON:  Well, we just wanted it for the river.  It was the only more detailed map, that kind of showed what the terrain was like.  But Hugh knew where we were gonna take out.  He knew the name of the town, and all that stuff.  He had it set up for a DC-3 to come in and pick us up.  And it was isolated, there were no roads, but there was a landing strip, and it was another missionary facility out there at this little town.  And when we got there, we unloaded everything, and the airplane came in.  I mean, it was amazing, it all worked.  The airplane came in and picked us up and flew us back to <Tegucigalpa>.  That was the first trip that we did.  Then we did another commercial trip through ARTA--they advertised it on their brochure.

STEIGER:  But he had just sold this himself, and he found this river beforehand and just sold it to Grand Canyon people, is that how that worked?

WILSON:  He sold it to ARTA.  Well, the first trip were actually more friends of his, people that he knew, and they came along on the trip.  Yeah.  Yeah, he had this vision for that, but it really didn’t work out very well.  I betcha that boat’s still down there somewhere.

STEIGER:  So he left the boat?

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Now the car, it was just a big ol’ sedan, like a big ol’ four-door?  Or was it a two-door?

WILSON:  It was a Plymouth Valiant.

STEIGER:  It was a medium sized.  I had one of them.  Those are good cars, straight six engine.  Runnin’ son of a gun!

WILSON:  Yeah, it did great!  Because that was a long drive for it, and it wasn’t necessarily a good drive.

STEIGER:  But when you started onto the public transportation, where did the car go?  It was too rough for it to continue on or somethin’?

WILSON:  There was a mission out there, where we went, and he gave it to the mission.  And they didn’t really want it, but they were able to use it, and they took it.  I’m sure it worked out for 'em.

STEIGER:  And the river, was it whitewater and stuff?

WILSON:  No, you know, it was a flatwater river with little riffles, totally engulfed by a jungle.  The river trip itself was pretty unique, because campsites were rare.  There were times when we just thought maybe we wouldn’t find one.  And one night we really didn???t.  We wound up kind of camping in a little flat area at the mouth of a tiny little creek.  Some people slept on the boat, and other people slept on shore.  But the rest of the time, we actually found a gravel bar.  But we had to kind of make executive decisions every day.  If we came to a gravel bar about two o’clock that was a decent place to camp, we had to make a decision whether we were gonna take a risk and maybe three hours later we’d find another one.  Most of the time, that worked.  Most of the time we were able to do that.

	The jungle was pretty interesting.  The ants and the little bugs are what really intrigued me.  There were just so many of 'em!  And the parrots and the birds, they were everywhere.  And the monkeys, you’d hear the monkeys.  There was a tapir one day.  Lots of caiman, the relative to an alligator.

STEIGER:  Yeah, little, not so violent.

WILSON:  They’re small.

STEIGER:  They look kind of creepy.

WILSON:  They do, yeah.  And there were just lots of those around.  Oh man!  And we started out the trip, Hugh actually hired a guy there in <Catacamas> to build our oars for us.  The guy did a great job.  They were really, really heavy wood oars.  We rowed for the first several miles.  We were just kind of lackadaisical about it, but we’d let the boat drift underneath jungle trees, and those were goin’ around, and we were drifting downriver there once, and all of a sudden there’s something going through the water, and it’s a snake--and it was a big snake, and it crawled right up on one of these branches like we’d been goin’ under all the time, and crawled into that tree and just flat disappeared, and we’re goin’, "Ooo, maybe we’d better not be goin’ underneath these trees anymore."  Because the fer-de-lance was the primary snake down there.

STEIGER:  Which would kill you dead.

WILSON:  Kill you dead dead, yeah.  Jungle’s pretty neat, though.  In the beginning we saw a number of people along the way, where the villages were.  And then eventually we ran out of villages, and it became nobody’s land sort of.  There just was nothing out there, except there was about a thirty-foot-long dugout canoe that had a family in it, with, it looked like, all of their possessions, and they were goin’ upstream.  It was really neat to just see that.  Hugh could stop and talk to 'em a little bit.  But what we learned was that down there, their languages change throughout the country.  It wasn’t Spanish anymore, it was something else, or some dialect or something--we didn’t know.  But it was pretty cool, you know:  kids and a dog and chickens, all that stuff on board that dugout canoe.

STEIGER:  But it only turned out to be like a two-trip deal?

WILSON:  It was a two-trip.  He didn’t pursue it anymore

STEIGER:  Seems like quite the adventure.  That’s a long drive.

WILSON:  It is a long drive.  Hugh did one other thing, too.  He hired some natives up on the upper end of the Amazon River to make him a balsawood raft.  They put it together for him, and he just turned it loose, it started drifting down the river, and he just drifted day and night.  He said that was pretty eerie sometimes, doin’ that.

STEIGER:  Did he have a way to control it?

WILSON:  Yeah, he did.

STEIGER:  He could pole it in or somethin’?

WILSON:  I think he probably had some oars on it.  He may have had some poles, and he had rope and stuff like that.  That was one of the last trips that he did to South and Central America, when he did that trip, I think.

STEIGER:  Huckleberry Finn.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Ah, river runnin’!

WILSON:  He’s married and got three boys and lives in <Alaska> now.

STEIGER:  What’s he do up there?

WILSON:  Well, he’s retired now, and his boys are away from home and college and gone.  He was one of the managers on a pump station for a pipeline.  His wife, Claire, was a schoolteacher.  But that, more or less, is the <Honduras> story.

STEIGER:  Pretty good adventure.  I’m tryin’ to think of an intelligent question to ask ya’ in this whole deal, while we’re sittin’ here, all this tape left, and all this time.  What are we forgettin’ to add about the <Grand Canyon>?

WILSON:  I’m wondering that too.

STEIGER:  You know that we’re forgetting something critical--I always do.

WILSON:  I’ve got another story.

STEIGER:  Good!  Let’s hear that.

WILSON:  One of these trips we’re goin’ on, David Winn, one of Peter’s brothers, had come from someplace, I don’t remember where now, and was just doin’ a trip, and it’d been a while since he’d been down there.  I think Louise was on this trip, too, and I think Roger was also.  David had been ahead of us, and we got to Crystal and David’s boat was not at Crystal.  And so we went up on top and took a look down, and his boat was nowhere in sight, and we’re goin’, "Oh, man, what did David do anyway?"

STEIGER:  He had run the river before?

WILSON:  Oh, he’d been down the river a lot of times, yeah.  And David had a great sense of humor.  And so we’re up there scanning the area, and somebody says "Well, lookit, there’s somebody runnin’ up the river, up the shore there."  We get to lookin’, and it’s David.  We still had no idea where his boat was, but he’s runnin’ back up, and he finally gets there, and he’s laughin’, he goes, "God, that was really an experience!"  There was a great big guy on his boat, and that guy was sittin’ out on one of the points, and there happened to be another person on the other point, and when they came up to Crystal, somebody said, "What rapid is this?"  And he said, "Oh, it’s Boucher."  He says, "I got in there, and went, "Oh!  No!  It’s not Boucher!"  Way too late.  And he says, "You know, I lost of track of where we were, because we were talkin’ about sex and socialism."  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Such an interesting combination.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  So he made the run and pulled over?

WILSON:  Everything was all right.  What made the difference was that big heavy guy on the front.

STEIGER:  That got 'em through, because they went down and hit the hole, of course?

WILSON:  Yeah, they hit the hole.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  Pretty wild and crazy times.  My goodness.  I love those pictures, just of those early motor boats.  Far cry from what they got today.

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s for sure.

STEIGER:  Just the whole routine.

WILSON:  Yeah, you know, I lived in my sleeping bag for six years straight, all year long.  And I worked on the river for eight.  When I got together with Marilyn there, actually for three years when I was with her, we rented a place to live.  But the rest of the time, I....

STEIGER:  Before that you didn’t, you were just on the road?

WILSON:  I was just on the road.  I lived in my car, wherever, whatever.

STEIGER:  What did your parents think about that?

WILSON:  They were worried about it, until I took 'em on a <Grand Canyon> trip, and they realized that it wasn’t death-defying, like everybody had been reading in the papers.  And so my parents never said anything to me about it.  I think my mother was particularly really good, because she had this feeling that whatever I needed to do, I needed to do.  My dad, he kind of wished he had done it.

STEIGER:  He was a little envious?

WILSON:  I think he was.  He told me, "You know, I’m really glad you’re doing this, because I missed my opportunity to sail.  I wanted to go sailing the South Seas, and I never did it."  And he actually seemed very enthusiastic about what I was doing.  Of course, he was a lot older.  He was fifty-six when I was born.  He died while I was working down there.

STEIGER:  It’s funny, because just from the way that you described him, it seems like--actually both of 'em, it seems like they were pretty practical and definitely hard-working people.  Your dad was a businessman and pretty straight up in that regard.  And yet here, when I first got here, I’m thinkin’ back to you showin’ me this scrapbook, which we’re probably gonna get these pictures out of, that he made for you.  And that was your dad that did that?

WILSON:  No, my mother actually did that.

STEIGER:  And was that later on in the game, or that was while it was happening?

WILSON:  While it was happening, yeah.

STEIGER:  That’s really cool to think of them--you know, you’re sending back all this stuff, and they’re puttin’ together that thing.

WILSON:  Yeah, they were pretty intrigued by it all.

STEIGER:  And you had a good time takin’ 'em down the river?

WILSON:  Oh yeah, that was a lot of fun, yeah.  Another thing I don’t know if I mentioned, but the guy who really turned me on to the Colorado was the older fellow who used to work for my dad, and had retired, and was living in <Palm Springs>.  I visited him on the way through, and he really enforced in my mind that I needed to go explore the <Grand Canyon> and maybe the Colorado River.  I had the opportunity to take him on a trip before he died.

STEIGER:  Had he gone?

WILSON:  He had never been down it before.

STEIGER:  He just looked at it from the rim or something?

WILSON:  Actually read National Geographic.

STEIGER:  Hadn’t even gone.

WILSON:  No.  You know, even at $300 a head, that was a little too much money for most people to spend on doing that.  But I got 'em in for practically nothin’, you know.  I got Ernie, my older brother, Norm Baker, the guy who got me goin’ on this, and then a fellow by the name of Doug DeVoe who was a person who was a real estate agent here in <Gold Beach>, was a good friend of my brother’s.  The three of them, they loved to drink, and so it was a perfect deal!  (laughs)  I felt really good about being able to....

STEIGER:  You got 'em all on the same trip?

WILSON:  On the same trip, yeah.

STEIGER:  So they could keep each other entertained.

WILSON:  Yeah, they kept each other entertained, and other people entertained also.  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Including you!

WILSON:  Yeah.  And Ernie had the distinction of falling off the boat in <Lava>, so that was good--my brother.

STEIGER:  Did he have to work at that, or how did that go?

WILSON:  Nah, he was on Marilyn’s boat, and somebody there just grabbed him and pulled him back in.  But when he talks about doing it, that’s one of the first things he mentions is fallin’ off the boat in <Lava>.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I took not my dad, but my mom and brother and sister, when the first time I accidentally got drawn, back when it was a lottery for a private permit.  So we went in the dead of winter.  I’d never done the bubble run before, and I missed it a little bit to the left.

WILSON:  Ooo-ooo!

STEIGER:  Me and my mom in the boat, you know.  We didn’t flip.

WILSON:  Good!

STEIGER:  We sat in there for a while.

WILSON:  Oh, did you really?

STEIGER:  She remembers that still.

WILSON:  I’ll bet!  Wow.  You know, I had a boat recirculate.  I took a motor trip with a paddle boat, and at <House Rock> I didn’t want to tie it on the back and tow it through, so I just threw it in the river and let it go, and it recirculated for about a half hour in the hole.

STEIGER:  You’re sittin’ down there scratchin’ your chin, goin’, "How’d I do that?!"

WILSON:  I’m goin’, "How in the hell are we gonna get this outta here?"

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Now, it seems to me....  Why were you takin’ a paddle boat?  Where did you get that cockamamie idea from?  Briggs, it seems like....  I remember somebody talkin’ about that, how you would bring a paddle boat, and you’d just put people in it every now and then, like for <Hermit>?

WILSON:  We did it at <Hermit> especially, and then if there was time, in some of the smaller--like up in <Marble Canyon> we’d do it sometimes.  And it really hangs on how much time we have to play around with it.  But yeah.

STEIGER:  You’d just put the people in and say, "You guys go for a little bit."

WILSON:  Yeah.  I had a bunch of paddles, and we’d pump up the paddle boat, and they could take off and paddle around with it.  God, they loved it.  It was neat.  I always wanted to have at least two boats when we did that thing at <Hermit>, and I wouldn’t do it with a one-boat trip.  We had a boat that would gather everybody at the bottom, because they always flipped.  (laughter)  I mean, we used to dump people.  We’d back up to the rapid, and everybody’d get on the back of the boat and they’d jump off and float the rapid.

STEIGER:  <Hermit>?

WILSON:  <Hermit>, yeah.  And that was a kick.  The people would just love that.  But on this one particular trip, the people got brought back to shore, and they first thing they were doin’ is they shouldered the boat and they started headin’ back upriver.  And I said, "What you guys doin’?"  "We’re gonna go do it again!"  I said, "Oh, no, you can’t, we don’t have time."  "We gotta do it again!  We gotta do it again!"  So they went and did it one more time.  But yeah, I don’t know, I did that for a while.  I don’t know what made me think of it.  We had the boats there, and nobody was usin’ 'em, so I guess maybe I thought I’d give it a try.

STEIGER:  Might as well.  (aside about dog)  Well, I know we’re missin’ somethin’ good.  Can’t think of what it is, though.

WILSON:  Yeah.  We may think of it later.

STEIGER:  All right, maybe we’ll just stop this for now, unless you can’t think of somethin??.

WILSON:  Not right off hand.  I don’t know why, but I can’t really.

STEIGER:  Oh, I know one!  Did we get into the Three Tinkers of <Flagstaff>:  Louie the butcher and....  What was that?

WILSON:  Back in the beginning, Lou worked out a deal with the Three Tinkers of <Flagstaff>.

STEIGER:  How did they get that moniker?

WILSON:  Oh, it was probably Richard Nielsen or Mike Castelli.  It was Louie the butcher, Guy the welder, and Glenn the motor man.  And Glenn the motor man was a guy that overhauled all the broken motors that I would bring in to him.  Louie the butcher worked for El Rancho Supermarket there in <Flagstaff>, which is not there anymore.  And they were open twenty-four hours, so what we would do is, the morning after we got off the river, we’d take the meat list in, the produce list, and the bread and dairy list in to El Rancho, and give it to each individual manager, and they’d get this stuff together for us.  And Louie was the one we liked the best, because he was just a character, and we’d say, "Okay, Louie, we need to have this and this, and we want this exact, this thick," and all this stuff.  And he’d just produce it.  He just had a good time doin’ it.  He just thought it was the greatest thing in the world.  So it was a kick.  And so he was one of the Tinkers.

	And then Guy the welder was the guy that built all these motor boxes.  When I got there, it was the last of the old motor frame mechanisms they had, which was kind of fallin’ apart.  I never actually got to see one.

STEIGER:  Because they’d all fallen apart by then!  (laughs)

WILSON:  They were all fallin’ apart by then, and they only had one or two--two of 'em probably.  And they’d come up with this design that they stuck with throughout the time that they were doin’ it.  And so Guy the welder put 'em together, and then we took all that stuff up to Lee’s Ferry and bolted the plywood on and everything, and painted 'em up at <Lee's Ferry>.

And then we had....  Let’s see, Glenn the motor man, Louie the butcher, and Guy the welder.  Those were the three guys.  They were the Three Tinkers of <Flagstaff>.  It’s just one of those things that we came up with, a personal....

STEIGER:  Key element of American River Touring Association’s <Grand Canyon> operation.

WILSON:  Yeah!  What other thing about those guys that was good, well now, Guy the welder always had the railroad caps with the bill, blue and white stripes.  He wore these caps, and when they got dirty, he just had a pile over there in the corner where he threw 'em.  I guess he just bought 'em by the case.  So we go in there one day, and Mike and Richard and I, I think--all three of us were in there, "God, it would be neat to get one of those hats."  And so we asked him, and he said, "Well sure, you can have all you want."  And so we took 'em and washed 'em and we started wearin’ 'em on the river.  (laughter)  I don’t think I even got any pictures of me wearin’ that hat, but I wore that hat for about a year and a half or two years.

	Glenn the motor man was another real character.  They were all characters, every one of 'em.  You could just classify 'em as real characters, born and raised in <Flagstaff>.  Well, Louie the butcher, he wasn’t; but the rest of 'em probably were.

	I guess I could talk a little bit about, you know, we bought food at El Rancho, and would usually go in around midnight when the store was pretty dead, because it was easy for two people or one person or something to just go down row after row, and we’d fill a cart up and go park it at a check stand, and go fill up another cart.  And we usually had ten to fifteen carts that we’d fill up.  And so we’d do that, and then we’d get checked out  We’d take everything to the back, where the back storage is and everything.  We’d take everything back there, and we brought our truck in the back and took our boxes, and we just loaded everything right there in the boxes, and we labeled the boxes and put it on the truck.

STEIGER:  Packed the food right at the grocery store?

WILSON:  Right at the grocery store, yeah.  We did that until they started deciding to buy bulk.  And then when we needed parts and supplies, we went to Babbitt Wholesale, and/or we went to a saddle shop in downtown <Flagstaff> that had all the hardware for saddles, that we also used for hookin’ our tubes and frames and everything all together.  And we were always goin’ to those two stores and buyin’ a lot of stuff.  One neat thing about Babbitt Wholesale is that they had 501 Levis for $4.50 a pair, which is a bargain.  I just wish now I’d have bought a thousand of 'em or something, you know.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  No kidding!

WILSON:  But that, and let’s see, what else?  You know, at one time--I guess it doesn’t hurt to just tell these just general off-the-wall things.  We had a time when none of the lights worked on the trailer, so it didn’t work goin’ up to Lee’s Ferry, but we didn’t need 'em for goin’ up there.  But when we came back off the river, we needed lights.  I tried to get the truck back before dark, but we just couldn’t make it, and it just got dark on the west end of <Flagstaff>, and I took the old highway into town, and drove through town, and came out the other side.  And I was out there by Camp Townsend, and every time a car would come up behind me....  Nowadays it wouldn’t be like this.  It was just late enough that there was no traffic hardly, and so anytime a car came behind me, I’d pull over, and the car would go by.  I pulled over this one time, and the car pulled in behind me, and I’m thinkin’, "Uh-oh, this isn’t good!"  But no red lights or anything.  So I’m lookin’ in the mirror and I realized it is a cop.  So I got out and he comes over and he says, "God, I’m glad you pulled over.  I hate those red flashing lights!"  (laughter)  But anyway, things didn’t always work quite right.  And I took that truck to the service station the next day, and the guy in there said, "Well, I see you came in to get 'em fixed."  (laughs)  The cop had already told him about it.  So they did fix it for us.  Actually, it was during that period of time I learned how to wire trailers.  After that, I decided I’d better figure that stuff all out.

STEIGER:  Save a little ticket money.

WILSON:  Yeah.  Yeah, the buyin’ the food.  That was the early days.  Later they expanded and made it more mechanized, and they had more different specialty shops they went to, to pick up their stuff.  There was a time on the motor trips where we used those blood boxes--military surplus blood boxes for an ice chest, which are just ridiculously terrible.  But on the motor trips, we could afford the room to have two of those boxes on one boat.  One of 'em we bought and just filled it with ice.

STEIGER:  What do those look like?  They had like a big lid that wasn’t on a hinge?

WILSON:  No, it was a hinged lid and had just a couple of cam locks that locked it down.  It wasn’t very much.  And a great big thick rubber gasket that went around.

STEIGER:  Were they insulated or somethin’ like that?

WILSON:  They were about that thick.  They were probably three inches thick, and they were aluminum.  Well actually, they were probably stainless steel is what they were.  And they were just crappy, they really were.  You know, when the meat started to thaw out in there, the blood would run out through the bottom of 'em and stuff, and we had stuff spoil in those at different times if we weren’t really, really careful with what was goin’ on.  And we started puttin’ dry ice in 'em, and that helped quite a bit.  And then of course later ARTA built these fiberglass boxes that fit the frame.  That was all for the oar trips.  But the motor trips pretty much....  Later we had some fiberglass boxes for those too.  But in the beginning, that’s what they were.  They gave us $100 for free spending money, and there were times when we just bought booze.  I don’t know where we bought the booze at now, but we’d just buy booze.  And we had this waterproof box with a bunch of booze, and then we had those big ice chests full of ice.  There was a deal where somebody would serve drinks, and somebody would cook the meals.  You could never get away with that now.

STEIGER:  No.  The county said everybody had to have a liquor license if they were gonna do that.

WILSON:  There was a time I was serving beer and I was underage.  Everybody was underage and we were servin’ beer to people.  You think about that and go, "Wow, that was pretty neat back then."

STEIGER:  Yeah, it was a lot more relaxed.

WILSON:  I don’t know, I think that’s about it for now.

STEIGER:  Okay, sounds good.  (tape paused)  Okay, here we go, now we’re rollin’ again ’cause we remembered some more.  Now it’s the thirtieth of October 2007.  Our lives are slipping away as we do this interview.

	We thought last night about the Wee Yellow and Steve Carothers, those would be worth talkin’ about.  So take it away, Allen.

WILSON:  The Wee Yellow was one of those Hamilton boats that went upriver.  What year was that?

STEIGER:  Like ’56 or something like that--’55, ’56, somewhere in there?  Big water.

WILSON:  Yeah.  One of 'em sunk in <Grapevine>.  The first couple three years I worked down there, that boat was layin’ in the bottom on the right side, at the bottom of the rapid.  Lots of trips we’d go by and the water was low enough that the whole works would be just layin’ there in the rocks and we could see it.  It was pretty cool.  And now, I’m learning a little bit about how it actually sunk there.  That’s one of those things, I got to see it quite often actually.

STEIGER:  That’s amazing.  I wonder if it went away, or if the water was just that much lower.

WILSON:  One year it disappeared.

STEIGER:  It did?

WILSON:  Yeah, it just disappeared, it wasn’t there anymore.

STEIGER:  So it was down low on the right, stickin’ out.

WILSON:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Kind of all buried in mud?

WILSON:  It was fast water where we were, so we were cruisin’ by and just lookin’.  It just looked like just a boat hull layin’ there.  I don’t remember it being covered with dirt and debris and stuff--at all.

STEIGER:  That’s amazing.  We were talkin’ about this last night.  I did this little trip with John Hamilton, and he told the story.  And I had heard from Don Neff, too, who had gotten a ride on it.  Don Neff was on some trip and they ran into him at <Phantom Ranch> and he got to go for a little joy ride.

WILSON:  Oh, I’ll be darned!

STEIGER:  But one of those guys, the story that I heard was, the way that that thingsank was they were goin’ up the rapid, and the guy who was drivin’ it just goosed it a little too much--which is really easy to do, I found out--just bustin’ onto the main tongue of the rapid, and he just gave it a little too much gas, and it got really airborne, which is really easy to do, and it came down in an arc, nose down, bow down, and it instantly sank.  I mean, it just perled right into the water.  It was instantly underwater, and that was it--it was gone, and they all just kind of floated out, and that was the end of that boat.  It was gone.

WILSON:  Totaled.

STEIGER:  Totaled.  It’s funny that it washed up down below, but I guess it would.

WILSON:  Yeah, it was right there.  It seems to me like that <Grapevine> has a constriction at the bottom.  It was just above that.

STEIGER:  Pretty wild.

WILSON:  Yeah.  You know, another thing I got to thinking about was sometime--I was doing motor trips still--there was a guy that got one of those boats.  Apparently they left the boats here in the States.  I don’t know what the whole story was with that.  He told me, actually, how he came by the boat.  I hate that my brain is so fouled up and I can’t remember these people’s names, but he was on the river for weeks and weeks and weeks, and he kept havin’ lots and lots of problems with the engine.  I actually brought him oil one time, and then he had to do an overhaul job at <Phantom Ranch>.  And it was because of all the things that happened with him, that the park service decided to limit the horsepower on the river to fifty.

STEIGER:  Wasn’t that John Cross Jr.?

WILSON:  Yeah!  It was!  It was.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I heard that story too.

WILSON:  Yeah, I came across him a lot.

STEIGER:  Venture was the name of the boat, right?  "The Voyage of the Venture"?

WILSON:  Oh, was it?  I don’t recall anymore.

STEIGER:  It was like this saga...

WILSON:  Oh man, he had trouble.

STEIGER:  Terrible trouble.  Broke out the windshield in <Hance>, and hurt himself and had to come back, and just had all kinds of hell.

WILSON:  Yeah.  It was quite a story.  I mean, I felt really sorry for the poor guy, but I thought, "God, it sounds like he’s doing this probably on a shoestring."

STEIGER:  Yeah, somebody was tryin’ to tell him somethin’.

WILSON:  But as far as those jet boats are concerned, that’s my experience with 'em.

STEIGER:  I thought it was worth gettin’ down into the record, just ’cause I’d never heard--nobody that I’ve ever talked to even mentioned that you could see it down there ever.  It struck me that "A," that’s just kind of indicative of how low the water was that you were seein’; and "B," it was just interesting to know that it was....  I thought maybe it was still down there or somethin’.

WILSON:  Well, I’m sure it’s still in a deep pool.

STEIGER:  It didn’t wash all the way out of there, did it?!

WILSON:  I don’t think so.  I don’t know, were they wood-hulled?  They were wood-hulled, weren’t they?  Yeah, it could have broken up.  Kind of surprised that....  Well, it probably was pretty well broke.  But it looked like just a full-blown boat layin’ there.  I always wanted to spend some time and go in there when the water was really low and grab ahold of it with ropes and try to drag it along.  (laughs)  But I never did, never had time to mess with that.

STEIGER:  And Carothers.

WILSON:  Oh yeah, Steve Carothers.  Did you ever know him?

STEIGER:  Oh yeah.  I’ve done a big interview with him.  I haven’t transcribed it yet, but it was very good, I thought.

WILSON:  Oh yeah!  Now, there’s another character!  Steve.

STEIGER:  Smart son of a gun.

WILSON:  Very smart, yeah.  I just did one trip, and Peter Winn was on that trip.  And Peter and I, both of us knew him fairly well, and we liked to tease him quite a bit.  And Steve could take teasing pretty good, but we maxed him out one morning.  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Yeah?  How’d you do that?

WILSON:  Well, what’s the little camp above <Havasu>, that’s got the little dripping spring?  Last Chance.  Yeah.  So we were camped there and there were four oar boats, four snout rigs, all sittin’ on those little ledges, and they were just hangin’ off into the water, and it was an easy push.  So Peter and I were pushin’ the boats in, and Steve, when we got to his boat, he jumps up and runs over there and he says, "Let me help."  So I’m in the middle, Steve’s on the right, Peter’s on the left, and we start pushin’, and those tubes are scrapin’ on the rock there, makin’ some noise, and I start goin’, "ssssss."  And Peter, as soon as I ran out of breath, Peter picks up and goes, "sssssss."  Then I went, "ssssss," and we’re still pushin’.  Steve’s, "Oh, shit!  What do you think?"  And Peter goes, "Well, sounds like maybe there’s a little leak, but I wouldn’t worry about it too much."  And we both just kept goin’ back and forth, and it went into the water.  Of course when those boats fall into the water, there’s a lot of bubbles and stuff come up.  We were pretty mean, actually.  And we’re goin’, "Oh, shit, look at the air comin’ outta there now!"  And he was really paranoid about it.  So we rigged his boat, and he kept tappin’ the tube with his foot.  This is terrible!  And Peter and I are chucklin’ to ourselves.  And we wound up, we went down to <Havasu>.  And Steve was doin’ a trip to take people on a nature--I don’t know what you call that, but it was a nature hike, and explain the stuff to people.  And he was back and forth occasionally.  Peter and myself stayed down on the boat, and another passenger who had no interest was there.  And we never thought much about him, but he was over on another boat, and Peter and I were layin’ there, and every once in a while we’d say, "We’d better go let a little air outta that boat."

STEIGER:  (laughs)  Just to kind of make the point?

WILSON:  Yeah.  So we went over there and we started bleedin’ air out.  And what we were doin’ is we’d bleed the air out, just right before the tube started to lose it’s shape.  We should never have done that either.  And so the first time Steve comes down there and he jumps up on that tube and just falls flat on his ass.  "Oh, shit!"  And he gets off the ground and he’s goin’, "God, it has really lost a lot of air!"  He hadn’t done many trips, and he’s goin’, "What should we do?"  "Well, you know, Steve, why don’t you pump it back up, and we’ll pay a little more attention to it."  And so he gets the pump out, and he screws the thing in.  We’re not raisin’ a hand to help him.  (laughs)  And he’s pumpin’ it up, and this passenger’s kind of watchin’ all this.  And so he leaves, and we immediately get up and go let some more air out.  (laughter)  He comes back with more people the next time--he’s sort of closin’ down his show-and-tell thing.  And so he comes over this time, and he just kicks it.  "Oh, shit!  It is really flat again!  This is horrible!"  And we’re tellin’ him, "Well, why don’t you pump it up, and we’ll work on it at camp."  And so we see this guy come over, and he’s talkin’ to Steve for a little bit, and Steve goes, "You sons of bitches!"  (laughter)  "I’m gonna kill ya’!"  He really, really did not appreciate that at all.

STEIGER:  That’s hilarious.

WILSON:  I thought it was a pretty good one.  And, you know, actually, I wish I would have worked more with Peter, ’cause we would have had more practical jokes for other people, but we didn’t.

	I guess I could just go on and on, tellin’ about different stupid stuff I’ve done, but after all, it’d make me look like I’m awful stupid, so....

STEIGER:  Oh, I don’t think so.  Sounds like humor was always on board.

WILSON:  It was for me, that’s for sure.  Water fighting was a big deal--just a big, big deal.  I even did a major attack on the second boat one time in the bottom of Crystal, down in the lower part.  That was fun.  I just killed my engine and started drifting, and the other boat came over, and my whole group just bombarded 'em.

STEIGER:  Had buckets already full?

WILSON:  Yeah.  Well, you know what we did?  We used Number 10 cans, small plastic buckets, because the big five-gallon buckets were dangerous.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  You could lose 'em in the river too.

WILSON:  Yeah, and you can lose 'em in the river.  So I always tried to collect enough small containers for people.  I used a peanut can, and they were really good.  You could really get people wet with that.  So the water fights were a big deal.  And then with Tim Means, we had a lot of back-and-forth.  Even after I went over to oar trips, I still would run into him.  That ended when we attacked him in camp one morning, and that was a little too much.  We overdid our stay with the water fighting deal.

I don’t know much else, right off the top, that may be of actual important.

STEIGER:  Well....  I’m gonna shut this thing off for a minute.  (recording paused)  Well, let’s see, I guess we already got all this stuff.  I was gonna ask, big picture, <Grand Canyon> in your life, where would you put it?  I mean, here we are, talkin’ about this thing, it’s been thirty years since you worked down there, but you’ve done what, how many private trips would you say you’ve done, since you quit workin’?

WILSON:  Probably ten.

STEIGER:  So you go every so many years?

WILSON:  Yeah, for a long time we went every two years.  Really, just about every two years, and then it tapered off.  The last trip, I think, was about ten years ago, probably.  Eight years ago!  Because I took a group of people in just regular little personal rafts from <Gold Beach> here, probably seven or eight years ago.

STEIGER:  This next one that you’re plannin’, are you thinkin??? motors just 'cause it’s just a little easier to handle logistically?

WILSON:  Well, you know, I don’t think that I’m in good enough shape.  I’d have to do a lot of stuff to get ready to run an oar boat down there.  It would be tempting.  Maybe that’s what’ll happen.  Terry’s kind of interested in doin’ a motor rig, because of the ease, and it’s a bigger boat, and you stay a little drier, and that sort of stuff.

STEIGER:  We didn’t get it on tape, but we talked about this at dinner last night, after we turned the camera off.  Allen and these guys were on a trip, a private trip with a whole bunch of boatmen, and they were down at <Crystal> when the Canyoneers boat flipped on the left, which was quite spectacular.  I guess that got everybody’s attention.  (laughs)

WILSON:  Certainly got our attention!  Well, we saw the aftermath, because we were camped upstream that night, and the helicopter traffic was absolutely phenomenal that day.  They were flyin’ the people out.

STEIGER:  I was gonna try to get something cosmic out of you, regarding just Big Picture: <Grand Canyon>.  Where would you put that in your life?

WILSON:  Well, you know, it’s the peak.  I hit the peak at a young age!  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Yeah, goldang it.

WILSON:  And it was totally by accident.  It’s something that I’m just incredibly glad that I did.  I don’t know...  I can’t really...  I guess I’m just not retrospective enough to see how or think about how it really affected me.  All I know is that as the years went by, after I quit commercial trips, if I couldn’t get the time off from a job, I’d just flat quit, and go do the <Grand Canyon> and then come back and find another job, or sometimes they’d hired me back.  So it was very important to me.  As I got older, and actually as Terry and my lives became more complicated with life,we did fewer <Grand Canyon> trips.  One reason was there was about eight years of Chetco River stuff, which is a pretty good chunk of time.  And now we’re done with that.  We are taking care of my mother; trying to work through all the stuff that we need to do with her, and we’re lookin’ at tryin’ to do another <Grand Canyon> trip.  So we’ll see what happens.

	You know, I never really thought too much about it, but I was a hyper kid, and I was pretty hyper down there, and I never thought too much about it, until Terry got to workin’ with kids in school, and I started hearing about what they do, and I see that I fit into that very active category.  And I like to have fun.  I like to tease people.  I got that from my dad.  And so those trips to me were fun and educational.  I wanted to make 'em educational for the people on our trip, and have fun.  It was always fun.  I loved to get a bunch of kids and start throwin’ 'em in the river if I could.  (laughter)  Though one time I picked the littlest one because the others I knew I couldn’t do anything with, and I was walkin’ beside the load, and he was sitting there, and I just asked him if I could go by, and he pulled his feet back.  At the last second, I figured I’d go in too, and I grabbed him, and just jerked him, and he picked me up and threw me over into the river, upside down!  (laughter)  So that was the end of....  And then he went around steppin’ on my fingers so I couldn’t get back in!

STEIGER:  He wasn’t gonna let you back in!  Messed with the wrong little kid!

WILSON:  I did.  And he was a little one!  People thoroughly enjoyed that kind of stuff.

STEIGER:  To me, it’s like, take a boatload full of people and go down into the <Grand Canyon>, try to have a good time.  Dirty job, but somebody’s gotta do it.

WILSON:  Somebody has to do it, yeah.

STEIGER:  Try to have a nice time.

WILSON:  I probably mentioned it, but I carried a library just stock full of informative books.  They were open to anybody at any time.  People utilized it.  It was pretty neat.

I can’t say that I got a cosmic thing from it, other than it was the top end of my life, and always somewhere along the line I think about it and try to relate to it somehow in my life today.

STEIGER:  That’s why I’m hangin’ on by my fingernails, is it finally occurred to me, "You know, I think this is probably as good as it’s gonna get."  (laughter)

WILSON:  You’ve been there a long time, though.

STEIGER:  I have!  Just because.  I keep retiring, but then going, "I’m not having near as much fun as I used to."  I know that it’s not gonna be that long before they won’t let me go anymore I think--relatively speaking.  But I’m gonna keep tryin’, as long as I can.

WILSON:  Yeah, you got to.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you gotta keep goin’, that’s for sure.  Or just keep goin’ in life, whatever it is that you’re doin’.

WILSON:  Yeah, that’s right.  Well, I’ve gotta tell ya’, I’ve tried a few different things.

STEIGER:  Give me the list.

WILSON:  Well, it’s a small list.  You know, construction was the number one thing.  In the winters, when I was living in <Oakland California>, I was living there with my girlfriend Marilyn at that time.  I just put an ad in the Oakland Tribune for odd job carpenter work, five bucks an hour, and I was two dollars an hour under everybody else.  I had no license or anything, and I didn’t know anything about carpenter work, so I went to a bookstore and found a really good book, and I’d just keep it in the car with me.  People would call, and I’d talk to 'em, and I’d decide whether I wanted to go look at their job, and I’d go look at the job and I’d say, "Well, let me think about that a little while."  And I’d go out in my car and I’d look in the book and see what it would take to do it.  So that’s how I learned a little bit about carpenter work there.  And then later Richard Nielsen, one of my friends I worked with on the river a lot, he was in construction and got me a job workin’ for a big construction company, and so I worked on a building in <Larkspur>: Victoria Station, it’s gone now.  I commuted a long ways for that.  And then after that, I just got into construction.  And I went to <Alaska>.  Actually, I went to <Alaska>, and I was gonna be in the septic tank business with Hugh Wingfield, the guy that really taught me stuff about the river.  That turned into kind of a failure.  So I got to see <Alaska>.  I worked as a cat mechanic in a gold mine up on the Yukon River for most of that summer and they had one of the last bucket dredges remaining in the <U.S.>  I worked on that a lot.  That was pretty incredible, actually.  Then I moved to <Houston>.  I got married to the lady I was living with there, and we moved to <Gold Beach>, where I was born.  And then I got into construction, and pretty much stayed there until I decided I needed to make a change, and I got into website design.  I quit all construction, and I just sat in front of a computer for ten hours a day for about five years.  I just got to the point where I couldn’t do that anymore, and so I went back to construction.  I’ve always been into photography.  I’ve got a few pictures strung around the house.  And so in the eighties, I spent hours photographing and making prints, black-and-white, and I made a calendar.  We sold enough calendars to pay for the printing costs!  Curry County is a tough place to do business.

	So what else?  Oh!  Now I’m into digital stuff.  Actually, I’m getting ready now to change my life a little bit more.  My mom and dad, when they moved here in 1939, had a large format, really like a cheap Brownie-type camera, but it took really, really clear negative pictures.  And so I’m gonna start scannin’ those.  Great shots of the countryside in the early forties here--like ’39, ’40, ’41.

STEIGER:  That could be a good book or calendar or somethin’.

WILSON:  I’m gonna do that, yeah.  I’ll figure out what to do with 'em.  So, you know, I guess it’s not that many things, but....



