CLAUDIA BLAIR INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.6

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. We're at the Dinnebito Trading Company in <Page Arizona>. It's Monday, February 9, 1998, about 4:00 p.m. We're with Claudia Blair. Brad Cole from NAU and Lew Steiger are also present.

Underhill: Claudia, we'll begin with your background. When and where were you born?

Blair: I was born in <Hindman Kentucky>, September 16, 1928. My father I think was teaching in <North Carolina> at the time, and it must have been the custom in that era for the lady to come back home to mama, so my grandfather's house had burned down, and they were in the process of rebuilding and they were renting a small house in <Hindman> at the time, and that's where I was born. There was no hospital in the town. We did have a doctor rather than a midwife, but later on that property was bought in conjunction with the high school, and it was just adjoining the high school property, and they converted it into the lunch room. That's where lunches were cooked and served. So I could tell the children, the kids, that I was born in the lunch room! (laughter)

Underhill: And Claudia, what was your maiden name?

Blair: Caler, C-A-L-E-R. Not many Calers spell it that way, but we did. My father was from <Georgia>.

Underhill: How big a town?

Blair: The town of <Hindman> I think, at that time, was about 600 or 700 people.

Underhill: And how long did you stay there?

Blair: Well, from the time I was born, I wouldn't say very long at that time. And Daddy taught schools at various places within the area later on, and we moved [to] neighboring counties and such, and finally wound up in a rural community about 4½ to 5 miles from <Hindman>, and that's where I grew up, say from five years old through high school, and I came to high school on the school bus, and my father at that time was teaching in the high school, so we came together (chuckles) on the school bus.

Underhill: When you were growing up, what did you hope would happen in your life? What kinds of options did you think you had?

Blair: (sigh) I don't know that I really thought that far ahead and had any options. I think we all just did what everybody else did. I certainly never (chuckles) dreamed of coming to an Indian reservation and a trading post. I didn't even know there was such a thing at that time. (laughter)

Underhill: And how did you meet Elijah, your husband?

Blair: His sophomore year of high school, he came and stayed in a settlement school in <Hindman>, and I was already a student, a bused student, going to the same high school, so we met in high school.

Underhill: And then he went on for military service?

Blair: After we graduated, he went into the army. I think he figured he would be drafted, so he beat that and chose what he wanted to do. So he volunteered, went into the army, and that summer I went to Berea College there in <Kentucky>, and rather than take courses--Berea was a school that operated you worked out most of your tuition. Everybody at the school did have a job with the college. So I worked there, and then the following fall--I went to school there for a year, and then decided I'd change and go to a business school. I guess I was in a hurry, wanted to get out quicker. And I was almost out, but then just before I finished that, Lige came home and we decided it was time to get married. He was gonna come back out here, he told me, whether or no. I later found out he had been accepted, I think at the University of Ohio. He would have gone there, but he kind of fibbed just a bit and said that he was gonna come back out here, and I finally decided, well, we'd get married, and that's what we'd do. And I knew nothing about it, absolutely nothing. I didn't know what I was coming into.

Underhill: And what did you think when you first arrived?

Blair: When I first arrived on the reservation, I guess, it was at his brother's place on the highway between <Cortez> and <Shiprock>, a little place called <Mancos Creek>. And it was one of the ugliest places I've ever seen. It's just clay hills. There was hardly anything growing, and I felt like crying. They had enclosed what had been a screened-in back porch, but it was now enclosed and made a bedroom out there. And when I woke up, I looked up to kind of a high little window there, and I saw this face which--just a part of a face. It looked more like a monkey than a face, really--like a human, you know. And he was a real character, this fellow was. He wasn't the best- lookin' Navajo that you'd ever meet. It was scary. I thought, "Gee, what is this?!" (chuckles) But after we stayed there, Lige already had a job at <Toadlena>, and when we went there, it was right up near a mountain, and it was much prettier, and there was more people. You know, much more satisfactory than <Mancos Creek> had been. (laughter)

Underhill: When you did take your first trading post then as a couple, what were your living conditions like?

Blair: Well, now, we were just--he was just a worker there. Occasionally they would call me down to help a little bit, but seldom at this trading post. We didn't stay very long there. There was a duplex that had been built kind of up on the hill above the trading post which half of it they were letting a couple of Mormon missionary boys live in, and the other half was our apartment. And we lived there, we came out in July, and we left in November to go to <Mexican Water>. And that was the first trading post that we actually operated by ourselves.

Underhill: And was that 1949 that you went to <Mexican Water>?

Blair: No, it would have been almost November of 1948.

Underhill: And what was <Mexican Water> like?

Blair: Lots of sand, for one thing. (laughs) It was very isolated at the time, and the living quarters was quite nice. Part of it was real old, a lot of it had been remodeled. A huge living room. It was really almost like two rooms, with an archway in between, with hardwood floors. And then the bedrooms, they were an older part. We did have running water and a bathroom in that place. The other place, I believe we had at <Toadlena> we had running water in the kitchen, but the bathroom was not completed. We had to go down to the trading post quarters to the bathroom, and for showers and such. But I grew up in <Kentucky> in very rural conditions, and we didn't have electricity until I was fifteen, so some of the things at <Mexican Water> was actually more modern than what I had been accustomed to in my earlier life. We had ample room. The stove there in the kitchen was a combination of propane and coal, so it heated with the coal and heated the hot water in the reservoir, and then you had the propane burners on the other side, which was very convenient. We had a propane-operated refrigerator. It was very nice--until the wind quit blowin' and the windmill quit goin' around, and sometimes we'd run out of water. That was very difficult. If we knew it ahead of time, we drew water and saved it until we could get the repairs done. Sometimes in the winter I even melted snow.

Underhill: What were conditions like for the Navajo customers?

Blair: Well, they were just their typical hogans-- most of them fairly distant from the trading post. There were a few that lived fairly close around, but there was very, very few pickup trucks at that time. Most of them came horseback or in wagons. If they came from a great distance, they'd come and stay overnight in our complimentary hogan by the trading post. And they may trade for two to three days, if they had a great distance to go. But there were no houses, as such, you know, as they live in today. They were all hogans.

Underhill: How did you get your news of the outside world?

Blair: We always had a radio, which at least we had news from that, and we had magazines that we got regularly, and we had people coming through. There was always salesmen and people who hauled the merchandise out. Occasionally, you know, even on those terribly bad roads, there would be tourists driving through, adventurous people. And there were people to talk to. And at <Mexican Water> also, it was only about fifteen miles, I think, from Red Mesa, where Elijah's brother and sister-in-law operated a trading post. And Sundays we could get together. And then a little later on, the people that operated the pumping station at <Boundary Butte>, a couple from <Arkansas> that became very close friends, very dear to us. They would come down and have dinner with us, or we'd go up and have dinner with them in the evenings, and play canasta, and had quite a good time with them. It was just really fun times. There was a missionary couple also [who] came later. They didn't approve of our playing canasta. (chuckles) But they were people that you could talk to, and we got out, actually went to town maybe once a month.

Underhill: Do you speak Navajo?

Blair: I don't really. I can't say I really speak Navajo. I know words, I know some phrases, I understand much more than I can speak--but I never became fluent, not like Elijah.

Underhill: And do you have a nickname?

Blair: Their nicknames are not exactly nicknames. They described you, and they did this among themselves as well. They usually called me their "in-law," their "daughter-in-law." Even little toddlers come up and they'd hear their parents say "Shizháá’áád," so they would call me the same thing. (laughter)

Underhill: How would you describe the trade activity--what transpired between folks at the trading post and Navajo customers--to someone who is not terribly familiar with it? How did it work?

Blair: Karen, now you're really getting into a difficult and complex question, to make them understand it. If you haven't lived it, it's extremely hard to understand. When we first went to the trading post, of course we knew from the owners before who their customers had been, who were the ones that were trustworthy, that you could credit, and to how much. This was passed on to the new traders always. And you set limits, sometimes you might go over, but as you got to know them, you said, "Well, you can trade 'X' number of dollars until lamb season or wool season" or what have you. And of course anything extra that they needed in between was either by pawn or by bringing in a rug or a basket or a buckskin--sheep and goat hides, which brought very, very little--piñon nuts, the years that there were a lot of them--cows and horses, an old ewe, whatever that they had they would let go of in between, they would bring in, in between the two main seasons, which was wool season in the spring and lamb season in the fall. I don't know, does that explain?

Underhill: Uh-huh, the basics.

Blair: The basics of it.

Underhill: And what did the trader do with livestock? And what was the volume of livestock in a typical year?

Blair: Well, now, I'm sure Elijah has given you all that. He knows statistics and numbers so much better than I. I don't remember things like that. I remember happenings, but not numbers, dates, and what have you. But a lot of times, the owner of the trading post, we were just working for him at that time, he had a big truck that he'd bring out, and he would load up a couple of cows or horses or old ewes, what have you, and take them to a sale barn. But at first they trailed the sheep from the trading post to <Farmington>, the closest railhead, and we hired Navajos to herd them, and we went to resupply them with food and check and be sure that all the sheep were there each evening. There were a lot of them. I don't want to give numbers, I'm not good at that. We had to put them in the corrals, and sometimes it would rain terribly, and the muck would get so deep, and sheep would get-- they're dumb--they would get down, get sick, or what have you--they just give up and die, they don't fight for their lives. And one year I remember they moved them all into my backyard, right outside our bedroom window. If that wasn't music to go to sleep by! (laughter) And we had branded the sheep as we bought them with paint. We had our brand, and I was involved in that. Many times they'd hold a sheep while I'd hold the branding iron dipped in a paint and stamp it. And I used to think, "Boy, if my old friends back in <Kentucky> could see me now!"

Underhill: The trading post really was the center of the community. (

Blair: It was.) You mentioned happenings. What kinds of activities took place around the trading posts?

Blair: Activities? Well, you know they came there, they knew this was a meeting place for everybody. If they hadn't seen other Navajos for a while, they knew they would see people they knew at the trading post. This was kind of a social event in itself, to come to the trading post and visit. And you got to know each individual that did trade with you. Occasionally I guess they would hold meetings near the trading post, outside the trading post or something--before they had the chapter houses, when they would move into those. Lots of times there were the Navajos that lived close by, there might be a squaw dance or their puberty ceremony. That would go on nearby. What else?

Cole: Were you and Elijah invited to any of those ceremonies or dances?

Blair: Sometimes. Sometimes, yes. I know one Navajo at <Aneth> lived just down over the hill next to the river, and when one of his daughters had their puberty ceremony, they asked us to come. We went down in the evening and stayed for a while. And we went to a few squaw dances. And of course at first they were very eery and weird to me before I realized the significance and what it meant to them. There's sings for illnesses--they didn't usually invite you to that. That was very personal.

Underhill: What do you think the Anglo folks need to understand about Navajo culture, based on your experiences?

Blair: Well, I think they need to realize that they are a different culture, and they have a right to a different culture. I feel that they need to respect that culture, and not really try to change it, unless they want to change, unless they want help. If they ask for help in a certain area, fine, but I don't think it should be forced or imposed on them. I believe all of us, if we turn the situation around and think of people coming in and trying to change our culture, our religion, our ways of living, we'd resent it. And I'm sure they resented it, too. I think we need to respect all people for what they are. You don't have to become one of them, but you need to respect it and give them the right to their way of living.

Underhill: How do you think--and this happened, of course, at Dinnebito--that the Navajo-Hopi land dispute, or Navajo relocation, impacted trade, especially in this part of the reservation?

Blair: Well, of course I didn't live at Dinnebito. I was gone before that. Even before <Aneth> I had moved in with the children. So I wasn't there all the time like Elijah was. But he did come home, and we talked and discussed things. And it seemed that after the impact of the relocation, when they actually started moving them to different places, he would come home sometimes, quite depressed, because a family that he had really liked and had good business relations with, would be the very ones that they had moved off. And as this happened more and more and more, then of course there was less business. And as he always said, his very best customers were moved away. You couldn't do the credit business that you had done before. And it became unfeasible, really, to stay there, as isolated as it was, as hard as it was to get your supplies and to really get out into the outside world. You know, it was a long ways from Dinnebito to <Cortez>. If he had not had his airplane, he wouldn't have been home very much at all. And he talked for years about whether he should or shouldn't get out, and yet I think he felt committed to the people, and they to him. They wanted him to be there. He almost felt like he was deserting them in many ways. So he stayed there longer than he really should have, from an economic point of view.

Underhill: And when did you move to <Cortez> with the children?

Blair: [In] 1960 or 1961. Vonda was born in 1955, when she went to school, we had already started building the house, so I did move in when the house was finished about probably the fall of 1961, when she started school. Kathy had stayed with my mother and father in town during the week, and then come down on the weekends to be with us. I felt like it was too much to ask. I thought that was too much to ask, but then definitely with two children, I could not think that that was right, to have them take care of two children in school. So we moved in then, and Jim was just a baby.

Cole: Did you spend summers or anything out at Dinnebito?

Blair: Not really spend summers. There were a few occasions that I would go down with Lige, but most of the time he'd been there all week, and he was ready to come home, and that's where the kids were, the kids' friends were, where everything that was going on in their lives [was]. So when the weekend came up, he was ready to come home and be there. So we didn't go down very frequently.

Underhill: When you were there, when Kathy was small.... First of all, I should ask you where Kathy was born. She's your oldest?

Blair: Kathy was the only one that was born in <Farmington>. The other two were born in <Cortez>. We were at <Mexican Water>, and I went in and stayed, I guess, with--I must have stayed with the owners of the trading post, Roscoe and Ruthie McGee.

Underhill: And what year was Kathy born?

Blair: She was born in 1951. And I had to stay, you know, the last three weeks or so--actually, it didn't pan out quite as long as I thought I'd have to stay, because she came just a little bit early.

Underhill: And she grew up, the first three or four years, there?

Blair: Well, after she was born, we came to <Flagstaff> and Elijah worked as a checker at the Navajo Ordinance Depot for almost a year. And we did this because the three McGee brothers owned <Mexican Water>. They did offer to sell him a part, but he knew that the store was not really big enough to make a good living for four people, and he would be required to be there. He had no chance to advance any further than that. So he decided at that time--he had learned to speak Navajo quite well, and he felt that he had learned how to operate a trading post, and he said that he would go down and work in town in <Flagstaff>. And he said, "But I won't go back on the reservation unless I can go on as an owner." And he says it was seven months, I think, that we stayed in <Flagstaff>. And each month, there would be one or two offers to go to a trading post. Most of them would say, "Well, you come and work for a year, and then we'll talk about it." And he'd say, "No, I won't do that. I've made this declaration that I will not go back until I'm a part owner in a store." So he held out until the offer to go to <Aneth Utah>, came up. And the fellow was so desperate--his family lived in town in <Cortez>--he was so desperate to get somebody to run the store, that he said, "Okay, I will sell you a third of the store." And that's when we moved back to the trading post.

Underhill: And while you were at <Mexican Water>, what was your role with the trading post?

Blair: I don't know that I had a role, per se, Karen. I went in and worked whenever they needed extra help. There is not a lot of people on a lot of days that came to the trading post, because they did live quite a ways away. And it might be very slow days, and he might not need me some days, but then when it was busy, then I was expected to go in, which I did. When the main owner of the store, Roscoe McGee, who had hired us, came out, he stayed with us while he was making his rounds of the stores and checkin' them all out. And I was basically a housewife and then a part- time worker whenever needed. This is what was expected. When Roscoe offered us the job, he made it very clear that I would work whenever needed.

Underhill: What kind of duties did you perform when you were in the store?

Blair: I did the same thing Elijah did. I traded with the Indians. They'd come in and start.... We had these little account books, and first they might buy some cinnamon rolls and a can of pop. But you just left it. You put their name at the top of the page, and they indicated they would be back later. Somebody else would come in, you'd start a new one. And you may have several in the same account pad, going at the same time. You'd leave a little space so you could keep adding to it. They would keep coming in and buy a few things at a time and go back out and say they'd be back later. Eventually then, when they'd get ready to go home, they would finish, and you would add up their account and tear off the carbon and give it to them, and put the other one in the McCaskey [phonetic spelling] system.

Underhill: Now, what is the McCaskey system?

Blair: Well, it was just a big metal.... I don't know how to explain it. Didn't Elijah tell you about McCaskey system, Karen?

Underhill: No.

Blair: Well, it was a metal case that had the leaves, which had a place for the different accounts, across, all the way through, and then there'd be another leaf and it would have it. And you had it organized like that, as alphabetically, I guess, as you could. You tore off the one you kept of the account pad, and put it in their slot, then gave them a carbon copy.

Underhill: And both men and women had credit at the trading post?

Blair: No, usually it was just in one name. Even though it was a matriarchal system, most of the time it was in the man's name, even though the women may say they own the sheep, they did the weaving and whatsoever. And occasionally a weaver would come in and she'd say, well, she wanted what they called a t’áá sahdii or separate account, and you might make her a separate account on the rug, and she would trade toward the price of the rug. And then when she came in, you would settle up. If there was more left, then you would pay her whatever was left.

Underhill: And what were the popular items you carried for men and for women?

Blair: Well, of course the most popular was all the food items, which they bought. You know, flour and shortening and coffee and sugar and these things, in huge quantities, and all the other food items that they’d buy. But then we also carried what they loved, the Pendleton shawls and robes, whenever they could afford it. Just like their sheep, this was a prestigious thing with them, their shawls and robes meant a lot, and it was a way of high standing and recognition to them.

Underhill: Do you remember offhand a general price range for a Pendleton?

Blair: At that time, I really don't, Karen. I know that they've increased in price over the years, but I can't remember what the price was at that time.

Underhill: Who did most of the buying? Was it the men or the women?

Blair: If I remember, they did it pretty much together. I would say the women probably bought most of it.

Underhill: Are there any artisans, weavers, or silversmiths who stand out in your mind that you worked with?

Blair: We seldom bought directly from the silversmiths; the weavers, we did. I remember Susie Claw at <Mexican Water> that wove a pretty good rug. At <Aneth>, they didn't do as much weaving, not as fine a weaving as they did some of the other trading posts. Elijah worked with them, and I'm sure it did improve over the time, but he did more of it at Dinnebito, and I was not there. Of course we do have rugs in our home of his favorite weavers, particularly, and I'm sure that he mentioned Rose Dan, who really stood out in his mind. And we've had rugs from Rose Dan. Marie Watson was another excellent weaver. But there were a lot of them: the Shepard family had several good weavers in the Shepard family.

Underhill: While you were there at <Mexican Water>, are there any humorous things that happened that you recall?

Blair: Oh, I'm sure!

Underhill: Right on the spot?! (laughs heartily)

Blair: (laughs) Oh, Karen, I don't really want to tell you some of them! (laughter)

Underhill: That's what makes it a good story! (laughter)

Blair: Oh, I remember one old lady... Her husband was an old man we called Short Hair, and he worked around the trading post and helped us. He made us some Navajo moccasins one time. Unlike most Navajos being non- demonstrative, particularly to an Anglo, he came in the house to try to fit me. Mine were too little, and he had put wet sand in them and buried them for a while to try to stretch them. And he came in to help me get them on and see if they were gonna fit. And then he reached down, I think, and in Navajo called me his daughter or something, kind of patted me, put his arm around me and patted me on the shoulder, which was kind of an unusual gesture from the Navajo. He was always very caring with Kathy. The Navajos liked the children, and they were very, very kind and kind of watched them. They were really on the lookout for them. We never had a fear of anything bad happening. Very different today. You wouldn't be as nonchalant about it, but at that time there was no fear from the Indians, none whatsoever.

Underhill: Did Kathy learn any Navajo words when she was small?

Blair: Not when she was real little. She didn't learn any English words that quickly either. I think we left <Mexican Water> before she--oh, I know, before she was talking. And then we went to <Aneth> when she was about two. There she picked up a few words, usually like "no good" and words like that, that she would hear. I guess Vonda picked up a few, too. And then Jim later on, when we'd go down to Dinnebito with his dad during the summers, he learned.

Underhill: Did you feel that you were accepted by the Navajo customers and the community?

Blair: I felt that I was accepted, as much as they would accept you. I think that you know that you're an Anglo and they aren't. They know that, and there is definitely a difference. But they were never unkind, they were never unfriendly because of this. You were accepted as the trader's wife, but not necessarily as one of them. Elijah comes close, but you were different. We are different. They knew it, we knew it, but it was all right. We didn't dislike each other because of it.

Underhill: What characteristics do you think the traders--at least the ones you've met--have in common?

Blair: There must have been a personality thing, or they wouldn't have chosen to stay in an isolated place like that and do what we did. So there must have been characteristics that would be similar. And as I said, Elijah and I grew up in very rural <Kentucky>. We didn't live in a fast social life, like people maybe do in town. I think the rural life anywhere, there's similarities to our life in the country, and their lives on the reservation. So it was not so difficult to accept, and I suppose that a lot of the traders came from similar backgrounds. I don't really know the answer to that question.

Underhill: And you may not have ever known a bad trader. But what do you think it takes to be a good trader?

Blair: Oh, I think it takes integrity, interest in them as a people and as a culture and what they expect, and what you can give in return. You can't always live according to their expectations. If you had, you'd have gone broke real quickly. You had to understand these things, and why, how it came about. I think a willingness to learn their language and converse, there's always, in any culture, anywhere we've traveled, I think if you tried to say a word or a few words in their language, it's always accepted with pleasure, really. And I'm sure that the fact that we tried, although we made a lot of mistakes and got laughed at and what have you, that.... I do think that just knowing them, learning all you could about them, without trying to put them down or degrade them. But I do think that integrity is a big thing, in bein' a good businessperson in any situation, really.

Underhill: Elijah talked a little about this, too, but you mentioned expectations. What did the Navajos expect the trader to contribute to the community?

Blair: What he wanted, whether he expected it or not, he did want them to give, to give a lot. You couldn't always do it. We did contribute when they were having a sing, if they came and wanted a contribution, we always gave something from the store. At their squaw dances, we gave things. They really expected this, but according to their culture, for survival I suppose they had to give, from each other, and particularly within their own clan. So they would have liked for the trader to have been the same way. And they would maybe come in and say--if you turned them down for credit, well--"Well, we would feed you," or "We would help you." And when you hired an Indian in the trading post, many times they didn't think of it as if they were a hired person--they were helping you. This is the way that they spoke of it, that they were there helping you, even though they were helping you for a salary, that's the way they termed it.

Underhill: Elijah also mentioned multiple roles, that he interpreted letters, wrote letters.

Blair: Oh, yes.

Underhill: What kinds of things did you see over the years that were not just a business, but beyond that?

Blair: Well, of course at that time, there were not many of them that read English--read anything. They didn't read their own language either, there was no written Navajo language at that time. So if a Navajo was recruited to go work on the railroad, or if the kids were off to school if they wrote letters to the family, then they had to be read to the family. And Lige got to where he could do that. He could see it in English and tell them what it said in Navajo, which I'm sure was a very big thing with them--otherwise, they wouldn't have known what they said. What else did you ask me about?

Underhill: Other kinds of tasks that he performed that were maybe above and beyond the requirements of business?

Blair: Well, many times, you know, when somebody would get hurt, there'd be an accident, they would come to him for help. He's done some major first aid with them, and many times taken them into the hospital or the doctor. We didn't have a very active part, as so many of the traders talk about, burying the dead. I know one of our very first experiences at <Toadlena> was-- I'll bet we hadn't been there, I hadn't been there, two weeks--a Navajo girl died way back on the mountain, and we were sent to take the store truck, go into <Farmington> and buy a casket and come back and a Navajo boy was to meet us at Two Gray Hills, and then show us the way to this camp. Although we didn't bury the person, we took the casket up to where they were, and just before we got there, we heard a shot, which we found out they had shot her horse, and we saw this, looked like a bonfire, which they had moved her, knowing that she was getting very close, that they moved her from a hogan out into a tent, which could be burned, and they didn't have to abandon the hogan. So that was the fire that we saw. And they had come down and taken out as much of her pawn jewelry as they could to bury with her. And they bought more than one Pendleton shawl, I'm not sure how much, and had her wrapped in these. And then when Lige had to help put her in the casket, they had her so wrapped that she would hardly fit in it. It was almost like pushing her in it. And we took the body back down. Then the Mormon missionaries took over from there, took it and buried the body. Some of the traders did, I'm sure, bury the dead, but Lige and I didn't have an active part in actual burials, that I remember of. If he did, then he did, but I don't remember any.

There were many times when the Indians, some of them, were sick or had an accident or somethin', they'd come to us for advice and for help, which we nearly always gave. And if they had somebody in the hospital, then they would want to call and get information. Well, as you know, hospitals don't usually give out information to anybody other than family members. And one old fellow at <Aneth> came in one time, and the store was quite busy, so Elijah had asked me to go back and make the call to the Shiprock Hospital for him, to inquire about his family member, and they said, "Are you a member of the family?" and I said, "No, I'm not." "Well, is there a member of the family that we can talk to?" And I asked them if they spoke Navajo, and it was somebody that could speak Navajo, I guess. Or they got somebody that could. So I handed the phone to Old Sagney Tso, and I said, "Here, you talk." And he looked at me kinda funny [as if to say] "What do I do?" So I put it up to his ear, and I said, "Say yá’át’ééh." And he very reluctantly did it. (slowly, quietly) "Yá’át’ééh?" You know, like, "What am I supposed to hear from this?" you know. And then they started rattlin' off in Navajo, and he said, "Shoo! Ayóo Diné yidiits’a’!" Which means, "Boy, it really can speak Navajo!" Not they, but it can really speak Navajo! (laughter) It was just like he didn't know there was a live person on the other end. He was just shocked that he could hear Navajo on the telephone.

Underhill: How did technology like telephones, television, automobiles, impact trading?

Blair: Oh, today the Navajo loves the telephone. Of course most Navajos don't list their numbers, because everybody that knows them would call, call collect, and they can't afford it. Back then, of course, there were not telephones other than at a trading post or at a school. The school was a government school, so this was "no-touch telephone," no matter what the emergency, you don't use a government- owned telephone. So the trading post was usually it-- that was the one that they would come and.... It was just a means that they could find out what they wanted to know. They didn't usually do it other than to find out about a sick family member in a hospital or something. They didn't.... Well, they knew nobody else to call in the town, knew nobody that had telephones, so they didn't bother you much at first with that. And television, of course they didn't have television back then. We didn't, for a while. So it didn't play a big part. And of course computers today are just mind boggling. It simplifies so much. And it's amazing--has always been amazing to us--how quickly a Navajo can pick up simple use of a computer or cash register, the adding machines, calculators, whatever. It just seemed that it was almost a natural, that they could pick it up so easily. If you notice, there's lots of Navajo checkers in the border towns that just zip right through, and have no problem with it. To this day, I have to look at every number and everything on a cash register and a calculator. I don't do it by memory, I do it by look and see.

Underhill: You've mentioned the missionary folks a couple of times. How would a trader differ from a missionary or maybe a government employee, teacher, that kind of thing?

Blair: Oh, their aims and goals were entirely different. The missionaries did do some of the things for them--some of the same things. They would sometimes, if there was a missionary around, they might take them into town to a doctor or a hospital. And of course a lot of the missionaries did take over burying them. If they were able, they would have read the letters. Sometimes the missionary, they'd take a letter to a missionary, and he couldn't read and interpret it, so then he would bring them to Elijah to do it, although he was trying very hard to learn Navajo, and one of them in particular trying to translate the Bible into Navajo. Learning it from written words, he would be many times critical, maybe, of the way Elijah would say something. However, when it came right down to the nitty-gritty and you had to interpret it, then he had to have Lige do it. This particular missionary, I can remember once after I was in <Cortez> and he was also living just outside of <Cortez>, and he'd worked years and years and years with other people doing this translation, and he called me and he was just so elated, he had finally translated it into Navajo. And I said, "Well, that's good, I'm glad you have. But who is going be able to read it?" Because there were not a great number of Navajo people that could read Navajo. They went to school, they learned to read English. They are, more and more now, are learning to read Navajo. But at that time, you know, they didn't--not many of them. And his answer to me, which I still haven't quite figured out, he said, "Well, Claudia, you know there's always gonna be some of those old people that don't understand English." Well, that's true, but how that meant that they would read the Bible, I don't know. Maybe he thought maybe perhaps that somebody in the family that could read Navajo, could read it to them. That's the only connection that I could make sense out of.

Underhill: Well, with United Indian Traders Association, did you attend those meetings on a regular basis?

Blair: I only attended the annual meeting, or actually I attended the banquet, dinner-dance, what have you. I guess I did sit in on a few of the general meetings at that time, but basically I didn't attend the meetings other than the annual one, which was kind of a party thing.

Underhill: How would you describe the group? Were they fairly fun-loving and outgoing at those annual meetings?

Blair: A lot of them were. It was mixed, some of them were teetotalers and really felt everybody should be . . . . didn’t like that we might have a before dinner cocktail. A lot of them tried to rule it out. They were not as exuberant maybe as some of us. It was mixed. It was always a fun time. We had door prizes. Generally, it was a pretty congenial group, I would think.

Underhill: Were there families that you were particularly close to that were members of the Association?

Blair: Well, yes. I’m sure there were. There would be, besides Elijah’s brothers and their families and the families that they married into and that we worked for--it became almost like a clan. (laughs) The McGees and the Bloomfields and, of course, Bruce Burnham, the kid that worked for us off and on several times and became like a family member, and his [Elijah’s] nephew Hank did the same thing. But we knew most of them, always had a good time with Troy and Edie Kennedy. They had the trading post at that time at Red Rock. They were a fun-loving couple. There was quite a few that we did mix well with.

Underhill: Did you get to see the other families that weren’t directly related to you much outside of the annual meeting, or was it ...

Blair: Not too much, no. They were all busy at the trading post and this was a full-time job. So they were all so far apart that that was about the only time of year that we all got together.

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Underhill: This is Tape 2 of an interview with Claudia Blair at the Dinnebito Trading Company, <Page Arizona>, Monday, February 9, 1998, and it is now 5:10 p.m. This is Karen Underhill. Lew Steiger is on camera, and Brad Cole from NAU is with us as well.

So Brad was just asking during the break about other properties that you have had over the years, including <Kayenta>.

Cole: <Kayenta> and Wetherill Inn.

Blair: Yes. His brother Brad had been at Red Mesa for a long time, and was in somewhat the same situation, I think, that we felt we would have been at <Mexican Water>. He didn't have enough interest to really provide what he wanted and needed for his family. And he got out of Red Mesa then, sold out his part to his partner, which was Roscoe McGee, and for quite a long time, then, Brad was just looking for a store to buy that he thought would be a good one. And he hadn't found what he wanted, or hadn't made a decision... But anyway, he had many wonderful ideas, but he did an awful lot of talkin' and didn't just go out and say, "Okay, I'm gonna do it!" Lige and I were different in that we would sit down and talk over something that we thought we might do, incorporating the trading post, or buy, or what have you, and say, "Okay, the pros and the cons...." We'd let one balance the other and come up, "Well, is it or is it not a good deal for us?" And then if Lige bought a lemon, he made lemonade. I mean, whatever it was, he went into it with the intention of making it work. Brad, although he was older than Lige, he seemed to be maybe a little fearful of whether he could make it work or not, although he could. He had no difficulty in it, he was a good trader. But he hadn't found a trading post to buy, and this Reuben Heflin that owned the Kayenta Trading Post, and Wetherill Inn at the time, wanted to sell out. And he came to Lige first, and he knew Lige better than he did Brad, I guess. And Elijah thought this would be really good for Brad, and he really wanted to get Brad back into his profession, what he had always done. He thought it would be good for him, so he talked him into it. He said, "This is really a good deal." It did require a lot of money. It was an expensive purchase. I think that Reuben felt like that he might be better off if he had the two brothers in, rather than just Brad. And they decided then to go in and buy it together, and they bought that one, fifty- fifty, really. But we already had more than we could handle--or Lige did--and Brad and Carolyn moved out and lived there. In fact, that's where they just about raised their children. Now, she did have the children when she was still at Red Mesa--or most of them--and she taught the older ones the Calvert Course--she was a teacher--for the first few years. And then of course when they went to <Kayenta>, then they could go to school there, they had a public school, not like some of the other places. At <Aneth> it was just the Indian boarding school, and our kids couldn't have gone, they were not allowed. So she was able to put her kids in school at <Kayenta>, and they went to school there. I think Hank graduated from <Farmington>, but then the others were at <Kayenta>. And Carolyn taught at <Kayenta> for a long time before she gave up teaching and came into the trading post full-time. And that was a big operation and a very successful operation.

Underhill: When did you sell that?

Blair: Hm. Must have been ten or twelve years ago. As I said, I'm not good on dates and times, Karen. I don't now always remember that. It was a very lucrative business.

Cole: So was Wetherill Inn and <Kayenta> the same? Were they two different places?

Blair: Well, Wetherill Inn was just up on the hill there in <Kayenta>, and the trading post is right down underneath the hill. As far as I know, they've always been owned by the same owners. When the La Fonts bought us out, they would loved to have just bought the Wetherill Inn, but one of the requirements to get the Wetherill Inn, Lige said, "No, you have to buy the trading post, too." But it's been very good for all of us, very good.

Underhill: How would you say that trading has changed over time, from your perspective, in the last fifty years?

Blair: Well, of course as the trading post evolved to what it is today, many of the people moving off the reservation, the children not taking an interest in the livestock that meant so much to their parents and grandparents. The livestock has decreased so dynamically, that they can't be self-sufficient as much as they used to be. Of course today, everything in most places is cash and carry. Most of it is convenience stores. There's a few that still--very few--but there's a few that still issue a little credit and buy whatever they have to sell. In fact, Lige just said he went into Van's Trading Post in <Tuba City> the other day--just last week, I believe--and he said they have an enormous amount of Navajo rugs, and they're still taking pawn, which they must have just ignored the regulations. They couldn't do it like it was required of us, it was just impossible, and made no sense whatsoever.

Underhill: You mentioned the evolution, but can you describe maybe a little more about how the trading post had changed from kind of the bull pen sort of operation?

Blair: Sure, some of us--a lot of us, in fact, and some didn't--change from the bull pens. A few of them stayed just like they were, they didn't progress. But as the kids went off to school, they came back, they had things they wanted that they had seen, and everybody else had. They had more demands. They taught their parents to want more. As the demands of the Navajo increased (tape goes dead for a second) so whatever they wanted, if we didn't have it, then the next order, we tried to include it, order whatever their needs and demands were. We broadened the scope of what we sold, I guess particularly in the clothing line. It used to be we didn't sell anything except yard goods and a few shoes and the hats and the blue jeans. And they made their dresses. As they began to wear jeans like we do, and more modern blouses and such, you know, we increased the dry goods and such as that--whatever they wanted. Whatever they wanted. We didn't start a car dealership, something like that, on the reservation, but anything within reason that they wanted, we tried to carry for them. Of course we went, then, from the bull pen to the self-service store with the gondolas and the shopping carts. We knew this was what they were seein' in the border towns, when they went to a supermarket, so we tried to do whatever they really wanted, what was better for them.

Underhill: And what is a store like today?

Blair: Well, most of them have gone, you know, from even the supermarket, they've got it back down to the cash and carry Thriftway convenience store. There's a few of them, the Foutzes in <Shiprock> have the shopping carts and gondolas and a big, big space with lots of things for them to choose from. I suppose at Van's, although I wasn't with Elijah, I suppose it is the same. And <Window Rock>. Of course, they have now, you know, like in <Kayenta> and <Window Rock>, they have a Basha's store or a big supermarket as well. And when you have a chain supermarket that comes in and buys in gross, you know, carloads of things that then they can distribute to different stores, then they can buy so much cheaper than the individual. And I think the same thing has happened to the individual grocer in the towns, too. You don't find many of them, they're all chain supermarkets. And it became very hard to compete. Of course when Wal-Mart came in, and with the prices that they can sell at, then it was no wonder that the Navajo thought that we were cheating them, if they could buy what you could at Wal-Mart, and then go to your store and see practically the same thing for nearly double the price. And they couldn't understand that, they didn't realize that the other was bought in such mass that they could get it so much cheaper than we could do it. So it became very hard to compete. After the roads came in and more and more had-- everybody, nearly, had cars and pickups [for] transportation--it was very hard to compete with the towns.

Underhill: How do you think Navajo culture has changed? And you've touched on just a little.

Blair: Well, it definitely is changing, I think as it must. We find kids here in <Page> that either cannot or say they cannot speak Navajo. To me, talking to this younger generation of Navajos, locally, if you weren't lookin' at them and knew that they were a Navajo, you wouldn't know any difference from their Anglo contemporaries. And I think as this becomes more and more so, it's going to change their culture. It already has changed. I fear that eventually that they will not, these young people will not remember the stories, the ceremonies, the songs. They won't remember anything about their culture. You take Roberta, downstairs, she's learned to speak some Navajo since she came here. She lived in <Kayenta>, went into the <Kayenta> schools. Her mother worked for us at <Kayenta>, and I think they spoke more English at home than they did Navajo. And when she started workin' for us down here, and of course the Navajo would come up to her and see she's a Navajo and try to talk to her, and she'd look at Lige, "Help me! What did they say?" And he has tried to teach Roberta to speak Navajo. (chuckles)

Underhill: Full circle!

Blair: So it's sad, in a way, that they eventually may not even remember their culture. But then I think that's true in all people. We've told our children and our grandchildren about our life in rural Appalachian <Kentucky>, but now when our grandchildren have children, how far is that going down? When will that work itself out, too, where they won't know about this kind of life? So I don't think this is so unusual. And as you say, your Indian people at NAU, like [Terry] Janis-- what's his name? If he didn't tell you he was a Sioux, you wouldn't know, I don't think. They are mixing. We have quite a few mixed marriages here. Downstairs, our accountant is married to a Navajo girl. They have a very nice family, they work it out very well. A white girl that used to work for us in the store when we first opened up is married to a Navajo. So it's working both ways more and more, and the kids all feel pretty much the same--particularly the ones that do speak English exclusively. They don't feel any different from the Anglo. And I think eventually it's just going to wash out.

Underhill: What have you learned from your association with the Navajo over the years?

Blair: I hope I have learned a lot of patience and tolerance, because they are definitely a patient and tolerant people. I don't care what kind of mistake you make, hardly, Navajos won't correct you, they don't tell you about it, they don't criticize. They've always been very kind, very tolerant, and very accepting. Something's different? So what?, then it's different, and they don't make a big deal out of it. I hope that I have at least learned that. And of course it's been quite enlightening to me to learn, I think, as much as we have, about another culture.

What more do you want?

Underhill: That's fine. What do you think you've taught....

Blair: I don't think I've really taught much of anything, Karen. Let's skip that one. (laughter)

Underhill: What are you most proud of, of your years here in the Southwest?

Blair: Of what am I proud? I guess first I'm proud of my family. (chuckles) Very proud of my family. I think that Lige and I have managed and invested and done exceptionally well looking out for our future and probably our children's future. I think that's commendable. I think we've probably been as giving and benevolent as we needed to be with the other people, without going really overboard in doing so. I guess I was a little bit proud, too, that the Navajo people must have learned that I didn't look at them so differently, I was always glad to go in and talk with them if I could--particularly the ones that could speak English and talk to me. Several of them have mentioned in the past, "You're different. The other traders' wives wouldn't come in the store. They wouldn't come in and talk to us." Now, my sisters-in-law, or Lige's sisters-in-law, did, they had a very active part, very active. But some of the traders' wives wanted no part of it, and they wouldn't interact. Edie Kennedy was another one that was very, very involved. But a lot of the women didn't, and sometimes you'd go into a trading post where the previous trader's wife hadn't taken a part, hadn't been friendly, hadn't talked to them, and just excluded herself from them. And they would look at me and think, "Boy, you're really different." And I'm glad. I am glad that they could see me as bein' different in that way.

Underhill: So why did you and Elijah stay in the business in the Southwest and not go back to <Kentucky>?

Blair: Well, certainly we felt that there was more opportunity, it was more lucrative here than it would have been for us back there. And we learned to love the wide open spaces, we learned to like the people, and it was just a way of life that appealed to us. It grew on us, as time went on we became more and more accepting of it. I don't think we felt we were missing out on anything in particular. So a lot of the people back there would say, "Well...." They thought we were gonna come out and make our potful of money and then come home. And they'd say, "Well, when are you going to come back to <Kentucky> to live?" We didn't intend to. "You mean you're gonna live out there?!" Well, we had been living out there, and intended to stay. They couldn't understand why we wouldn't want to come back to <Kentucky>. And there's lots of them back there still yet, that have gone away, and then came back home. One of my mother's cousins, one time talking to me when we were back visiting, and she said, "Well, surely to goodness, Claude and Alva will come back home to die." (suppressed laughter) That was just the way they kinda looked at it. But we will die at home, but home is here. After all, I was nineteen when I left, and I'm sixty-nine. So this has been my life.

Underhill: Is there anything you would change?

Blair: I don't think so. I really don't. I've been happy, content. I won't say that Elijah and I have never disagreed. I mean, that would be amazing, wouldn't it? (laughter) But we've disagreed and learned to disagree without having any major clashes, I guess, so I think we've both been very happy. We feel that we've been successful and it's been good for us, and we hope we've been good for it.

Underhill: Is there anything else you'd like to add?

Blair: Right off my head, unless you've got more questions, Karen, I don't think that well.

Underhill: You don’t want to read a statement to us?

Blair: I didn't have any prepared statement. This is pretty much it. As I say, Elijah, I think as long as he can maneuver and walk about on his own, this is where he is happiest. And as I say, this is where he goes to get his perks, and then he comes home and I can stand him for a while longer. (laughter)

Underhill: Well, on behalf of the United Indian Traders Association Project, I thank you for your time and for sharing some of your memories with us.

Blair: Well, thank you for listening.



