PAUL BEGAY INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.9

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. We're at the Dinnebito Trading Company in <Page Arizona>. It is Tuesday, February 10, [1998]. We're here with Paul Begay. Lew Steiger is operating the sound and camera equipment. This is part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. 

Underhill: Paul, we'll start with your background. What clan were you born for, and where and when? 

Begay: Well, as I remember being told by my mother, I was born when the snow was this high. (holds out hand, about three to four feet from floor) Now, the Navajo people don't keep records, they don't have written records, so all the records are kept by memory. So my mother remembers giving birth to me when the snow was this high. I guess back in those days, the snow was always that high at a certain time. And so in the Navajo way, we tell stories of the calendar years. Now, you have twelve months in a year in today's world, in the English way. But in the Navajo way of storytelling, you have thirteen months in a year. That makes it a little bit difficult to really pinpoint exactly when I was born. Our [year] begins in the month of October. We call it Ghaaji’, or in the literal translation, it means "back-to-back." On this backside of it, it was once--everything has turned colors, everything has died. Everything that was once alive has died, so a new beginning will come. So new process begins, a new life begins. So that's the other side of this back here, so that's why they call it back- to-back. So being that October is the first month of the year, then we call it Ghaaji’ when everything dies and a new cycle of life begins, followed by November, which we call "thin winds." Now, these are literal translations of that month. "Thin winds" meaning that the light winds will begin to come. You will feel it on your face, the light winds, meaning that the winter season is here, and you can feel the cold air--followed by December, which we call the "big winds." Now, the big winds bring the big snow. So back in those days, it is understood that it snowed all in December. So when January comes, the snow is this high.

So when my mom says, "You were born when the snow was this high," that pretty much told me and everybody else that I was born in January. So when I got introduced into the education system, they put as my birth date, January. What day, we don't know. So everybody took a wild guess, said "third sounds good." So they put January 3. What about the year? See, that's where the difficulty comes in. My mom's story goes according to the thirteen months of the year. On the other side we now know today as thirteen months of the year. So any way she tells her story, it's never gonna be right. So they tell me today I'm forty-five years old, give or take a couple of years, because we don't know. So that's the way my so-called "official" records say, January 3, 1952. I know for sure, according to my mother's story, January is correct. But I have questions about the day I was born, the third, and the year 1952.

I was born--my mother belonged to the Gap-in-the- Rock Clan, the Tsédeeshgizhnii clan. The Navajo society, we are made up of a matrilineal clanship system, meaning that we will carry on our mother's clan. So all my brothers and sisters, we carry on our mother's clan. I was born for my father's clan, the Deer Water Clan, Biihbitoo’nii. In the Navajo way of thinking, Dad is just a visitor to our home, so we teasingly refer to Dad as our "in-law," because Dad is married to Mom, who is the same clan as I am. We tell Dad to go get a job and support us. There's a lot of teasing going on. It's a way of life in the Navajo society.

So I was born for the Deer Water Clan. In the Navajo way, we're told that in order to know who you are, you must know four clans. Because it's a matrilineal clanship system, I must also know my maternal grandfather's clan, my mother's father's clan. He belonged to the Bitter Water Clan, the Tódích’íi’nii. My mother's mother's clan is the same clan. I already know that, because it's a matrilineal clanship. Mom carries on her mother's clan. I must also know my paternal grandfather's clan--my dad's father's clan. His clan will be different. Dad's mother's clan are the same, because he carries on his mother's clan. My father's father's clan, my paternal grandfather's clan, was from the Towering House Clan, Kinyaa’áanii. So in order to know who I am, I must know these four clans. Name is irrelevant. Name doesn't really mean anything to the Navajo society. In order to identify yourself to another person, who you are, these four clans we share. In this way you know who you are, and who the other person is, and you greet each other accordingly. He might be a brother, a father, a mother, a cousin--that's the way you get to know each other.

So in identifying myself, I will tell this person my four clans. I am of the Gap-in-the-Rock Clan, born for the Deer Water Clan. My maternal grandfather belongs to the Bitter Water Clan, and my paternal grandfather belongs to the Towering House Clan. Now he knows who I am, and when he tells me his four clans, I will know who he is, and we greet each other. (Steiger asks for time out, tape turned off and on) 

Underhill: Can you tell us a little bit about your early life, the area where you were, and what kinds of things you and your family were doing when you were young? 

Begay: Growing up, the men in the Navajo society, it seems like they're separate from what the women do. The women have their own thing to do, and the men have their own thing to do. So they're pretty much doing their own thing throughout the day. In the evening, of course they all come back to their traditional hogan-- this is the native Navajo dwelling--and they become one family again, it seems like. But during the day, everybody does their own thing. We were expected, as young boys, we were automatically tabbed as the sheepherders, the caretakers of the sheep. You take care of the sheep. We were taught by our grandfathers and our fathers. If we had an older brother, he will have had experience herding sheep, so he carries his knowledge down to us--where we should take the sheep. It is not proper to take the sheep in the same area for three or four days at a time. You must always alternate your grazing area. You have your winter camps and you have your summer camps. This is so that the grass and the food supply for the sheep and the horses and the cattle will always be there. These are things that were taught to you by your elders or your older brother when you were growing up. You learned how to build a fire, if you needed to build a fire. You learned how to hunt the rabbit, because you weren't fed all the time in the morning before you left. There were times when you went without food, because food was scarce. And you were--[thought of] as a person that has learned how to catch these rabbits and get food: how to chase the rabbits, how to chase it into the holes, how to use a stick and turn the sticks and make sure the fur catches, the stick is caught by the fur, and then you pull it out. How you go through the process of skinning the rabbit, cleaning the rabbit, cooking it--these were taught the young child, so he can survive.

Everything that exists on earth we're told is good, because in the mythology stories, and in the stories of the Navajo, we're told that like many Indian tribes, the earth is our mother. And everything that comes from the earth is good. So come noontime when we took the sheep to the local waterhole, we didn't look at the water as being dirty. When the sheep knelt down to drink, the Indian sheepherder kneels down and drinks also, never thinking that the water was bad. I remember every once in a while chasing the tadpoles away and drinking. But I didn't fear the tadpoles or everything that exists in the water or on land, because we were told as young children stories of our elders that everything is also related to us: the living creatures, the crawling creatures, the winged beings and the four-legged beings, they're all related to us, because in the mythology stories, before we became the image of a man and a woman, we were of these creatures, we're told. So they're all relatives of ours, and we share the land with these creatures. We're related to the plants, the trees, the valleys, the waters, everything. So we address them likewise, like they were our family and our relatives. The darkness is our grandmother, the sun is our father. So we pray to these beings, the elements of life, the air--they're related to me. And so you're taught these things at a young age, so that when you go out there herding sheep all by yourself, you're all with your family out there. And so we became sheepherders at a very young age. Of course our father, grandfather, or older brother will accompany us in the beginning. But that will not last forever. You're expected to become a sheepherder at a very young age, and you go out on your own. Eventually, you will be joined by other brothers. This is not to say that only the boys herd sheep--the girls also will do that. There are cases where only the girls are born into the family, so they become sheepherders. But most of the time, the girls' chores will be at home--preparation of meals, the wool projects, the weaving--those are taught the child, the young girls at home. And so they stay with the mother and the grandmother, and their teaching and their learning is done at home. And so as young boys, we're out there herding sheep all day.

I remember my grandfather telling me that the sheepherding process is an all-day job. He would stand to the west, and with two fingers, go like this, sideways. "You do not head home until there's two left," he says. Meaning that this is the land, and this is the bottom part of the sun. And so this is the time when you will head home. That will give you enough time to take the sheep back home, put 'em into the corral, the sun has set and you've done your job. You will not be heading home when the sun is still up. There's a lot of grazing time left. You're wasting that full day here. So these were the teachings given to us by our old people. This is the way to herd the sheep. You had learned how to identify certain plants. In case you didn't eat, you can dig up a certain type of a plant, and chew on the roots, drink the juice and the hunger will go away, so that you can last the rest of the day. These are the things that is taught the young child. 

Underhill: What did you do with the herds? Some wool? Did you also trade or sell some of your stock? 

Begay: Oh, yes, springtime is a very busy time. When we had to--this is probably the only time when we won't begin to herd sheep until about noontime. All the other times, as soon as you're done with everything--your eating, your prayers in the morning, using the ground corn to pray with--that begins your day, and you take your herd out. But in the springtime, that would be time for shearing the sheep, taking the wool off. The women there will be helping the men. Very seldom will you see men and women working together, but this is the time when the whole family will be working together. So a lot of shearing is done, bagging them, getting them ready for the trading posts. A lot of the wool will be set aside, and they will save those for their own rug-making. They will go through the washing process, the preparations, the dying, the carding, the spinning, and all through what will become a rug, which will eventually be sold to the trading post. But others [i.e., other fleeces (Tr.)], in bulk form, in bags, will be taken like that to the trading post. Back in my younger days, when I was a small child, I remember we only had wagons with a team of horses, and being that we lived about twenty-five, thirty miles west of the nearest trading post, Dinnebito Trading Post, it took at least a whole day to travel there and back. You had to make your purchase, I guess, pretty quick, so that you can beat the sun. But many times I remember the sun had set and they would come back, our families would come back. But wool would be sacked, and they would put it on the wagons and they would take it. And there the wool was sold. Back in those days, a couple bags of wool will buy you a lot of stuff. That was the way it was.

When a sheep is butchered, the skin is saved. It is stretched and pinned down on the ground to dry. After it dries, it's all rolled up so at times you might have nine, ten, eleven sheepskins all rolled up. These were even taken to the trading posts to be sold. And a couple of these sheepskins, that was my spending money for me, because I did a lot of herding sheep. And many times when a sheep is butchered, I would save it and put it up there on top of the arbor shade, save it for the next trip to the trading post. And if I have two or three of 'em there with me, that would give me a ticket to go to the trading post also. It was something to look forward to. All the other times, if I didn't have a sheepskin up there, my job is to go out there and herd the sheep. But when I had a couple of those sheepskins, I knew that I could take it to the store, take it to the trading post, Mom and Dad will sell it, or my grandfather would sell it for me, and I would get the money. And I don't quite remember, I think it was always like kid stuff, something sweet that you wanted to buy, or something that will last a long time, that you kept in your pocket. So, a couple dollars went a long ways back then.

The springtime was always a time.... And of course in the fall, it's the same way. By that time, the young lambs that were born in the springtime had grown. When we began to experience the education system come fall-time, when we had to go back to school in August, this is the time to sell the lambs. And so the first thing that came to the mind of these people was because there's no way to get money from anywhere else, there was no source to get it from--sheep was a way to get money. Sheep was our source of income. And so four or five lambs would be put into the wagon, and away they would go. And the kids that were going back to school, would be riding on these wagons, and they would make their trip to the trading post, the lambs will be sold, and what money that we have, we'll buy a set of clothes, shoes for the coming year. It was always an exciting time, also. Even though the thought lingers in the back of the mind, (regretfully) "Oh, it's schooltime again. I don't want to be away from my family again for nine months out of the year." Because of the boarding school system, that's the way it operated back in those days. Nine months out of a year, from August to May, you were away from your family. If you were lucky, and your family, your parents had transportation, you might get a couple visits. But it was a very seldom thing for parents to come and visit the child. So you're basically away from your parents nine months out of a year. And that's why we really--even though the excitement is there for new clothes, you still had in the back of your mind, "Here we go again, for the next nine months." But it was exciting. This is a way of income for the Indian people. Sheep was our ticket. This was like dollar signs, if we had about fifty head of sheep there, we were secure, we knew that we can make things work. So fifty head of sheep was a good herd, back in those days. But I remember many other people having a lot bigger herd than fifty head. And we looked at people and you sort of determined in your mind, "They're a lot richer than I am, because they have about a hundred head more than we do." Yeah, sheep was very important to us, it was our ticket to the store.

Of course the store was a convenient place for us. It seems like when times began to change, when we began to get away from the traditional way of life, we wanted to be like everybody else. We wore the things that are different. We began to see people wearing different, other than moccasins, it was something that was made. And of course you want to also have that. You'd see people beginning to drive the pickup trucks on the Reservation. You want that. Those are the things. It went with the changing times on the Reservation. But we always thought, "If I have enough sheep, I can have that." And so that was the thinking of the Navajo back in those days. 

Underhill: How often did your family go to the trading post? Just twice a year, or more often? 

Begay: They will determine [when there is a need.] There will be a need to go. It wasn't set like we will go at least once or twice a month. I think there is a time when they feel there is a need to go. Of course, Navajos are not community-oriented people. There's clans living together. Our group of clan consisted of probably about five or six hogans, dwellings, and that made our big family there. Mom and Dad and the kids, my brothers and sisters and I, we had our own hogan. And aunt and uncle over here had their own hogan. Grandpa and Grandma, they had their own hogan. So we all lived in this small area. And being that they're not a community-oriented people, the next group of clans lived maybe four or five miles away. So they were bunched up like this, many miles away. Of course there's visitations, people keep in contact, but your families stay together like this. And so one of these families from one hogan within your group might decide there's a need to go to the trading post.

Now, the Navajo way of thinking is not like people think around here today. I live here in town now. If my neighbor two doors down is going to the trading post, or to the store, he won't come over here and tell me that he's going to the store and [ask] if I needed a ride. Now, the Navajo ways, they help each other in this way. They will go around all these other hogans within their group and say, "We're going to the store, does anybody need anything, or does anybody need a ride?" And so they will go, rather than making four, five, six, seven different trips within one month. Why not make one trip? It'll be easier on the horses, and you get to help your family members also. And so it wasn’t really specified how many times you should go. There will come a time when there is a need to go.

Many ceremonies on the Reservation began to use materials, fabrics, that the trading post began to use. And it seems like a lot of the trips that were made to the store was for that purpose. Ceremonies is done all the time on the Reservation. And so what they began to do was buy these fabrics, and they began to use it in the ceremonies. They would have this patient-- Towards the conclusion of the ceremony on the last night, they would fold these blankets, fabrics, within about one yard square, and the patient will sit on top of that, and the singing and the prayers go on all night. At the conclusion of the ceremony in the morning, the patient gets up and the medicine man rolls this fabric and the blankets together and he puts it on his horse, ties it on the back his saddle, and he rides off. It's used as part of the payment for the job or the service rendered. And so that became a common practice. So a lot of these fabrics, blankets, were sold in the trading posts then. And I remember in our group of family, that was the reason for the trip. And of course you bought that material and blanket. And of course then you bought the food also--your necessary things, the necessities of life, it seems like is always there: shovels and tools and hoes, something that made your job a lot easier. And we began to experience these types of, "We can use this to make your job--you can get a shovel and build your hogan a lot faster." Those are the things that, you know, it's eye-catching. And that's what the trading post was to us, is a convenience for us. Everything that we need, it seems like it's there. It's always something you look forward to. And of course as little children, we'd cry because the wagon is leaving. We want to go with Mom and Dad or Aunt and Uncle.

I was very attached to my grandfather. I remember my mother telling me a story one day, and my grandfather, I guess, was going away to the trading post. Everybody was inside the hogan, and me being very attached to my grandfather, a very young child, as a toddler, I began to follow Grandfather. Grandfather never looked back, he just kept going on with his team of horses and wagon. And I kept following, until after a while, everybody missed the child, the little kid. And I guess by that time I had gone over the hill and still going after my grandfather. And my grandfather tells us the story, he says something made him look back after he was down about three, four miles traveling. He looked back and there was this dog, the dog that always followed Grandpa when he was traveling, the tail wagging back and forth. The dog is following Grandpa quite a few ways back, I guess. But he also noticed something quite a little ways back there, too, something else moving. And the thought just came to him, "It's my grandson!" So he turned around. By that time, everybody was following the foot tracks. He left, he went and followed Grandfather.

So the little kids will tend to cry, because now they understand there is good stuff at the trading post also. But you also understand you have a job to do, you're herding sheep, or you stay home and you help your other relatives, you kept the house clean, you had a lot of stuff to do. It was never--you never had time to lay around. We are so spoiled today. I believe what made us very spoiled is the TV set, the video games, all this commotion goin' on, back in those--oh, that was a sweet life, that was a good life, even though it involved a lot of work, it was a good life. I remember and wish it could have stayed that way today. 

Underhill: What did you think the first time you saw an Anglo trader at Dinnebito, do you remember? 

Begay: I really do not remember, but growing up and then looking back at the little kids, I sort of thought to myself, "Maybe that's the way I acted sometimes." But I don't remember ever bein' shy. Most of the Navajo kids will be shy. Boys and girls, they're both shy. They have this mother here, and of course the mother wears the long skirt, and you could see the little kids hiding behind the mother's skirt, pulling on the mother's skirt like this, and looking at the trader. And it's sort of a funny thing to me, because I think, "Is that the way I acted back then?" Because I really don't remember my first time seeing this trader. Just the action of the little kids, I tend to think that that's probably the way I acted, because that's the way the majority of the kids act. Even though you were a timid person, you still acted that way. Of course, once you know the person, then it's a different story. Kids begin to get all--like a lot of kids today--hyper, and they run around, they carry on their own things. Kids sitting around inside the trading post on the floor. Mother might buy them something, and they're pretty much content with that, and they play with that while the mother and father takes care of the shopping. Over the counter is the first thing that I remember. I remember going to this Dinnebito Trading Post, and that was our store. A full day's travel there and back. I remember this man [indicating Elijah Blair (Tr.)]. Well, I know him pretty well today, but not back in those days. I was just one of those regular Indian people that went over there, I guess. And there was a big gap after probably the age of eight or nine, where I didn't see this man again, because of my education life, I went to school in <Utah>, and for a long time I didn't see this person until I was probably a teenager, and then I saw this man again. And he's still there. But I've never really talked to him, never really got to know this man, until I became a man again. I was over twenty, I was nearing thirty. I ran into this guy again, he has a store here in the big city of Page. And so one day I talked to him, I said, "I remember going to your store as a young child. And I remember selling the sheep, helping my grandma and my grandfather loading the sheep and tying them down, making sure that the sheep doesn't kick free. I remember selling the wool. I remember selling the sheepskin, the dried sheepskins. I remember going into the store." All these stuff I was telling him about, and the memories came back. I said, "Oh, yeah, that's the man!" He changed quite a bit, now he's all white. See, he's all gray, but the man is still the same. 

Underhill: And this is Elijah Blair? 

Begay: This was Elijah Blair. I remember him talking. You have to make an Indian person very comfortable in order to win his trust, because in the Navajo way, you're told you don't talk about your culture, your language, your history, your tradition, your taboos--especially your religion--to a non-Navajo. It's very hard for a Navajo person to do that. So the trader had to break through this and win the trust of the Navajo. And the way they did it probably what I'm thinking is, they first have to learn the language. He tells me he came to the Reservation among the Indian people when he was nineteen. Didn't know nothing about the language or the culture. Now today, after forty- some odd years, close to fifty years, this man is fluent in the Navajo language. He knows the way of the teasing, the tradition, how to act as being a Navajo, how a Navajo should act, how you tease. Now, if he spoke the Navajo language to a Navajo, you make that Navajo feel comfortable, you begin to win this Navajo's trust. And so this man is loved by a lot of Navajo people. He knows, talking to him, a lot about the tradition, a lot about the culture, and he's the only man that I know that speaks fluent Navajo in Kentuckian accent. (laughs) And so it is possible to learn (chuckles) how to talk Navajo. It don't matter what part of the country you are. And so this was the way to win the hearts of the Navajo--learn their language, learn their lifestyle, learn their way of teasing. Teasing is a big thing among the Navajo people each day. I would see this Jaiyazhi, Elijah Blair, teasing with the Navajos, grabbing at each other's clothes. It's a way to interact with the natives. And he got accepted in this way. And people, I don't think, after a while, when transportation became more convenient, people did not actually go to the trading post mainly to buy something or to get supplies--they went to see Jaiyazhi. (laughs) I remember in my group of clans, or in my group of family, our hogan, the men talk about Jaiyazhi. The women, on the other side, of course, in their own teasing ways, "Ah!, forget about that white man! He's no good, he doesn't know nothing about the Navajo." But the man, they stood up for this man Jaiyazhi. "I will go over there and talk with him, shaadaaní, our in-law," they call him. This is a way of, when you say "in-law" to a white man, you're basically saying, "Oh, he's good enough, so I wish he could be my in-law." This is what they're actually saying. It's not going to become, but it's just a way of teasing among the Navajo people. And so when they say "my in-law," they're grabbing at his clothes, and he's doing the same thing to the Navajo. Maybe he's grabbing this Navajo's clothing because he owns a lot of jewelry and has got a big concho belt. "Huge! Looks like a wealthy Navajo. I want him as my in-law." And so this is the way to build a good rapport, a good relationship between the trader and the Navajo, to win the hearts of the Navajo. And he's mastered that, that type of life. He's a great man, Elijah Blair. 

Underhill: What did the Navajo people expect from the trader? What did the people hope the trader would do for them? 

Begay: Well, history tells us that back in the old days in the 1860's, the Navajo people--my grandfather used to mention in his stories, even--that his parents and people in his parents' age group were known as savages, raiders, thieves, murderers, and he sadly says it is true--this was the lifestyle of our people back then. And this caused the government of this land and the people that ran this government system in this country, this caused these people to come, and they sent a man by the name of Kit Carson. And so the roundup of the Navajo, because of their lifestyle, their savage way of lifestyle, their renegading ways and their thieving ways, they were rounded up between 1860 and 1864. They were placed in a prison. They were enclosed, controlled position, in a place called <Fort Sumner>, for four more years between 1864 and 1868. The summer of 1868, based on the treaty between the Navajo people and the United States government, the Navajo people were released. But they had to make a lot of agreements. And so the Navajo chiefs placed their "X" on these agreements. Probably one of the treaties that is most outstanding is that the Navajos will no longer go back to their old way of lifestyle, being the thieving people that they were, the murdering people that they were, the savage way of lifestyle-- that they will become sheep people. The government will provide for them sheep and goats, and they will become sheep people. Their lifestyle will be based on being sheep herdsmen. And so when they came back to the Reservation in 1868, they were provided with sheep. And they took their small herds, and they began to grow their little herds. When they came back to the Reservation in 1868, they saw that people had moved onto their land, and these people will be known later as traders. Trading posts were set up many miles apart. And so of course the Navajo man and the trader had to begin to know each other. So probably one day, Mr. Yazzie, or Mr. Begay, Mr. Todachini [phonetic spellings], somebody, some Navajo man, made a visit to this place to see if he can begin to understand what his purpose was for being there. A lot of people will think all the Indian people know how to do sign languages. The Navajo people are quite different than a lot of other Indian tribes. The non-Navajo sometimes might think of an Indian person and see a whole bunch of feathers. Navajo people do not wear a whole bunch of feathers. Navajo people don't know sign languages. Of course we do gestures and stuff like that. I guess it's a form of sign language, but that's about the size of it. So the Navajo and the trader began to communicate. Probably nothing happened the first couple visits, until three, four other visits came by, they began to interact. They began to probably come up with a way to communicate. He spoke his language, the Anglo person. The Navajo spoke his language. They began to try to figure each other out, figure out why the other person is there. Eventually, they began to pick up little parts of each other's language, and a lot of gesturing. "Háádée’ish naniná, Where are you from?" Is probably the question that the Navajo wanted. Of course the white man didn't understand-- gotta figure this thing out. They did not really have a way to work together, they didn't understand a way to work together. Until after a while, the white man began to notice that the Navajo man carries a blanket around all the time, a woven blanket. And his wife, the Navajo wife, wore a woven dress. The horse that he rides, he's got a blanket on top--maybe used to soften the impact of the backbone of the horse. And so he notices, and the idea came about, "You know, this is probably a good way...." And so the introduction of the rug was made to the world, to the metropolitan areas: <Chicago> and <New York>. And of course, when this happened, [they] said "Look at these magnificent rugs!" And so the Navajo and the trader began to understand, "Hey, this is a way to work together." And so the trader began to ask for the rugs. The first purchase of the rug probably was placed on the wall. And when the Navajo man and visitor, his wife comes, the trader pointed at the rug. This gave the understanding to the weaver that the trader wants this rug. That way, he can give us the stuff that's in the back of his counter here. And so they began to educate each other on how to work together. And so through this introduction, they began to work together and they understood that this will be a way. Here again, sheep is the economy of the Navajo--based on the sheep was even understood back in those days.

And your question was? 

Underhill: Expectations from the Navajo toward the trader. One thing that Elijah Blair has mentioned is that the approach for the Navajo was more communal, as in, "We should share." And the trader was there to make money. In your experience, what kind of reactions did that cause? 

Begay: I think initially the Navajo people understand.... Well, even today there's still a lot of this thought among the Navajo people that, you know, "I've labored through so much to make this piece of rug, and to take it to the store and just get a small amount of money to make my purchase," that's always in the mind of the weaver. But this is because from the Navajo side, they really don't understand that the trader is there, like you say, to make money. And how do we make money? It seems like in the Navajo way of thinking, "I will sell my rug for $100. I will make my purchase." And she sort of thinks that the rug will be sold back to the public for $100. And they see this price, that they've sold this rug that they wove and sold a couple of months ago, they look at the price after a couple of months, and it's got $200 on it, and they think, "Oh, I got a bad deal here." But it's basically because they don't understand that this person is also there to make money. But the more time is put into interacting with the Indian people, and the trader, when they're talking together, they began to understand that this is the way it runs. The guy will not make any money. But we also understand from the Indian people that it is a good thing for the trader to be there, because he has some things that I can use, like I said, to make life more easier. He's got tools to make life more easier. He's got food that will last a long time, as opposed to if you butchered a sheep, you divided it up among all these different hogans that you call your group of family living together, so that the food will not go to waste, the meat will not go to waste. It's sort of like consumed within the short period of time. If you go to the trading post, you got 'em in cans and stuff like that, so it's a convenient thing you can save until you need it. And the more and more stuff began to go into the trading posts, more and more we began to go over there. They kept coming up with more new stuff. So in a lot of Navajo people's minds, I think that the Navajo people think they were being ripped off in many ways by the trader. But then again, they also understand that they can't do without the trader, because then it seems like they're not advancing with the changing times. In order to change with the times, you change with this trading. He has something that provides you with these things, so that you can keep up with these changes in time. And so that's the way the Indian people thought of the trading post. There was always a little animosity, there's always a little anger set towards the trader. But then it's also understood we cannot live without the trader also. It's a place, like I say, going back to convenience--there's a lot of things that he has to make it convenient and easy for us to live. And so that's why even the person that got mad at the trader will always be back over there again about a week later--not necessarily to apologize, but he's gonna go back over there, because he needs this place to also be there. 

Underhill: Were you familiar, when you were younger, with the pawn system at all? As you went to the trading post, did you witness much exchange in terms of pawn? 

Begay: I remember my mother and my father pawning, my grandfather pawning. That was also--there was times when you needed to do it. Just because you had a hundred head of sheep don't mean that you had sheep to sell. It's understood, the Navajo people took real good care of their sheep. You don't sell your sheep.... It seems like it's not necessary at this time to sell the sheep. Save it for later. It will be of better use later, if we sold 'em later. So let's say, for instance, in the middle of the summer--May, June--why would the Navajo sell five head of sheep, when he could save it and use it? [Not] sell until August, so he can buy the kids' clothes to go back to school. So in the meantime, they resort to their jewelry, a set of beads, a concho belt, a bracelet. They could pawn it for fifteen, twenty dollars. Growing up, I remember watching Mom and Dad do that. They would take off their bracelet and sell it--not sell it, but pawn it. And they would get some money-- fifteen, twenty dollars maybe. And then, here again, that's a lot of money--you could buy a lot of stuff. As far as the addition of money for interest, I never-- I didn't know that existed. But here again, I'm sure the Navajo person also understands--especially the older ones will say, "Well, I'll pawn this for forty dollars." He expects to get it back for forty dollars. But here again, because he doesn't understand that this person has to also make money, he is helping you by lending you forty dollars, but for a little price. Now, today a lot of people understand that, you have to pay a little price to borrow some money. But back in those days, it wasn't like that. But as time went by, they began to be educated that this is the way it is. They talk among each other--the Navajo people talk among each other. "Haash yit’áo? Why is it I pawned this for twenty dollars and then I had to pay twenty- three dollars to get it back?" And then the person that now understands how the system works will tell the Navajo, "Jó! Because he doesn't know you and you don't know him. If you didn't know me, and I don't know you, would you give me twenty dollars, lend me twenty dollars and tell you 'I'll give it back to you sometime later'?" "No, I won't do that." "Well, you won't do that to me. At least this man, he keeps it there, and he says he'll give it back to you, but for a small price. In the meantime, you get your food or whatever you need, and you go. See, it's a way of helping." The Navajo now began to understand that you get help in this way. And so three, four dollars or five dollars interest is a small price to pay for what you got. They began to understand it. But then again, there's a lot of people--especially the elders--they still believe that they should get it back the same way, because they don't understand. He's looking at this man, this white man, the trader, and he drives around a car--especially probably Jaiyazhi, he's got his airplane sittin' out there--this is a rich man. Why would he need an extra three, four dollars? They don't understand that, see. But he still needs it, probably to pay for his airplane or his pickup. But through the years, as times changed, they began to understand it. Today the majority of the Navajos, I believe, understand how the system works. But it took them a long time. People still bring it up every once in a while, "It shouldn't be that way." I think they do that just to pick on the trader. 

Underhill: Were your family members able to borrow their jewelry for ceremonies and things from Jaiyazhi? 

Begay: Um, I don't remember back in the early days, but here, today, sometimes I remember.... I even got in a situation where I had to take a piece of jewelry of mine, and I took it to Jaiyazhi, and being that I know him personally, I know his son and daughter, I know his wife, his family. I think there's this, going back to this trust among the trader and the Indian people. I once came here a couple of years back, a ceremony being done, and I approached him. I said, "I have this item on pawn, but I don't have any other jewelry to use during the ceremony." And I explained to him my situation. And they understood. Here again, because Jayazi understands the significance of the religion, the culture of the Navajo people, how important it is to the Navajo people. He says, "Yes, you can take it, but bring it back on this day as soon as the ceremony is done." And I did, according to what I promised him. With the agreement made, I took the jewelry. Yes, there are times when Indian people do that. They would place their items on pawn, it's still on pawn. Go to the trader, explain your situation. There's a great trust between the Indian trader and his clients, the Indian people. And so it goes along with becoming great friends. Yeah, that's a great friend of yours, after you have made this relationship work. I don't know if he'll let me do that this time, but (chuckles) yes, there were many times when I had to do it. I personally did it myself, brought the items back, put it back into the store, and it's on pawn there until I took it back out. 

Underhill: You went to a boarding school. What differences do you see between a trader and maybe a BIA schoolteacher or a missionary or other Anglo folks who were coming to the Reservation? 

Begay: Um.... The school system I went to in <Tuba City>, back in the latter part of 1950, early part of 1960, it's probably the time when I saw a lot of white people all at one time. But here again, you have to individually pick out these white people and go through the whole process of winning their trust again, it seems like. And probably the teacher is probably the one that I began to work on first--not really "work on"--she had her job to do, but the thing that really [won me over] as far as my first teacher, her name was Mrs. Kirkpatrick. A very tall lady, with the smile. It seems like the smile always told me that everything that I did on paper was always good. And in the Navajo culture, you don't have this eye-to-eye contact, so it was very hard for us. 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Begay: You had to learn to do that. You had to learn to look at a person in the eye and feel good, feel comfortable with it. It takes a long time. Even when I was in high school, I still had difficulty looking at a person in the eye. Today I public speak, and I really had to get rid of that. But when you see another Native American, or a Navajo person walking by, the culture kicks back in and you look away. But this lady, I think because of being away from Mom and Dad for nine months out of the year, you tend to look for some type of a mother figure, or a family figure. And even though this lady was a white lady, she was the one that I picked. And so I was very comfortable with her.

But the other, the missionaries, it seems like they were sort of very pushy in certain situations. I didn't understand why, I thought it was all part of the school system. I remember at times when they would come to the dormitories where you lived on Sunday-- [Video stops here; the following thirty lines (within these brackets) do NOT appear on the videotape. They were transcribed from the audiotape, and remain here for continuity:

and it wasn't a case of what denomination you were-- a group of kids just went with this strange white man, and he took you way far away, across the street to a building. And I guess that's where you worshiped, and you're supposed to worship there. I remember I went to a church where sacrament was bread. And I remember most of the kids wanted to go over there, just so that they can eat some bread, because we were hungry in the morning. So that was a choice of religion, because of the bread that we could eat--a little extra eat. And so other than that, we never really got to know the missionaries.

Now, we had another store, a trading post, just a little ways, about a mile away, walking distance. Now, I didn't really get to know this man. All I knew, he was a short guy with a bald head. But he won our hearts because he had his way of doing that also. I remember if we were good boys and good girls, we would have this privilege of being told that we can go to the trading post. We didn't have any money, we had no reason to go. But when we got there, I remember this white man used to tell us to stand right in the middle. See, the counters went all the way around here. And there was a space right there in the middle where people mingled--all these Indian people that came to trade and to buy stuff--they mingled there and talked. That's where all the kids would get all bunched up and he would take a handful of these pennies and he would throw it to us like this. And we would scurry to get as many pennies as we could--get at least two handfuls and do that to us. Now we had money to spend, see. And he did that to us every time we went over there. That won our hearts, and we wanted to go see this man again. Even though we didn't have any money, we had about maybe ten, fifteen cents, but it was enough to buy maybe gum, bubble gum. Boy! And we made it last a long time. That was a way of adjusting to the school system. We had the missionaries there, we had the dormitory life, the teacher there. We also had the trading post. We went through a lot of hard times, going to school. But everybody had their own--the teacher, the missionaries, and the trader over here-- they all had their own thing to do, and they all had a way of keeping us going, keeping us interested. (Videotape resumes)]

(Steiger makes comment about tape) 

Underhill: This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. This is Tape 2 of two with Paul Begay. Present are Lew Steiger, and of course Mr. Begay and myself, and it is Tuesday, February 10, [1998], about 10:00 a.m.

You mentioned weaving and the importance of weaving among the family, among the Navajo people. Was your mother also a weaver? 

Begay: Yes. That was, like I said, back in the old days when I was growing up. It was expected that the women are weavers. Like I said, it was the way of our economy. You can't have anything or expect to have anything unless you knew how to weave. If you had sheep, you gotta know how to weave. You can't be selling sheep or sheepskin all the time. But of course a nice blanket will always bring a higher price than just selling your sheep or selling wool or selling sheepskin. And so Mom was the weaver. She taught my sisters how to weave. Because of the introduction to the education system, some of my sisters have limited education in the art of weaving. A couple of my sisters had spent a lot more time with Mom, and she had more experience and education into weaving, so she has more knowledge in the weaving area than my other sisters. And so weaving, we've always seen. In each hogan, there is always a weaver. This is a part of life. It was always done year-round, because you never know when the trip to the trading post will be made. It seems like there's always a rug there. When I go down to visit my mother in <Tuba City>, there seems to be always a rug on the loom there, half woven or almost completed, or in the process of beginning. So Mom is still a weaver today. I have a daughter and she spends a lot of time with my mother, and she's learning how to weave. In fact, a year ago, a year-and-a-half ago, she began to give me small practice ones. They're about a foot by ten inches, and I'd seen maybe about ten of them, around. And she would give me a couple of them here and there. And then one day, I don't remember what the occasion was, but she gave me something wrapped. And all the time I've been visiting there, I guess she was hiding the loom somewhere, but it was a pretty big-sized rug, about three feet by four feet. And she gave me her first finished big-size rug. She says, "This is for you, Dad." So I have it at home. And so the rug weaving is carried down--at least in my family--to even the granddaughters, the younger generation. And so it's important to my mother, in her way of thinking, that this tradition, this art--it's not more or less an art, it's a tradition, it's a culture--that it be carried on and be maintained, not to let it die. And so I feel that she's got this great appreciation in her heart, knowing that it's still being carried down. 

Underhill: Some of the traders have described showing the Navajo women different designs, and from their perspective, influencing how the rugs were made. I've also heard from a Navajo woman that there is no design until you start, and that the rug takes on its own life. (

Begay: Yeah.) 

Underhill: How would you describe that process? 

Begay: Well, the weaver never uses any type of a measuring device, because of her strong belief in the mythology stories. We believe we learn--the Navajo people, the Navajo weaver--believes she learned how to weave from this spiritual person. Now, when we got into the education system, I read a book, and I was told by people in the education world, that the Navajos were not weavers at all, and that they had learned this art from the Pueblo Indians. And so one day I went home and I told my grandmother, I said "We were told that we learned this art of weaving, this culture, from the Pueblo Indians. Kiis’ áanii bits’ ‘áádéé’, from the Pueblos." And she told me (chuckles), anything that she disagrees with, or anything that my grandfather disagrees with, he or she will correct you, sit you down right then and there and correct you, and tell [you] their version. Because of the strong belief in the mythology story, my grandmother sat me down there, and she told me that a long time ago in the mythology stories it is told where we learned the art of weaving. It was not from the Pueblo Indians. She says that like many Indian tribes, the earth is our mother, and the sky is our father, and everything that exists, like I said before, is related to us--crawling creatures, the winged beings, the four-legged creatures, the plants, the trees, the mountains, the valleys, the waters, the air, the darkness, the light, the sun, the moon. They're all related to us. "And so one day," she says, "the sun came up, our father the sun came up." Back in the mythology world there was only holy beings existed on earth, and one day the sun spoke. And the sun spoke and he says, "Why is it that I travel many miles, many distances each day, and I give you the light and I give you the warmth, but when I set in the west, I spend my lonely nights by myself? I need somebody to be with me, be my companion, to spend my nights with." And so the holy people came together. Now, before these holy people came together, there among them was this spiritual woman. They called the spiritual woman Changing Woman. Now, this woman became a woman. Before she became a woman, she was called White Shell Woman. Now, there was a white mountain. In the Navajo mythology or the cultural teachings, you have four sacred mountains: the white shell in the east, the turquoise mountain in the south, the abalone in the west, and the obsidian, the jet, in the north. And the Reservation is within these four sacred mountains. During that time in the mythology world, in the beginning, they saw to the east a mountain, this white shell mountain, and there were many mountains around it. One particular mountain had a cloud hovering on top. And so the holy people got up in the morning and they heard a child cry, and they didn't understand where.... It appears that the crying of this child was coming from this mountain that had this particular cloud hovering on top, floating on top. So the holy people went there, and sure enough, they found a child there. Seems to be abandoned. They looked around, they didn't find anybody around. The spirits spoke to them, and it was a gift to the holy people. They picked up the child and they took it back down to where they lived. Because the child did not belong to anybody, it didn't have a mother or father, the holy people helped each other and they raised the child until she reached the age of puberty, and a puberty ceremony was done for the child, this little girl, this young girl. At the end of the four-day ceremony, the conclusion of the ceremony, she became a woman, so they changed her name from White Shell Woman to Changing Woman. Now it appeared when the sun spoke to them, that the sun requested a companion. The holy people thought spiritually, "Oh, this is why the child was sent to us. It was meant to be this way, that we send this woman, who's now called Changing Woman, to be with the sun." So the Changing Woman was sent to the west to be with the sun. There, they had a spiritual union. From this spiritual union it resulted in the birth of two boys, twins, one called Monster Slayer, the other called Child Born of the Water. But they had one main reason for being born, these two boys. The reason was that they will travel on Navajo land and they will kill off all the monsters that should not exist in today's world. There were many monsters, enemies, that preyed on the people, the Navajo. And their job was to do away with all these bad creatures. One day they were doing their job, and they were walking down this valley and they heard somebody singing, a beautiful voice coming from afar. And they looked in that direction, but they didn't see anybody, so they began to follow the sound. And the closer they got, the singing became louder and louder, but they still couldn't see anybody, until they came upon a hole in the ground. They looked down there, and sure enough, there was somebody down there. There was a woman, and the woman was weaving a rug. The boys quietly knelt down, and they looked down there, and they watched. The woman was happy, that's why she was singing. She was happy because she just had a little piece to go to complete her weaving on the rug. The boys watched. The woman completed her weaving, she took the rug off the loom, and she walked in that direction. And the direction that she walked away, a line followed her. "So, my grandson," my grandmother says, "When you look at a spider web somewhere, in your home or someplace, look closely, and if you don't see a spider there, you'll see a line, the direction that the spider departed. That's why when you make a rug, in one corner of the weave, there should be a line that comes out to the end of the rug, we call the spirit line. That is to pay tribute, to honor the Spider Woman that we learned how to weave from. It was not the Pueblo Indians we learned how to weave from, it was the Spider Woman. Therefore, the line should always exist in an enclosed--(draws a square with his hands) [In] a rug with a border, there should be a line that comes out. When you leave this line out, that means that you will leave your mind open to think of new designs. If you don't leave the line in there, you close the rug, then you've enclosed your mind, and you will have a hard time thinking of new designs. New techniques, new designs will be gone. And so this is the reason why the line should be there." So it is the Spider Woman, this is the spiritual woman that we learned how to weave from.

Now, being that the belief among the weavers is that we learned from the spiritual woman, she don't need no measuring device. She, beforehand, understands what kind of a rug she will begin to weave, and she will begin to weave--run the wool back and forth, the strands of yarn and the wool, back and forth, and she begins to weave. What they have, the intricate designs, all these, they are usually identical. From this side, if this rug was one piece here, it would be the same as it is over here. I can never understand how my mother does that. She weaves from the bottom all the way to the top. When she completes the weave, a rug something like this (gestures toward rug on the wall behind him) with a very intricate design, I fold it in half when she completes it, and it's exactly half and half. And sometimes I will get a straight pin, and maybe put a straight pin right here (again gestures toward rug behind him), and maybe another one right in the middle of this diamond here, and another one maybe right in the middle of this grey area here, fold it, half and half. Then I turn it around, when I turn it around, it's exactly where I placed it on the other side. Now how does that happen? For the weaver, it's the power of the spiritual woman, the Spider Woman, that makes it happen. This is the way they think when they're weaving. The only measuring thing that I see when my mom is weaving, is she'll be weaving and she'd use her hands. "Oh, it's about three [hand spans] there, three there," and she'd go back and forth, and that's her only measuring device, is her hand. But it's not determined. When I wanted to draw a rug, I get out a ruler or a yardstick, get out a piece of paper, and I measure it out. This is the way a lot of people understand. They think that the Indian people do this. But the weaver just begins to weave. How does it happen? By the power of the spirit of the Spider Woman. 

Underhill: When did you begin working in a trading post? 

Begay: I believe I worked for Elijah Blair for about three years--mainly, I guess, because I needed a job (laughs) at that time. And then I also had a lot of understanding about the rugs, I had a lot of understanding about the arts and crafts of the immediate Indian tribes here. And I see a lot of them here. I also knew Elijah Blair very well. I didn't really know his children personally at that time. But when I began to work with them, I eventually grew to know their family very well. Just the thought of working with the people. Although at many times, here again, the negative part and the positive part of the Indian people coming to trade, you begin to feel that. I remember feeling at times, this woman put a lot of work into this rug. Maybe she got paid about $200. I would stand here and wish she could have got at least $300. But, you know, I'm a person trying to make a living too, even though I understand that this is the way the system of the trading post works. Here again, the compassion side, the compassion for my people is always in the heart also, and you sort of feel bad, but you still work with that. And so it was good working with the Indian people. Here again, even though the Navajo people sometimes have bad feelings about the trading posts, coming to the trading posts will never stop, they will always be here. We wish it will always be here, anyway. It's not the same as going to a Wal- Mart over here, or Safeway over here. It's not the same. When you go to a trading post, and you know this trader, it's just like going to a relative that owns a trading post. This friendship and this relationship between the trader and the Indian has developed so strongly that this is the place you want to go, even though you complain at certain times that that's too much, you still go there, 'cause that's just part of family. 

Underhill: What separates a good trader from a bad trader? 

Begay: (big sigh) The only thing I see as far as a good trader and a bad trader is, I think--just that I don't know one trader personally, and I know the other one. I think eventually if I begin to know the trader that I [didn't] know before, eventually I will like the trader. But I think all traders are alike. I sometimes go to the bigger cities. Traders there are really--they have really big stores. They have a whole complex of buildings, and inside there is just amazing-- just stacks and stacks of rugs. And this is what the Indian people see, and this is the first thing that comes to their mind. "Boy, that man is just getting rich on us!" Now, that's just the idea the other people have. Sometimes I get that idea also, but that doesn't make him a bad trader. I really don't think there is a bad trader--at least not from my experience. I think the intention of the trader in the first place, when he came onto the Reservation, was to work with the Indians and help the Indians--just the understanding that he is also making a living was a little bit hard to understand. But eventually, the Indian people began to understand that.

My experience with Jaiyazhi, he's, like I said, always a friend to the Navajo people. He always will be. He's traveled most of the Navajo Reservation, setting up his trading posts here and there. We would love to think that his home is always Dinnebito, even though his store is not there. I think just looking at him, just the feeling of being--just because I'm Indian and I feel this--I think he thinks Dinnebito is his home, because he knows a lot of people there, that's where he spent a lot of time. Growing up as a little kid, he was the first white trader I have seen. My family, my grandparents, my whole relatives that live within this expanse, the surrounding area, with a radius of about twenty, twenty-five miles, they know nobody else other than Jaiyazhi. And so we go over there. He was our man. Well, he still is today! (chuckles) 

Underhill: You mentioned that all traders are alike. What characteristics do those traders share? 

Begay: Pawn, rugs. (laughs) I think the main thing, they're there because they love the Indians and they want to help the Indians. They were there before the big stores were, before all these convenience stores got scattered on the Reservation. They were there before everybody else. And I think for the most part, most of these traders just grew with these Indian people, and it's now hard to get away from, because they have now become part of the family. I think for the most part, most of these traders feel that way. "I belong to the Indian people." And the Indian people also feel he belongs to us and we belong to him, we're family. That's just the attachment that develops through years among them. So, being family, it's very hard to get away from family and relocate. If I lived here all my life in Page, it'd be hard for me to get away from my relatives--especially the Navajo way. It's easy for a white person to do that. It's easy for a white person to relocate to L.A.[<Los Angeles>] or to <Seattle>, maybe because of economic reasons you have a better job over there. But Navajo will settle for a less paying job here, just so he can be with his family. I think Jaiyazhi doesn't want to leave. I think some of these traders don't want to leave, because now they've lived with these Indian people for so long, they're beginning to think like Indians--it's hard for them, their heart says, "I can't leave." 

Underhill: What have you learned from your association with traders? You've mentioned some of the differences in the economic approach. But is there anything else that you've learned? 

Begay: I didn't really spend like on an every-day basis, but I've learned to appreciate, like I said, I’ve also looked at the negative part of it. The trader is feeding off the Indians. I've looked at it in this part a while back, for a time. But I've learned to appreciate that they were there to help my family. I now understand the reason why the trip to the trading post was very special. When I was growing up, it wasn't done all the time. When somebody came and knocked on our hogan door and says, "We're going to the trading post. Do you need anything? Or [does] anybody need a ride?" Or, "Throw in your three sheepskins, we'll sell it for you and bring you back some bubble gum." The more stuff, supplies, the necessities were added onto the trading posts, the more we needed to go to the trading post. And it was a way for the trader to help my family, my grandma and my granddad, my parents, my aunts and uncles, the group of people I lived with. It was a way to advance, go to the next stage of this changing life. And I have this great appreciation for that. I've learned to appreciate the trader: Do away with the negative side and learn to appreciate that they were there for a reason. They were there because they thought, "I'll work with the Indians, because I love the Indians, because I want to supply them with what they need. They have what they need, and they make what they need. I can work with them, and become friends and become family with them." And a lot of traders have gotten to this stage. And my appreciations, not only for Jaiyazhi, but for the trader that also thinks in this way, thinks of the Indian as family that he's grown to love, and he's finally made them understand that this was the reason why he came. 

Underhill: And what do you think the Navajo people taught the traders? 

Begay: What the Navajo taught the trader? Well, in this case, for Elijah Blair, I believe that because I now understand he's got probably a greater knowledge of Navajo culture, language, the everyday lifestyle, the teasing techniques, how to interact with your Navajo people. He has greater knowledge than a lot of Navajo people I know. A lot of Navajo people don't really carry on this tradition, because, here again, with the changing times. A lot of our Navajo people don't understand the language, they don't understand the way it used to be a long time ago. But this man was here a long time ago, so he understands. And so I think that the Navajos taught this white trader, and in return, [he] better understands the Navajo. Here again, becoming the family, this was a way of becoming that family member. 

Underhill: Is there any favorite story you'd like to tell on Elijah before we stop? (laughs) 

Begay: Elijah Blair? Well, like I said, he's a very fun person. "Fun" meaning that, you know, when I see--not only me talking with him--even when I see, it gives me a great thrill to watch him with other Indian, Navajo people, and the way they act. He doesn't act like a white man, he acts like the Navajo. He puts himself in a position of probably thinking that he's Navajo. In fact, I've even heard him at one time say he thinks he was born with the wrong color. (laughter) And one of the greatest--the one that stands out in my mind, thinking about it, [is] when he said one day that he believes that he should have been Navajo and not white--he was born with the wrong color. I remember he was standing with his wife, and in the Navajo way, you might observe when you go out on the street, when there's a lot of Navajo people, if you see a Navajo man walking, at about four or five paces behind, there's a Navajo woman walking. Culture tells you that these two are married to each other, because in the Navajo way, they never walk together like this. The Navajo man always leads the woman. I remember him saying, "I believe I should have been a Navajo, so Claudia, from now on, I want you to walk four paces behind me." (chuckles) And I remember Claudia getting mad at him, and telling him that she was never gonna do that, and that was disrespectful. Of course that's disrespectful in white culture. I remember this teasing that went on. That gives me an idea that this man is very schooled and very educated in the understanding of the Navajo culture. Quite a man. 

Underhill: Is there anything else you would like to add about trading or Navajo culture? 

Begay: Well, cultural stories are very important to me. I consider myself a traditionalist. The stories that I tell relate to traditional ways. I also understand the western way of life. That cannot be avoided. I live in a changing time, a world that is constantly changing. But I have great pride in my language, in my history, in my culture, and I wish to just hope that it carries on, and it never dies. Like the thoughts of the Navajo weaver, she hopes that the rug weaving never dies, and she tries very hard to pass it down to her daughters and granddaughters. Likewise, the traditional stories, I would hope that it stays that way. A Navajo or an Anglo trader or a trader to the Indians, for that matter, if he truly understands and respects and appreciates the cultural teachings of the Navajo people, he's truly a Navajo trader, a trader to the Navajos. I think a true trader is the trader that understands the Navajo in this way. 

Underhill: Well, I'd like to thank you very much for your time this morning. It's been just a wonderful interview, and I am honored to have the chance to talk to you. Thank you. 

Begay: You're welcome.



