FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Josephine Babbitt

Interview number NAU.OH.28.5

 

Josephine Babbitt, who is the widow of Herbert Babbitt. Herbert was the son of George Babbitt, Sr., one of the five original Babbitt brothers. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on July 20, 1976. Transcribed July 20, 1995. Transcriber: Nancy Warden.

 

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

 

Tape 1, Side 2

 

Born in <New Mexico>

Parents

Mother, Nancy Saunders, W. Virginia

Father, Uton Hays, <Missouri>

Father’s occupation

Brothers and sisters

Schooling

Jobs held

War Finance Corporation, 1920’s

Arizona Livestock Loan Company

Babbitt’s operations in <Arizona>

H.V. Watson

Came to <Flagstaff> in 1929

Marriage and family

Husband, Herbert Babbitt

Superintendent of ranches for family business

Babbitt family, discussed

George, Sr.

Fight for Normal School

James

George Babbitt pulling out of corporation

Children

Babbitt women had babies in <Jerome> and <Los Angeles>

Nancy, Joanne, Herb, Jr., Bertrand

Schooling

Streets on Cherry Hill named after family members

Downtown area discussed in detail

Prohibition and Front Street

Hotels

Residential areas, who lived in certain houses

 

Tape 1, Side 2

 

Downtown, continued

Stores and service buildings

Snow storms

Mill Town

Babbitts and Riordans

Traveling around Babbitt ranches and feedlots

Social life in community

Entertaining in homes

C.J. Babbitt home

Fraternal organizations

Card clubs

Horseback riding and picnics

Role of NAU in community

 

Tape 2, Side 1

 

Social life in community, continued

Community concerts

Pioneer Historical Society Museum

Art Barn

Museum of Northern Arizona

Comments of social problems of 1970’s

Churches, discussed

Mormons

Depression of 1930’s

Weather conditions

Other ethnic groups

Blacks

Orientals

Jewish families

Summer festivals

Community concerts

Flagstaff Symphony

Pow Wow

East <Flagstaff>

Saguaro Club, night club

 



KRISTENE PRENNACE: This is an interview with Mrs. Josephine Babbitt, who is the widow of Herbert Babbitt. Herbert was the son of George Babbitt, Sr., one of the five original Babbitt Brothers. The interview is being conducted on July 20, 1976 in Mrs. Babbitt's home, located at 612 N. San Francisco St. in <Flagstaff> by Kristine Prennace, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay, Mrs. Babbitt, when and where were you born?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: East <Las Vegas New Mexico>. Now, listen, there's no use writing that down.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: And who were your parents?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Nancy, do you want her maiden name?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Sure.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: She was Nancy Saunders, S A U N D E R S. And Upton Hays. And that's H A Y S, not "es".



KRISTENE PRENNACE: And where did they come from originally?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, dad was born in <Missouri>. And my mother was born in <Hinton West Virginia>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay, and what did your father do?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: He was with the Santa Fe Railroad.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh! And, now did you have any brothers and sisters?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: I had ah, I had three sisters. No brothers.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: And then you completed all your schooling in <New Mexico>?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Ah, well I went for a short while to the University of <Missouri>. But I went to NMNU that was what it was then, <New Mexico> Normal University, and Santa Fe High School in <New Mexico>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: What was, like your area of interest? Were you… if it was "Normal School", is that for teaching?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Ah, no, not at the time that I went there. I was in the elementary school there.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And then we moved to Santa Fe, and I took my high school there. And then I went back to the University of Missouri. And I got sick, and I had to come home. And then I got to working, and I didn't go back. I went in with the War Finance Corporation. And we had <Arizona> and <New Mexico> and <California> and a portion of Chihuahua State in old <Mexico>. And the War Finance came in there in the twenties to help finance. That was when all the banks were closing and all. And the cattlemen, well all the livestock men were having such a fantastically bad time trying to get by. And the War Finance was instituted to try and pull them out of their financial difficulties after so many of the banks closed. And I worked in the head office there in Santa Fe. And then my immediate boss from there came over here. At that time, Babbitts' had formed; they called it the "Arizona Livestock Loan Company". And that was picking up when the individual loan companies were attempting to come up with the financing for the livestock men. And they had that. It has since; they since closed it out of their operations. But it held over that period of rehabilitation of the financial structure. And he came over here to run that and to manage the Babbitt Brothers Trading Company as a whole. And he brought me with him. I was his private secretary. And when he and his family came over here, why I came along. That's how I got to <Flagstaff>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now, what was his name? I didn't catch it.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Ah H.V. Watson. And he's since dead. And his wife lives and daughter live in <Scottsdale>. And, but that was how I happened to come to <Flagstaff>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh, and what year was that?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Twenty-six.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh (laughs).



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Fifty years ago next month.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, did you gonna investigate? (Maybe talking to an animal).



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay. So, now, when did you…? We'll go ahead with your marriage and family, then. When did you meet your husband?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, when I first came to <Flagstaff>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, right away.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: He was superintendent of ranches for the whole Babbitt outfit. And he, 'course when I came here, Babbitts' were very, very much in the livestock business. They, or their affiliates, had about fifty thousand head of sheep and fifty thousand head of cattle. That's almost as many as they've got in the whole state now (?). And he ran that and supervised them all and the lands. He and his uncle, C.J., and Uncle Bill. They were the livestock end of it. And Herb's father, of course, had died in 1920. And he was, he was the merchant. That's originally what he came for. He worked for P.J. Brannen. Brannen had a store here. And Herb's father worked for him. And then he was in real estate… ah, Herb's father.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now is that David?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: George, no that’s George.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: George, okay.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: George, Sr., and he was very active in politics. In fact he was responsible for keeping the college up here. They wanted to turn it into an insane asylum. And he was responsible. They made many a trip back and forth to <Phoenix> in buckboard, fighting for that, he and some of the old timers. And Lady B, I don't know whether you ever heard of her or not.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh uh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: It was Mrs. Beckwith. Hey, don't put your foot in that, Bitsy (?). She hears something buzzing. She's lost, that's what's the matter. We lost our lovely old collie, just died yesterday morning. We're lost. (talking about dog) And Lady B, who has since died, they called her, she was matron of the dorm, the old Campbell Hall. That was the one dorm they had for women. And he got her, and then Mother Hanley, they ran the dining room for years. And when her husband died, why Mr. George was the one that got Mother Hanley in there running the dining hall at the college. Then she was there for a long, long time. All the old grads remember Mother Hanley. But he was, they were very much a part. He was very much a part of everything connected with the college. The rest of them never paid too much attention to it, but Mr. George did.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Is he the one that the Babbitt dorm is named after now, then?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, they named that… now that was named for James Babbitt. And, C.J. Babbitt, who was the second oldest, and Jimmy was his son. His two brothers, Paul and John, are still living. But Jimmy, that Jimmy Babbitt, and he was state senator, and he was working around like that. And then after he died, John took over. And John was in the Senate for awhile. And then was on the Board of Regents for a long time, his brother. But he kind of inherited Jimmy's place originally in the Senate after Jim died. Jim died on a hunting trip down there, froze to death.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh you're kidding.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And his wife, she's still living. She lives in <Santa Monica>, was the daughter of P.J. Brannen, who was the daughter of P.J. Brannen. And, ah, they had somebody write quite a story about the Babbitts'. Phyllis has never let them have it published. She stopped publication of it. And I personally have never read it. My daughter has, Paula has a copy, but I've never even had a copy. And the fella that wrote it had spent a long time on it and did lots of research. But anyway, that does for the Babbitts' enough anyway, I think.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay, so...



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And I met him, of course, we were all in the office and working together. And he was Herbert, of course, Herbert Babbitt. And he came from <Flagstaff>. And he died in 1970. And I have, of course, he had been out of the firm, the George Babbitt family got out of the firm as a whole in thirty-seven. And George was postmaster and then real estate here for a long time. And Bert ran the sheep outfit, and Herb was in, well originally he was in the farm machinery business. And then he went into automobile business until he got sick. And he was in there for a while after that, but not too long.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now is that… then James Babbitt took that over again, Jimmy Babbitt?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, no, no.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: No that wasn't the same…?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, E.D. Babbitt, who was Dave's oldest son, started the Babbitt Ford.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And this is… Jimmy's his nephew. And he, Herb had, he had Dodge-Plymouth and then he had DeSoto - Plymouth. And when he first started, he was in John Deere Farm Machinery and stuff. But there was no connection between the two motor companies.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh. When did you get married?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: In thirty-one.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: And you had children then?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Four.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Why don't I go ahead and get their names since they were probably born… and well, I don’t know if they were born and raised in <Flagstaff>.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, they weren't born here; they were all raised here. But when my children were being born and Frances' children were being born, and Rosa's children, that was Mrs. Ray, when they were being born, we wouldn't have them here if you could possibly get away, because the… they didn't think too much of the hospital situation.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Don't quote me on that, for heaven's sake. But anybody, or even with any illness or anything else, you'd get away from here if you had to. We used to go on, almost all of us here used to go down to <Jerome> to the United Verde Hospital down there for surgery and stuff.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, that was very large (?) _____.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yes, it sits up there on the hill in <Jerome>, still. It was up there, and Dr. Carlson (?) ran… a fabulous surgeon, he was wonderful. But we'd get out of here if we could. And all of my children, we had Dr. Rooney (?). Herb's oldest sister had had her children in <California>. Through her, the rest of us got in touch with Dr. Rooney, and Frances had her children. Of course she and Paul lived in <California> for awhile, over there before he came back here. And he had been here first. He was in the office here when I first came. In fact we were engaged a short time for awhile. But, and then he went over there and took his law. And then was over there. But, so three of my children were born in <Los Angeles>. And the fourth one was supposed to be born there, (ed: kitten can be heard) but he came ahead of time. And we barely had time to get the ambulance to <Cottonwood>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh (laughs).



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: So, he is really the only native Arizonan in that respect. But, of course, they were all back here by the time they were ten days old. And were raised here. And all of them went to school here. Joansie (?) did go to the University of Arizona one summer. But she and her husband and Nancy and… well Nancy's husband went to the U of A. But she taught in <Tucson> for awhile while he went to the U of A, my oldest daughter. But there were four. Did you say you wanted their names?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Sure.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Nancy and JoAnn and Herb, Jr. and Bertrand. That's B e r t r a n d. He was named after his uncle.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: I was wondering. Somebody told me that the streets up on Cherry Hill were named after…



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah, the families, uh huh. And Bert was Herb's older brother.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: But, ah, and three of them still live here. JoAnn and her family live in <St. Johns>.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: And then did they go to, like Nativity School?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Was that called "Nativity" or "St. Anthonys"?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: St. Anthonys. St. Anthonys. I can't remember when it changed to Nativity. I know every once in awhile we still start calling it… here not long ago, some of the kids, they had a reunion, class of forty something here. And she had some pictures taken of, and everybody said, " St. Anthonys School." It was St. Anthony’s. Stayed that way for a long time.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah. Okay. When you first came to <Flagstaff>, can you remember what the downtown area looked like?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh heavens, yes. Well everything was down town. And the American Kitchen was down there where Karl's Shoe Store is now. And Bogart's Cafe was around on Front Street. And, well most of the restaurants except Bogarts (?) were on Front Street. Well just everything that there was, was down there. And, then, of course, when prohibition was repealed, why the saloons came back. But, ah…



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Was there anything in their place during Prohibition? That was a little before you came here.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, when was Prohibition? Didn't come out until '33 did it or '32?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay, I wasn't sure.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah, because we drank, lots of us, we called it "Panther Juice". For a lot of years we had some awful good bootleggers around here.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: (laughs). Did they convert those saloons then to some other type of business during the Prohibition?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, but they had been closed.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Just boarded up.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, closed as far as saloons were concerned. They just had ... I don't remember what was in, like old Club 66 down there on the corner. I don't remember what was in there. There was, and what's now the Rose Tree. Doc Williams had his saddlery on Front Street down this other way. And the beauty parlor in there for lots of years. And the old Pine Hotel. Where the Arizona Supply is now used to be the bus depot, Greyhound Bus Depot. And it's kind of hard, I hadn't thought back about the location of things. And, of course, the old Bank Hotel was still operating, and there was a gift shop down where Berger's is now. But the upstairs was still being operated as a hotel. And the old Weatherford was big business. I came here in twenty-six, and the Monte Vista, is a hotel, and, oh my, they were terribly proud of it; well it was a lovely place; opened at New Year's time, twenty-seven. That was quite a big event, the opening of the Monte Vista, because the Weatherford was up, and the old Commercial Hotel was very active down there on Front Street. And Mr. Longley, the old man Longley, had a barbershop down there for years. And off the lobby, which was kind of characteristic of those days, they always had, and of course, they had the barber shop and baths and stuff, you know. Because when the cowboys and so forth came to town, they needed shaves and baths and everything. They weren't running back and forth in pick-ups and so forth.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: No, no. (laughs). I’m sure they weren’t.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And Mr. Prochnow, Charles Prochnow, ran the old Commercial Hotel down there. It's strange, way the things go around. A girl with whom my sister went to school, in fact they graduated from NMNU, <New Mexico>, she's twelve years older than I am. She and Marguerite graduated together from over there. And Marguerite's father ran the old Commercial Hotel down here for quite awhile before Mr. Prochnow went in. Then Mr. Prochnow ran it. And that is Mary Lewis' father. She could tell you some of that, because all those Prochnows, see there were twelve of them. And they lived over in the old mill, by what's the new mill now, Southwest. But they lived; there's a big old home still over there. And, of course, Betty Biller, who is here, and Eleanor Durkee, and Mary Lewis, and they're still living here. And they are pretty well scattered. Ray lives in <Sun City>. But Mary, of course, was Clerk of the Superior Court down there. But, it was funny, come clear from <Vegas>, and be in here and then they went on to San Francisco, the Duers (?) did. In fact she and Earl Slipher, who is since dead, he was V.M's brother they were engaged. And then they broke it up. And then he married Bess. And, of course, Bess still lives here. And I was trying to _____. And the old Weatherford, of course, the Weatheford's themselves ran it. And the old… it was quite a hotel.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Was the Ideal still downtown, the Ideal?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah, the Ideal that was over there by the Courthouse. Where that Savings and Loan is now. And it was really, they called it "The Ideal Hotel", ah, the majority of the time that I was here until they tore it down, it was run mostly as a, oh what you call a semi-rooming house. The bus drivers and people like that kept a permanent residence at this end of their lines, you know, and roomed in there. Kind of that, that kind of a travel. More than a hotel type. Oh, people could always get in there for a night or two if they were going to be here and all, but it was more on the type of "home type" hotel. You know what I mean.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh, yeah.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Little different than the old Commercial and the Weatherford, and so forth.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Were there any hotels built south of the tracks at all?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Mm mm.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Sierra Vista and the Downtowner. Are those fairly recent?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, no, no, no, they've been built since then. And, ah Nackard's Downtowner down there is one of the… well DuBeau's, I guess, was really the first motel that opened up down town. And Nackard's built those in around there, and then, of course, enlarged it. But that house that's in there, that was, I think they're using that for rooms now. But it was their home. Victor and George and Naj and all of them were… that was their old home down there. And then across from there, where the Western Liquor is and all, and all around that corner onto Agassiz, that all belonged to the Junes. And they had the old laundry, and their big old home is still around the corner there on Agassiz. It's the first big home when you turn this way, you know, has a lot of lilac bushes in front of it. It's still there. But that was their property around there. And, I was trying to think. There wasn't too much. Pilkington had a garage. That was the one my husband bought later, on the corner of Beaver and Santa Fe. And next to that was… there wasn't anything in there until you got to Friedlein's where the station… what do they call it, the motel that's right there on the corner of Humphreys, you know, where the stop lights are. But anyway, that was the old Friedlein property and he owned it. He was plumber and so forth. Freidland (?) Prairie up here on the Peaks is named for him. He had property up there, and there wasn't very much. And, of course, there was no underpass. I'm trying to think of what was on up… damn little… The old, ah… what was her name? Ah, I know Herb and I were supposed to be the first ones married in Nativity Church when the new church was opened. And, what's her name, Bernadette Morris, the old Morris house sat up there kind of on a hill, where that motor outfit is now by the side of the river. And then down here, of course, it was C.B. Wilson's office on the corner where First Federal is now. Of course C.B. was right out on the corner, and he owned that property in there. And next to it was a big two-story frame house that belonged to him. And Mrs. Vandevier, her husband, Art Vandevier, was sheriff here for years. She ran a room and boarding house there. And there was no overpass. There was just a dirt road that went up over the railroad for years and years. We lived, Herb and I lived up there on Aspen for three years or four, and we built this house up here. We moved in here, February of '37. And we lived up there in the old Hagar (?) house. Dr. Fronske lived on the corner right across from the Federated Church, and we lived in that brick house that's right next to it. And then Dr. Manning lived right next to that. And then the old Ashurst house, where, ah, oh Juanita, oh he was health agent here for years. I can't… his name's just escaped me. I'll call it in a minute. Anyway, they lived… that was the old Ashurst home. That brick house that's there on the corner. Stanfill is what I'm trying to say Ed Stanfill, Ed and Juanita Stanfill. And, ah, there wasn't much behind it until you started to go on up what's old Coconino Avenue, and then the older houses started in up there. Like Frank Gold's house and Flora Compton's and those places on up to the houses on the observatory. It was pretty well built up there. And it (?) _____ had built up Coconino there around the old spring.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh. There are a lot of older homes in that area.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: People been there a long time.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And, ah, then Aspen and Birch, and what's the next street?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Cherry.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Cherry. Ah, they were pretty well, pretty well settled from there to the city park, you know. That area was the older area. And, ah, of course, Dave Babbitt's home was down here where the sisters' home is now. That's the old Dave Babbitt home.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh. That big white house that's just by the schoolyard.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Big glassed in porch. Yeah. And, of course, Father Albouy's house. And the school and the nuns lived upstairs over the school and all. And they had a hall, well it faced Cherry and that was their… the front end of that. And the sides were the school. And they had, in the front of it, and when I first came here, they were using that hall for a church. It was the church.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh. It was like a little frame building, was it?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, brick.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: It was brick? Huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: It was brick. And it, ah, that was in there. But that was the older part of town. Herb's folks lived down here; their home was down on Leroux. And their corner was there; it's vacant now. They moved those houses off of that. And the old Sisson house. Sisson was with the mill.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Was next. That's been destroyed.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, he had a town…?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: That whole half block in there, if you know which one I mean. This side of the Unemployment Office.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: From Cherry to Dale. You know that whole back end's vacant. And, ah, the old Hennessey home is where the Unemployment one. And they were there, and the next door. They kind of made that block in there. And then, of course, the old Greenlaw home. Mary's possibly told you that was across the street. And then Eva Marshall lived on the corner where the Navajo Mission is.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: You know… and, ah, C.J. owned the house on the corner where the Valley National is now. And Dr. Miller lived there for years. And the old Keller home, of course, was right next to that, where Kay was raised. And, of course, the one that she's in is on the same street up there, Aspen, in her aunt's old house, the old Beaseley home. And the old Metz house is still there on the corner. That old brick house. It's cater corner, well right across from old Emerson School. And then this way, well there was the old Ideal Hotel and the old Love house. It came up to the corner.

 

END TAPE 1, SIDE 1, BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: She didn't want anything up in front of the big house. They built a beautiful big home up here in 1906, up on the hill behind our house.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Is it gone? It's gone now. (Ed: Babbitt Mansion?)



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yes. Vandals blew it up; burned, gorgeous home.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And that property hasn't been developed. The Dave Babbitts had the south end of it, and that's what's now Pine Crest, you know. The big… where you go up Cherry and up to the big district up there. Ah, now the house across the street, the white house over here was the old Verkamp house.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, right across the street.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah that was John Verkamp's house. That's the Verkamps; his children still own the store at the Canyon, the Verkamp store that's up there. And the white house on the corner was Mom Jakle's old house. And across from it was the old Yeager house, which is still there. It belongs to Dr. Barnes. But Yeager was a sheep man here. But there was nothing here and nothing on up here. And, ah, the houses over… the Thompson house is on the next street; the one on the corner. And, of course, Viola's house was where they have that Guidance Center over there now. And then, ah, Aunt Elizabeth and Uncle Bill owned the house next to the corner that Bess Slipher lived in for so long. The corner house was Judge Crabble's house. And then later, I always knew it as the old Power's house. She was an old timer here. And she had a hat and dress shop down there in the building where Jack Grace is now. The newspaper office was in there where the health deal is.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, it was?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And she had the… and then the old Arizona Light Company was on next to it. And across from there, Rex Goble had a garage and repair shop, that kind of garage and repair shop. And then, of course, the Monte Vista opened so shortly after. And it took up that block. And then right behind it, where the, oh that pants center, right behind the Monte Vista.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Right, that little building.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: It's a two-story building that sits up there. That was the old mortuary.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now, that's where that was.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Uh huh. That was the old mortuary.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, now was that...?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And Flora Compton, Flora Compton's stepfather, Whipple, he ran it for awhile. And then Bill Compton, her husband, he had been in the sheep business, but he got out of the sheep business. And he ran the mortuary. But that's where it was.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay. No one's been able to tell me where it was before.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Right there's where it was.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Great. Good, I’m glad to know that.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: So, and of course, there wasn't anything down there where Babbitt Ford is. Where McLellan's is used to be Babbitt Ford. (Ed: Aspey, Watkins and Diesel Building). That was Babbitt Motor Company that big building there. And behind that, and what's the back end of Penney's now, Babbitts' had their old slaughter house, well not slaughter house, but their… what should I call it, they made sausage. They made all their own sausage and bacon and all that. It's a smokehouse I guess you'd call it. And Herb Hilkin's father and Bill Hudgens ran that for Babbitts'. But, oh their bacon and all. People'd come here to visit, and they'd write back from all over the <United States>, "Please send us some Babbitt bacon". We hated to see it go out. But Ed's garage there. And then at one time, the big basement, where they used for storage and one thing and another under Ed's place, the garage connected over with the basement under the main store, and they work. That store's been remodeled so often, you have no idea. At one time the opera house was upstairs in what's now Babbitt furniture. The old Flagstaff Opera House was up there. And…



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Was there also a theater right in there, too?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: The theater, when I came, was where it is now, the Orpheum. Mary Costigan ran that, and they had the opera house up there. And they'd play stuff that they brought in here. But it was up there. And, ah, over Babbitts' main store. And, of course, they had, they had everything there under one roof. And the old Arizona Bank was where Sprouse Reitz is now. The Arizona Central Bank. And then, of course, the Pollock property was over there by the Weatherford. The Telephone Company used to be in where the, ah Weatherford Cafe is. The Telephone Company was in there. And the… Tom Pollock, he had his offices, and he had a bank. He had his business and all in there. Then Dr. Raymond's property on down the street. You know where it is now behind the old Bank Hotel? Jean and Trox have their Sound in it. (Jean and Trox House of Sound) And then across the street was the old George… his name has escaped me. And then, of course, where Babbitts' Thriftway was, just recently remodeled, three beautiful… George Walters is what I'm thinking. He had the corner over, and they still own it. Oh, where Merle Norman's is, and Western Union used to be in there. And the drug store was on the corner, you know around. And the Post Office was down on the corner of the alley across from Karl's Shoe Store. I don't know, I think they've got a finance company in there now, haven't they? You know you don't get down that way. I don't go down that way often enough. I think it's a finance company. But that was… Of course, Switzer had his building. And then Fines. And then Nackards, Phil and Bessie Nackard right next to Switzer's opened up the dress store that was… and then Fines bought it, and ran it. And then Bea Taft had it. They still kept the name of "Fines". But then and they built the apartments upstairs. But there on the corner was the old post office, the alley, on the corner of the alley.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Was the old post office.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, it was right in there. Do you remember what, you know where Valdis Photo is now?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now what was in there?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: That was the old First National Bank.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Ah, okay.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: That was the old First National Bank. And the Babbitts and the Riordans really owned it. And I know Mr. Grammell (?) was here for a long time, and… Well, I know in thirty-seven when Edna died, that was Ed's first wife, she was up here in the hospital on the hill. And the hospital was a long ways, then. We had terrific weather. She and Ed and Herb and I, we were in the process of moving in here, and we both were sick in the hotel with the flu. They wouldn't let us in here, because the paint wasn't dry. And we'd gotten rid of, out of the old house. You couldn't get any more coal. That winter they delivered coal on sleds. And Ed and Edna, Herbie and I were living down at the Monte Vista. And Edna had surgery. And we were in having breakfast when the phone rang. And they called Ed to the phone to tell him that Edna had died. But he was going back and forth to the hospital on snowshoes.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, you're kidding.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah, because the street ended up here, just a short street. And they didn't have plows and everything. You had to wait and make your own ruts. And he was going back and forth to see Edna up at the hospital. He was going on snowshoes.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh boy. That must have been a really bad winter.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: That was in thirty-seven when we moved in here. And it all happened right there around the first of the year. But it was very sparse up here.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Where did San Francisco end? Do you remember?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well it ended, there wasn't anything up the street here past Runkes'. It just ended. Runkes' old house.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah Columbus kind of was the end there.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And it didn't go as far as Columbus. It was just a dirt road.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh. It's hard to imagine.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well over where the liquor store is and where the office supply is, there wasn't anything when I came. But, ah, we were one of the first, Huffers and Jess Gaddis. And we were the first FHA houses to go in, in <Flagstaff>. And, of course, Huffers is down here on the corner of Cherry and Verde. And we were here. We came in to this. Herbie's mother consented to open up these twelve lots here. And Jess's house is still there. It's a little rock house on the right, right in behind Dr. Ward's office. It faces Beaver.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: What was his last name?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Gaddis.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, Gaddis.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And, ah, there just wasn't anything up here.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: I bet it was really nice.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And my folks came here in twenty-nine. And my sister and her two children were here and Mother and Dad. And we lived over there on the corner of Humphreys in the rock house over there that belongs to Jessie now. (ED: Chez Marc's). And Eleanor Knoles lived across the street, Eleanor and Tommy Knoles.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh they lived here, then. I mean they lived in town. I always thought… oh, it was after you guys moved here that they moved over there.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh it was a long time, yeah. But her children were all born while they lived over here. That was Regina Riordan's, that was Arthur Riordan's old house, the yellow house on the corner, across from Jessie's. And, ah, Arthur died. He and Anna Riordan, and the little Raudebaugh girl all died within twenty-four hours of each other of polio. They'd never seen… they hadn't even seen each other or anything else, and they had it and were gone. And there was no more. And then Regina left here and took her family back to <Kansas>. And Eleanor and Tommy moved in. And they lived over there when Mother and Dad were here. And the old Thornton house was next. And then old DeVaney. He was an uncle of the DeVaneys' that used to have the shoe store. And they had a little house on the corner where Fredell's office is now. (ED: Flagstaff Urgent Care office). And there wasn't anything else up Humphreys for a long time after that. And over behind that towards the high school… I'll tell you who can tell you where everything was to the nails and boards. And then, of course, Mill Town was very flourishing. I mean ALandT homes, the old Arizona Lumber and Timber. And they had a lot of homes around out there where's the Ramada and the Travel Lodge, and Bob's and all. Those were all homes, and everything all around in there… they all belonged… mill houses.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now were they all very similar in structure?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, yes, they were typical of the time in the way that they were designed. And they were all frame. There were no stone or rock houses out there. Except the Riordan homes. You know where they are. You know where they are.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And ah, let me see, of course, up on Observatory, C.B. Wilson's home was up there. And Earl Sliphers lived up there. And then they lived on the road going up to the Observatory. Earl Slipher's house burned. That was when they bought Aunt Elizabeth's house down in town. And C.B.'s house, of course, is still there. And then later Charles Wilson, Jr. built that other house in there. And then V.M., (Slipher) of course, lived up on the hill. And it's centered… but the mill was out there, you know. The big old barn… everything was centered out there. In fact the old office, Joe Riordan still uses that for an office in connection with the mill ______. That was a rock building. It's right on the corner of the highway, where you come off of there by Tyrrells', you know, and down. That was the old original ALandT office. That was there when I came.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now was that a Sisson home, down aways?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, Sisson home was down here on Leroux.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay. I had thought that it was over by ALandT. I don't know why.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well they did have one over there. Wait a minute. I'm wrong. Their house, the Sisson house was out there. It was the old Vail house that was down there on Leroux. It was a great big home.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Well, someone else told me they lived downtown.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: It was an apartment house for a long time, and before they tore it down, it was an old wreck. But the Sisson house was a big house out there. But that was Mill Town as such. And in behind where Pic Quik is and all, and out there, and out in the west highway, there were an awful lot of very sad looking shacks where Mexicans lived and so forth. That was an old section, and the mill workers, and it was handy for them. 'Course we used to have an awful lot more weather than we have. And then also they didn't have the snow removal stuff that they've put to use since. But they didn't have them, you know.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: So you just didn't get down in that end during the winter.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well I mean it was handy for them. And they had housing. And they'd live up there. And they hadn't spread out and went over that way in the old part where the Prochnow house is and all. But those were mostly the bigger homes, like Prochnows' and all, were more executive type homes, as you want. And then they were interspersed between there and lower San Francisco and all with the old, the brown frame shack type things.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh. Now that was in connection with the other mill.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well no, it was the only mill that was here. But their operations were around.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: I see. Now, do you know how the Riordans and the Babbitts were related? Now were they really? (laughs)



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Do you really want to know?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, (laughs). Well, I don't know. Is it spicy?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Do you really want to know? Dave Babbitt, and C.J. Babbitt, and Ed Babbitt, that is the old Ed, not E.D. Babbitt Ford, married three Verkamp sisters. Three brothers married three Verkamp sisters. All right. The Verkamps were first cousins of the Metz families (ED: Note that this is possibly erroneous). And Tim Riordan and M.J. Riordan married two Metz girls; two sisters, Metz sisters. And then Miss Alice, who never married, Miss Alice Metz, the aunt. She lived there a hundred years. She was the first teacher they had here. And the Verkamps, of course, were married to the Babbitts and the Metzes.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay that's how they connect.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Now that's as close, because I'll get you completely confused. But I mean, I've had more people just disbelieve you when you tell them that three brothers married three sisters.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: It is unusual.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well families were large then, dear. And even Cincinnatti was a big place by the side of <Flagstaff> or anything. But we've got old programs, and we've got their old choral deals and their plays, and all that stuff. They were also closely related and acquainted and all. It's just like marrying your school friends. You spend your life with them. It's kind of more or less natural.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Right.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Raised together, your interests and so forth and so on, you know. So they think it's darn strange. And then to have two Riordans married to the sisters, you may get rattled.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay, so now did you, I'm trying to think how long he lived. Did you know M.J. Riordan?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh yes.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: When did he die, do you know?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh, lord, honey.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Well, well, was it like in the thirties, or…?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Anna and Arthur and the little Raudebaugh girl died in, right after I came here, twenty something. M.J. lived quite awhile after that, because… oh quite awhile. But I'll swear I can't remember. I would venture the late thirties sometime. Then Timmy came; well I'm not for dates like that. I'm not good on that. Well I was busy. Of course I worked five years here before Herb and I were married. And then I travelled alot with him. We went around; oh I had to go to all the ranches and all. They had feed lots for the cattle in <California> and feed lots in <Phoenix> and <Chandler>. And they had cattle at that time up here at <Cibecue>, which is on the Apache Reservation. And they had them down here up the river from <Parker>. Then later they threw all the people off the reservation. But they were scattered. And I, we travelled. I traveled with him all the time around to the different ranches and what have you. And then I… busy in the family. And then, of course, I went back to work. And I worked thirteen years for the Valley National before I was retired, you see. So… down town Valley National. And so, I don't know just one year led to another 'til… and I remember… oh, like moving in here, and what the situation was when Edna died, specific dates. And I remember when my folks came here.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, other people in town.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: For dates of death. I think I've got them all, you know, scattered and stuff around the house.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: When you mentioned, you know, going and visiting these ranches, did you maintain residences at each of the places where…?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No, dear. They had a house out here on Cedar Ranch, such as it was, and they had a house out on Spider Web. That's on the road toward Cameron, the other way. And that's the CO Bar. This is the Cataract, and they had a ranch for the foreman down here out of <Winslow>, what they called Dennison (?) on the railroad. And we used to spend… Roy and Lucille Potter, Roy ran the Hart Ranch for Babbitts. And we were awful close friends. I'd get off work, and weekends go down there. And Herb would come down. I've ridden horseback all over Meteor Crater and everything from the ranch. And ah, they didn't maintain, and they weren't… ah, that was the nicest house right down there. Since they've built a real nice house out here at Cedar Ranch; and have a real nice place at Spider. But they were typical ranch houses. I mean they weren't...



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Not real fancy.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, no. And they weren't these estate type things like you think about, the Spanish ranchos in <California>, or anything of that type. Far from it.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: So you're right. The Apache reservation now, was it a reservation when they had the cattle there?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well they had them at what they call "Pine Springs", which is right across there at the <New Mexico> line and <Cibecue> at <Cibecue Arizona>. They called it the old Cibecue Cattle Company is what it was. And it sat there. I'd have to show you on a map. But Alpine Springs and all of it. But we used to come in through <St. Johns>, you know. But we had an awful lot. Oh <Flagstaff> was sure fun. We had a wonderful time.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay. So now I can ask you about the social life.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: There was a lot; I don't know we were just busy all the time. We had to make our own entertainment. We entertained entirely in our homes. And Herb's mother was an inveterate party giver. They always had tremendous New Years(?). And the old Elks, of course. Across the street from the Catholic Church, Nativity, was the old C.J. Babbitt home, one of them. They did live up there on the corner of Park and Birch, too. But, they called the old great big old house. You've probably seen pictures of it. They lived there. Then when he sold that, she went to <California> and stayed there the rest of her life. She never even came back here. And then the Elks bought it. And they built a big hall. And the house faced Beaver. And the big hall was back aways this way. Later it was the Labor Hall. And now it's part of the library. I mean I think they tore it all down to build the new library. But that was where it was. And we had the Elks and the Knights of Columbus and everybody. The big… always had a big Knights of Columbus dance. And always a big Elks dance, New Years. And then we'd all leave the Elks Club and go up to the big house on the hill, to Herb's house and wind up the New Years the rest of the night. And Herb's mother entertained. She always had a tremendous Easter egg hunt for all the Mexican children in town. She'd dye hundreds of eggs and have a big egg hunt in that great big old house. And they had a wonderful time. And she entertained just skads, just all the time, everybody in town. Mary Drain, she can tell you her mother and all the older women. Old Agnes Bouchette(?), and Mrs. McGonigle. They were all high powered. Of course they didn't play contract bridge. But they played Whist and then Bridge, you know.

 

And talk about your cutthroat games. If you wanted some cutthroat games, you get some of those old gals in there to play. And it was a riot. Cheat like hell if you didn't watch them. Mary was laughing about that here not long ago. Then the other people, the Dolans and the Waldhauses and the Ishams and the Sliphers and the Watsons; and then Mary Lutes and Mildred Wetzel and I and Mildred and Mary Todd at the college. And I, of course, was secretary. And we were always in with that group. Their children were all small then. And we weren't married. And we had wonderful horseback trips. And then almost, almost every night we'd have a picnic. And Grace Gassman and Beulah and Abbie Isham and all of them. They were all home during the day. So they'd fix all this marvelous food. And we'd go up here and picnic behind the Flagstaff Country Club and all. And then Otto Hallman (?) was here, Otto Platten we always called him then, and he was from <Denmark>. And he was a cowboy out here on the C.O. And we used to then… Helen Dolan, and then the younger group later, Otto would go out here. And we'd go up to <Little Springs>, around the mountain. It's all, oh it's not cleared out. It used to be a beautiful spring. Do you know where it is, in behind Fern Mountain?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: You've probably seen the sign, "Little Spring", yeah. And we'd go up there. And he'd go ahead of us in the afternoon and have all the food cooked in Dutch ovens. And we'd go up and eat and ride horseback home.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Long ride.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And we went up the old Weatherford Trail. The old trail, not the road to the top of the peaks, one trip on one Sunday. And that was quite an experience. And it's almost, I guess, completely obliterated now from land slides and one thing and another. And ah, I don't know, the library was up there over where the Baker's gift shop… upstairs there, there was an apartment. The old library was up there. And everybody used the library all the time. Lucina DeVaney ran it for years. It was her husband who had "DeVaney's Shoe Store". And, ah, we did that. And, of course, Peggy Neff (?) was here and Dorothy VanNess (?) who was Bess Babbitt's sister. She didn't live here. Bess does, but not Dorothy. And Kay Rucker and all of us we used to go over to Miz Pollock's to the "Girl's Friendly Society". And then almost all of us took courses at the college. They had night courses, and we'd take night courses up there at the college. And, ah we didn't take cake baking and stuff of that kind. We took economics, law, and all kinds of things. We did a lot. We did that. And cars, of course, weren't made to go too far. We would go back and forth to <Oak Creek>, but the old road didn't go like you go now. It was quite a road.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Really sharp turns.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh they'd go down there to the old Lolomai Lodge and have big parties. The Lolomai Lodge was in there behind where the Call of the Canyon was. You know the government, the Forest Service, bought it. And so you're aware of that. But in behind that was the old Lolomai Lodge. I think part of it is still standing in there. But that was the Sisson's place on <Oak Creek>. And they used to have some wonderful times down there. And the Sissons were gone when I came. But it was quite a gathering place for all the younger set when my husband and Ed and all of them were young people. And, ah I don't know. Everybody was busy all the time. Of course, if anything happened to anybody, everybody waded in and cooked and fed and took care of them and so forth. Of course everything that they had at the college, the towns people participated in. We were very close to everybody at the college, personally. And then everything that came was a major interest to the town. And we'd take it in. They had progressively better things coming.

 

END TAPE 1, SIDE 2, BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1



KRISTENE PRENNACE: That was…



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: She was the prime (?). But Peggy Wilson, Mrs. C.B. Wilson, Sr., and she was the primary; she was the prime mover of the Community Concert. And, ah I was a secretary when she got it first started. And we were all volunteers into that, on that. And some of the pioneers around here instigated by Harry Metzger, and they were interested in having our own museum. And they started the Pioneers' Museum. Viola became interested in painting. And she has won quite a good deal of acclaim for her painting. And she instigated the taking over the old building out there for the Art Barn. And, of course, you know she's working on the arts center now. Of course everything that went on at the observatory was like what went on in the college. It was all a community, community deal. We were in on it. And their observations and, you know it was wide open. And they'd say, well what do you do in <Flagstaff>? Well I don't know. We had a wonderful time and were busy. And ah, I don't know, ah culturally. Of course, Dr. Colton came in here and started the museum. And it's grown. He… ah, and, of course, you know that they have turned in quite a fantastic operation. And ah, I don't know. <Flagstaff>'s been a quiet town. They've got more damn stuff going on now than happened in almost the whole fifty years since I've been here. They didn't have all these drug problems and people needing guidance and help and a few other things. If they needed help, they went to church. Honestly, these guidance centers are faking me out. They absolutely are faking me out. I go down to church at a quarter to seven in the morning. And they're over here, and they've turned the old Spangler house over here on Leroux into one right here. We've got two of them right here on the next street. And they're coming in there a quarter of seven in the morning. And later on in the day, the cars are everywhere besides all the others. The one on down Beaver you know all these others? And it amazes me. What's the matter with people? Can't they be satisfied within themselves or within a home?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Things have changed a lot, I guess.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: But there's no need for it. If they'd settle down and tend to their knittin', they wouldn't have all these problems. Well I really, I really feel that way about it. And, ah the thing is I think ninety per cent of it is that the kids are having too much, too easily. They're not kept busy. By the time they get in high school, they are bored.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: I agree with that part.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: So they start looking for excitement. And they get in excitement, and then they get involved. And then they've got problems; and their minds nor their bodies are adjusted to the strains so they crack up.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh yeah, there’s a big difference.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And ah, but, jiminiy, when I think about it. Look at all these people now. It just astounds me. Alcohol and dope and illegitimate children and, ah, all. It ah, it's not because I'm old fashioned especially. But my family, all of our families, the old <Flagstaff> families were of high moral fiber. And the families were raised that way. They weren't out to set the world on fire or anything else. But they were of high moral fiber, and they were stable. And they tried to keep it; they tried to keep their families. They tried to keep their homes that way.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, there was a lot tighter family unit.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Stable. And to, ah, just completely lose. When I was growing up, well, in fact, with my children, my oldest daughter's thirty-eight, and the rest of them behind Nick (?). But if I had thought that my daughters, that I would put my daughter on the pill when they were in high school, believe me, there would have been something doing. You've probably grown up with it, but… and that's not that long ago. I mean that's not being that old fashioned. But I tell you, I think it's terrible. And what in the world are their parents thinking of to turn them loose that way. You don't have to be grim and keep them locked up. But don't they ever talk to them? Don't they ever instill anything into them? No pride, no nothing. I can understand married people if they can't afford to have children and all. That's a different situation. But because they know that the next door neighbor's going to let their kids go out and do it, and you want to protect yours. Why I'd have died. That's not my… that's not my idea of it. As I say, I can understand it from the other's standpoint. But not from just for the sake of letting them go do it, because all the other kids do. Can you really? As young as you are? Can you really see it?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: No. I wasn't raised that way, either.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, I bet you wouldn't. So, I don't know, honey, really. Oh we've had all kinds of problems. The wars. Our boys were all in them, and they all came home. Our religions. There's something else that astounds me is our churches. We had the Guadalupe Church and Nativity Church. And we had the Episcopal Church. And we had the Federated Church. And we had the old Spring Hill Baptist Church and the old colored church that's down there on the south side. And, ah, that was our churches.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now, Spring Hill was located where?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Up there on Coconino up on the _____ side of the hill. That's where it got its name: spring and hill. The old Spring Hill Baptist Church. Most of those people go down here on… what is it on? Franklin or some place down in there. They have a real nice little church down there and all. Most of those people are going down there now.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And ah, but there was another one down there. And there was the Mexican Methodist Church down there on south San Francisco. I think that's been torn down, below El Charro there, where that nice brick deal is up there now that Mr. Hathaway has built and so forth. I am sure that I'd have to go down there to remind myself, but there was an Iglesia Methodista, they called there's, a Spanish Methodist Church. By golly, we just plan didn't have the churches here. And when the Mormons first came in, their place was on the campus. That was their first in there.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh I did not… now that was after you were here that the Mormons started coming in?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh yes, all this. Came in went across from what was old Campbell Hall. Their building is still over there. And then all these others. And the big Stake House on the hill, and all that sort of thing. And then, of course, the Methodists, finally after all these years, it was Federated Church for years, you know. And they have this lovely one, all these beautiful churches out here up by Elden and all.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And besides all these others, and the Bethels, and the… I think they've got everything in town but the Holy Rollers. If they've got the Holy Rollers, I don't know where they are. But ah, jiminy Christmas, hon, we got to get through this.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah. But were there any Mormon families that you know of that had been here?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh there were Mormon families. But, well now, wait a minute. Mormonwise…? Who were the Mormons that were here when I came? Damn few in fact.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Were the Comptons Mormon?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: They weren't.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Heavens! No. And, ah, we had Catholics and Masons and, but I was trying to think. Who were Mormons? But the old Francises and the Campbells, old time sheep people and old timers here. And none of them were Mormon. None of the Greenlaws weren't Mormon. Riordans or the Dolans or the Steinmatzes or… And the Thompsons were over here. And he ran the Weather Bureau for a long time. And the Jak… all the old timers. And the Flemings and old George, I told you a while ago, Walters, he wasn't a Mormon. And Lee Doyle that had those two beautiful homes. Gee, I wished they'd have saved those down there where Babbitts' Thriftway is. They were beautiful homes. George Walter's house that was on the corner of Beaver wasn't so pretty, but it was typical of the era. But ah, none of them were Mormon. I remember Karl Mangum and Jessie Mae when they came here. He's what we call a "Jack Leg" Mormon. He was raised a Mormon and all his family, but Jack Leg, you know. They don't pay too much attention to it. They lived down the street here from us when Dick and Linda were little. And ah, but they weren't, they were Mormon, I mean, we knew it.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah didn't practice.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: But it never made any difference. They just did the same things we did. Drank and smoked and told dirty jokes. And, ah, isn't it funny, I'd have to, I've never stopped to think about it, dear.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, did their _____ _____?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: The infiltration was really gradually.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Just came much later.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: They started that place up there by the college for the sake of the Mormon students who came here to school.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: You know.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Maybe a lot of them stayed then.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: They weren't the local kids.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Right.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Like going to church. I'd have to; I'm just…



KRISTENE PRENNACE: It's interesting now.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, yeah, I'm just going to have to… I'll have to talk to Mary about that, Mary Draine, when we were conscious of them as Mormons. Because for so many years, and, of course, the years I was growing up in <New Mexico>, and when I first came over here. They were kind of anathema in <New Mexico> and north of here because of the polygamy, principally. And of course, if they could do anybody, and, of course, working in the War Finance I ran into an awful lot of them. But the Mormons that I, I'm speaking about <Flagstaff> when I say I can't remember. But when I was in the War Finance, and then came over here in the Loan Company, and we had southern <Arizona> and <Safford> and all that place down there. And that was all Mormon. And we were used to dealing with them. And they'd cut our throats as soon as they'd look at us. I mean, if you were non-Mormon, even if you were their banker, they'd do you dirt if they could. Now that's a terrible remark to make, so don't quote me on it for heaven's sake. But I mean, they had come in and gone down there. They were up here in <Utah>. And they were here up on the strip and in <Fredonia>. But then they moved around. They went in down to the <Kingman> area, and then they came in this other way and settled down there through all that Safford country, you know, and all around down in there. And, of course, they're scads of them down there.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh, but they weren't in this area.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: But to think about them in here, I…



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, they just weren't. That's amazing, you know, like probably into the thirties and forties, just a hand full, if there were any here (?).



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And Lord now, every judge in <Arizona>'s a Mormon.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, very prominent people. Okay, we talked a little bit about prohibition, I guess. Depression, you know, because you were with the loan company.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh heavens.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: That you were probably more aware of it than _____.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, yeah. And then we were married in thirty-one. We thought that it was easing up a little bit then. And it was nothing. And, of course, Herb and I saw so much more of it than the people here did, because we were still having to go to the feed lots in <California> and all. We got in on the apple lines and the bread lines and everything else. People don't believe you when you tell them how bad it was. They just don't realize. And, ah, then, of course, coming along with the war and the ration stamps. And there was a lot of that. We had our… I don't know, catastrophes. Of course, <Flagstaff> burned a couple of times (laughs). You know about that.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Very early on.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Yeah, way back when. And, ah, we've had plenty of droughts periodically. And we've had some hellish snowstorms, including one, what was that, sixty-eight? We had one hundred eight inches. Then, well we had eighty-four inches in just nothing flat. That was really bogged down. I know in a four wheel drive jeep with snow tires on all four wheels, it took Jimmy Dave twenty minutes to get me from Babbitts' Thriftway to my front door, when that eighty-four inches fell. Between the Valley National, we couldn't even see the Thriftway. That was a catastrophe for sure. And, ah, really, we've been exceptionally fortunate in many ways, in epidemics and one thing and another. Like when Anna and Arthur and what's his (?) name, the little Raudebaugh died, that polio, spinal meningitis hit here, and just wiped them out. Of course, Arthur and Anna were first cousins. But they hadn't even seen each other for six months. The three of them were gone in twenty-four hours time. And nobody else got it. And we've had, really they've been extremely fortunate in many respects in that way.

 

And, ah our old colored people here were wonderful. There were some mighty fine families here. Some of the men, some still here. The… we were not bothered with the colored people until the mills closed down in <McNary Arizona> during the Depression. And they had brought all these "niggers" in from <Louisiana>. And they weren't the choicest selection of people. As my old colored woman who used to work for me, she was one of the distinguished ladies of the town as far as colored people were concerned. And the Fullers, and all that sort of thing. She'd said, I'd had my Dad here, and the kids were sick and all. And I said, "Phoebe, can't you get somebody to at least to come help me with the ironing or something?" I said, "You ought to know some of these colored folks through your church." And I said, "I need some help, just even that way, just help me tide over." And she goes (?), "Oh God, honey, I wouldn't send none of that trash." She says, "Work for you?" She says, "They ain't even niggers." She said, "They just combed them out of bushes." But <Holbrook> wouldn't let them stop. And <Winslow> wouldn't let them stop; <Kingman> wouldn't let them stop. And they stopped in <Flagstaff>. That's where we got our colored population.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: That was in the thirties?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: During the… yeah. That's when the mills closed in <McNary>. Of course, they reopened, but then that was during a real bad time and everything. And that's where we got out colored folks. But <Holbrook> wouldn't let them stop. And <Winslow> wouldn't let them stop. And they wouldn't let them in <Kingman>. I bet you wouldn't find a half a dozen colored folks in <Kingman> if you can find that many right now.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: I didn't know that. The… now like, the oriental families who were very highly regarded.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh yes, they were excellent people.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: The Junes. Did the Wongs come much later? Now then, were...



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well honey, the Wongs are the June.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Okay, yeah. But wasn't there another family of Wongs that came in?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: No.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: No?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: The Gees. And we got Peter Wong that runs the Weatherford. They're not related to the Wong-Junes. But he… of course, Lord, he's got a wonderful family. But the Junes, of course, the kids were all raised here and everything. Mother and father were wonderful people. And the kids have been a very, very close part of our family forever. And, ah, even those that even aren't here. But they're all… we've all been very close. And, ah, there was only… the Hermans were the only Jewish family in town. And they have, they still own their property down there on lower San Francisco where the Karl's Shoe Store and that property around the corner. That's still the old Herman property.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: I think Rita's the only one living of the family except some nephews; but in the original family. And they owned where this new doctors' offices is going up on Beaver. They owned all that property and over on to Leroux. And they refused to sell it. Everybody nearly dropped dead when they recently managed to get hold of that property and started building on it. Because we didn't think they'd ever sell it. It stood vacant years and years and years. And, ah, so, and we really didn't have any Jewish people in here until Jack and Tillie Fine came.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, now they were...



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And they came up from ,Coolidge>. And Jack had asthma very very badly. Of course, Tillie was born and raised in… she was born in ,Oatman>. And she and her sister were both graduates of the University of Arizona. They are <Arizona> Jews. Jack was an import. He came from <New York>. I mean he was, as we always say. Of course, they lived next door to us for years here, and we're bosom friends. And he was the “kike” and I was the Catholic, you know. And we were always going back and forth. But, ah, Jack and Tillie came here. And they were our Jewish population.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: That was two families. That's interesting, too, because I've never heard... Oh, let me see. Oh, why don't we go on here to, would you say the Community Concerts then would kind of start, of what developed into the summer festival of the symphony?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well yes. And then Eldon Ardrey started in, primarily, instigated the symphony. And then they got the guild, the symphony guild and working on it. And working together for their own promoted it up to the existing symphony plus the festival. Each one has, each one has been an outgrowth of that beginning of the Flagstaff Symphony.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Now, Community Concert, did you get people from outside of <Flagstaff> to come in and perform? Or was it primarily...?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Oh no, honey, it's a national set up, the Community Concert.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, okay.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: You get your national artists.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, I see.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Just like they get Sol Itzler (?) and the rest of them in here to ramrod the Festival. But we've bought the individual artists. And we had to sell memberships enough. We had to see how our memberships went before we could select our artists because of the prices, you see. We had to base it on that, on the Community Concert. But they were all nationally known artists. When they had some wonderful ones in here. And they still have a good program. But that's the way that worked was memberships in Community Concert. And you'd have your drive and get your tickets so that you knew what you could pick for your artists. And, of course, you had to have the money to finance it. That's the way they worked it. It was primarily a net deal.

 

You didn't know it when it was a real good Pow Wow. It was really something and a long time. We were laughing about that the other day. Old Jack Fuss and my husband, Tom McCullough, all those, Fred Stem (?), John Paul Jones getting ready for the Pow Wow and the big summer celebration. And they all dressed up in their Indian clothes and their breechcloths. And the Limited came through here at nine o'clock every night. And they used to go down there and put on a big Indian dance at the station at night when the Limited'd come in. Have a ball.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: (laughs). I can imagine.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And I know one night, we had one of our famous picnics up here at the Country Club. And all of them stripped down to their shorts decided they were going to have a fire dance. And they had some; boy did they have some burned seats, too. They all got really carried away with that fire dance. We've laughed a million times about that. It was a riot.

And, ah, of course, the University and all its growth. There's no use talking to me about that. I mean it's...



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh, you talked quite a bit about it.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Well, of course, that was the old style when, like Herb's dad trying to keep it from turning into an insane asylum.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Right.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And so forth. But ah...



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Yeah, the only thing I might want to ask you is about East <Flagstaff>. Do you remember when you came...?



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Hell, yes I remember. (Both laugh). Well the Greenlaw mill was out there, way out there. And, you know where the… what do they call it? The Twilight Motel is?



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Uh huh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: Where you turn off on Arrowhead. That, all that in there, my husband had, it was the old potato ranch. He raised potatoes out there. And I can't remember that man's name right off the bat. He and his wife came in here, and they wanted to build a motel. And he bought that property there. Right across the road from it was the old Saguaro Club. Herb had sold that frontage off, too. Well he didn't sell it, he had sold it, he sold it a little later. But these folks bought that property there. Of course the street didn't turn because it just went into the old thing ____. And he sold that to them, and they built that motel. And everybody raised sand with him. Told him what a nut he was and everything, because there were no restaurants, no anything out there and anything at all. And what did he want with a motel out there. He said because it's out where it's quiet. And he did great guns. He had a beautiful place when that thing first started. And then, of course, the son of bitches bought some more frontage, and they built the old Saguaro Club. And, of course, that was the first real nightclub that <Flagstaff> had.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Oh.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And they served dinners. And everybody had dances out there. I know a lot of us women entertained out there with bridge parties and luncheons and all. But really it was really the Saguaro Club was the first night club <Flagstaff> had. And the rest of it was not there.



KRISTENE PRENNACE: Just nothing out there.



JOSEPHINE BABBITT: And my brother-in-law had some property in and around there, and in fact he still has some out there. And I know his very own sister; my sister-in-law is the first one to criticize him. She said, "George has sure got a lot to answer for. If he had, had taken care with the lots he sold, as to restrictions and one thing and another, they'd of had a lovely settlement out there." Instead of having a lovely home here, and right next to it a broken down collapsing trailer. You know what I mean. And he's responsible. He didn't restrict it; he just wanted to sell it that’s all. He had no consideration for the people to whom he sold.



