COLINA YAZZIE INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.42

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with Colina Yazzie, at the Yazzie Indian Arts Store in <Gallup New Mexico>. It's Wednesday, January 26, 2000. This is an interview that's part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. 

Cole: Colina, we always like to start from the very beginning. Maybe you could tell us about your clans? 

Yazzie: Okay. My clan is Tótsohnii. My father's clan is Ta’neeszahnii and Táchii’nii báshíshchíín dóó Tódích’íi’nii dashinálí. My mother is originally from Piñon, and my dad was from <Steamboat>, and raised around <Ganado> and <Steamboat> area. 

Cole: That's where you were raised? 

Yazzie: Yes. 

Cole: Do you know when you were born? 

Yazzie: I was born November 26, 1959. My mother said she had me, I think it was on Thanksgiving Day. She was in the hospital and she remembers the nurses bringing her food with turkey and a Thanksgiving meal she had.

One of the things that stands out in my mind about my mother talking about when I was born was there were nurses working in the hospital who had names. A lot of the Navajo ladies weren't able to give their children names, so the nurses assisted in picking out names for the children, more modern names that could be pronounced by teachers--I guess making it easier for the future, because we were expected to go to school. 

Cole: What were your parents' names? 

Yazzie: My mother's name is Mary Sadie.... Her maiden name is Johnson. Her last name is Gorman. And my father's name was James Gorman, Jr. 

Cole: And what are some of your memories of growing up in that area? 

Yazzie: As a little kid, I remember living out in <Steamboat> near my grandfather and my grandmother's place, which was near the Balakai Mesa. I remember having brothers and sisters, so I spent a lot of time with my--it seems like more time with my brothers than I did my sisters--of course, probably because I avoided the household chores. So I spent a lot more time outside with my brothers, riding horses and climbing up on the mesas and doing different things. A lot of times my brothers would get into the waterhole and go swimming. I don't remember ever doing that, but I remember them getting into the waterhole and swimming. But I did ride the horse a lot, and had to ride it out to the watering hole to water them. Didn't herd sheep a lot, but my grandmother always had sheep. And my mother did have--her and my dad split up when I was about eleven years old. She then started her own herd, and she still tends her herd, and she still does her weaving.

Everyday life, you know, you had to have groceries. There were trips to the trading post: when my mom finished a rug, we would go to the trading post and sell the rug and bring groceries back and things like that. My dad raised horses and he also broke horses. So as soon as those horses were trained enough or broken enough, then he would let us ride and ride and ride until they were used to having people on their back, and I liked that.

Our first home was a hogan, a very small hogan. I had four brothers: two older brothers and two younger brothers. I had three sisters, one older and two younger. I do have a much older half-sister, but she has a different mom, and we both have the same dad. But all of my mother's children, we lived in one hogan together when we were children. Our first school was going to the boarding schools. The first school that I went to was Kinlichee Boarding School, up until I was about third grade. 

Cole: Where was that at? 

Yazzie: Just southeast of <Ganado>, maybe about ten miles. I remember when I first went to school, I was so excited, but I never knew that I was going to get really homesick. (laughter) I got really excited about going to school, and then later on found out that my mom wasn't going to be back for quite a while. I've always been really close to my mom, and never wanted to be away from her for long. But that first time I was away from her for quite a while I really missed her. I think she dropped us off maybe in August, and when we were allowed to go home for a longer period of time, she would come back and pick us up. When she did, that was like Thanksgiving, the short vacation. I remember her wearing a Pendleton blanket when she came in. I started crying and I couldn't let go of her.

When my mother and my father split up when I was about eleven, my mother sent me on the placement program, which was in <Utah>, and I lived with foster parents. They still are like natural parents to me, and their names are Joyce and Kay Clark [phonetic spellings]. They live in <St. George> now. At the time, they were living in <Provo Utah>. Then I had to go away every year to go back up for school, and I really missed my mom a lot. When I came home, as big as I was, I used to sleep with my mom all the time.

After my mom and dad split up, life really changed for us. My dad was no longer with us, and we moved out of the area where we lived for years, and moved to <Steamboat>. When I was twelve years old, I started working for the Steamboat Trading Post part-time. A guy named Jerry Foutz was operating--he had the trading post at that time, and I worked for him just cleaning and doing different things. On Saturdays I would go in half the day and help out. And I did that, that first summer when I was twelve years old. That was probably the first contact that I had with really working with a trading post, besides my mom taking her rugs to the trading post. 

Cole: And what trading post did your mom take her rugs to before you moved to <Steamboat>? 

Yazzie: Oh, she took her rugs to <Ganado>, the Hubbell Trading Post. At the time, Bill Young was managing the store, and it was always fun to go there. It's a beautiful place, because where we lived, there weren't any trees for miles. So when we went to <Ganado>, there were all these cottonwood trees, and it was so beautiful there. I always enjoyed going there with my mom. She would buy food, and we would get snacks that we didn't get every day. It was nice. We then had to go home and take food home to our families.

I tried to help her to prepare her rugs. Every time I asked her, you know, "I need ..." something, she would tell me, "You'd better start carding wool, then." That was the job I didn't like (chuckles) but I had to do it. She would give me raw wool, and I would comb the wool out. There's a lot of dirt that comes out of it. I would pile them up in the box and she would later spin it and use it for her weaving.

When I got out of high school, I moved to <Dallas Texas>, where I was supposed to take training to work with the airlines. When I completed the training and was ready to go find a job, then I came home to visit my family and I missed them a lot. One of my brothers told me, "We haven't seen you in a long time, and we missed you. As Navajo, we always stay close to our families, and you might think about coming home and working close to home." I really thought about it a lot, and I did miss my family, so maybe it was about a year later after that, I moved back to <Ganado> and <Steamboat> and started working at the Hubbell Trading Post, where I've always liked being. Whenever I went to visit, it was such a beautiful place, and I did my work in there. The only few places that I guess where I could use my experience and training, working with the airlines, had to do a lot with customers, and just relations--you know, how you do business with customers. And so I started working there when I was about twenty years old.

When I first started working, I was just a sales clerk, and slowly got promoted to... I would go out and do interpretations, like interpreting what the rugs were, and designs, and how to care for them, and how they're woven. And visitors who came to the trading post would really enjoy that. And then I did another one on Navajo jewelry, then Zuni jewelry, and Hopi jewelry. And then all combined. And I would go out, and that's the next step. They gave me a promotion to being an interpretive aide, and I worked as an interpretive aide for about two or three years, and then got promoted to assistant managing--Bill Malone's assistant--and worked there as assistant manager until I left the trading post. That was about five years ago now--over five years ago, almost six years ago.

And all during that time I had three children. My oldest son is Scott, and the next one is Felicia, and the youngest one is Christopher, who wasn't born until we moved here, and he's five years old now. As soon as we moved here, my husband always talked about maybe we should start a business, because we have the knowledge and we know about the art. It was a hard time to start, because I had just had the little one, and then we just made a big move from <Arizona> to here. But he decided, well, we're just gonna do it!

Our first business location was up on Hill Street, which is just about four blocks south of where we're at now. We started slowly. We just only had a few, maybe one showcase of jewelry and some rugs that were on consignment from different places. We didn't get many customers, it was very slow there. But we traveled to a lot of different shows and we met people and found out during the year when business was slow, they still called us and wanted things. So if it weren't for them, we wouldn't be in business right now.

And Bill Malone really helped us out a lot, too. Every time we needed assistance, needed to sell something, we always went to him and he was very kind to help us, and always purchased something from us.

And then later I worked.... Since the business was very slow, then I worked with the Richardsons, just down the street from here, for about maybe a couple of years. That was a part-time job for me, and we still had the business and still sent things out through the mail. About last year was when we really--you know, the kids were a little bit older, and they really didn't need a lot of the attention they needed when they were smaller. So we decided we were going to try to do it full-time, and it turned out we still needed to do shows, and still needed to go and take care of the kids. And so the business, our family came first. If we had to close to go for appointments or go travel somewhere to sell something, or do shows, we'd just close the store and went. And every year has been a little bit better, a little bit better, business has been building. So this year, since we moved here, changing our name from Yazzie Trading Company, to Yazzie's Indian Art, and then moving to this location where we've always wanted to be, we expect business to be even better. So we're thinking about opening full- time, and the kids can come in and run the business with us, now that they're a little bit bigger and don't need a lot of attention. They can just kind of be here when we're here. It works out for us. [I get] a lot of support from my husband, because he's the one that when I first told him that I would like to have a store, he said, "Well, let's just do it!" And I'm really glad that we did, and we hope to have a successful business and things continue to get even better, as they have within the last five years. 

Cole: I'm gonna back up a little bit. When your mom used to go sell rugs, describe how that.... Did you ever watch how the trade was transacted? 

Yazzie: A lot of times when she went in to sell her rug, she would show it to them, she would lay the rug out, the trader would look at it, and they would always.... At that time, we didn't really need money for light bills, electricity bills, and things like that. Most of it, a lot of the things that we needed were there at the trading post. So my mom would just--the trader knew that she would need food, groceries, whatever, so what he offered was, "I'll give you a certain amount in cash, and then the rest, maybe you can go in and buy what you need." And that's the way the trading took place back then. But now, she still does the same. She goes into the trading post at Hubbell's and Bill will let her buy food, and he'll still give her cash whenever she goes to sell her rugs. 

Cole: And then were you involved then in trades when you were working at Hubbell, but on the other side? 

Yazzie: Yes, I did the same thing with a lot of the weavers that came in. They would have rugs for sale, and I would give them some cash and some trade whenever I purchased their rugs. Because of the weavers there at the trading posts, I became very interested in weaving then, and slowly started--it has taken me about twenty years to really get a better quality rug. At the beginning I was not getting the quality that I wanted. It's just experience that brings that, and it takes years to develop that skill to put out really nice-quality rugs. I'm finding out that I really can't keep any in inventory like I would like, but always have one on the loom, like my grandmother and my mother did years ago; and occasionally get special orders, and try to get those out as I promise them I will have out by a certain time. And that's always hard, because you never know what's going to come up, and what you need to do. Sometimes it ends up longer than you had expected. 

Cole: Did your mother have a specialty, or would she weave whatever the trader wanted? 

Yazzie: When I was a little girl, I remember her weaving the Yé’ii rugs, but she has changed slowly. When I was around about twelve years old, she wove the stripe designs, more of a Chinle style designs. And that stuck in my mind. When I started working with Hubbell Trading Post, I thought that was the only design all the weavers wove, was a Chinle rug. When I saw all these different designs, I had to learn about the different styles. There was a different feel about each of 'em, and it was really an interesting thing for me to learn. And her style has changed again to more of a Klagetoh. She uses a lot of grey in the background, and then she uses some red and black and white colors, the geometric designs. 

Cole: What prompted her to change her design? 

Yazzie: I don't know what it is. It probably has to do with being able to sell certain styles, because she's near <Ganado>, and she does sell her rugs at <Ganado>, so I think she was encouraged by one of the Bills--Bill Malone or Bill Young--to weave the Ganado style rugs. They sell more of those rugs, since they're in that area, and there was a higher demand for that style of weaving. I think there still is, because she continues to weave that style all the time. 

Cole: And who are some of the weavers that you remember that you worked with at Hubbell--anybody in particular? 

Yazzie: At Hubbell's? 

Cole: Yeah. 

Yazzie: When I first came to Hubbell's, there was a lady named Sadie Curtis [phonetic spelling], who is a very good friend of mine now, we've traveled to different shows together--her demonstrating weaving, and I doing presentations and helping with sales. May Jim [phonetic spelling] who is deceased--she was a diabetic--she was a great weaver. Evelyn Curley [phonetic spelling] and Mary Lee, Helen Davis. Those were the weavers that were there at that time. They had about five or six weavers, and the last time I was there, there was only one weaver, and they were trying to find a new weaver who would weave full-time, demonstrating. So I know it's harder to find weavers that are willing to sit eight hours a day to weave. I've been asked to do different demonstrations, and it is hard to sit for a long time and demonstrate weaving. But all of those weavers at Hubbell's have really, at times have given me ideas how to weave. Just sitting there and watching them weave was just amazing, how perfectly they wove their rugs. It just encouraged me to do some of it. 

Cole: Ordinarily, like, say, your mother, how much time would she spend weaving in a given day? 

Yazzie: Oh, very little, unless she's coming to the end of a rug. Then she would really want to get it done. But at the beginning, she'll spend maybe a couple of hours in the morning and a couple of hours in the evening, but it was never full-time, because she had all these other things to do. The first thing she would do when she'd get up would be fix breakfast for the family. Then she would do other things, like she needed to wash, or she needed to go and take care of the sheep, or other things that she had to do. She'd sit back down for a couple of hours again in the afternoon, and then she'd fix something to eat again for the evening. Not often did I see her weaving late at night, until she had about maybe two or three inches left on the loom. Then she'd really go at it! (laughter) She was getting pretty anxious to take it in and sell it. She'd take it off the loom, we'd help her undo the bindings at the edges of the rugs, and she'd lay it out, and we'd have to do all the trimming and take all the little extra yarn [pieces] that are still sticking out, clip 'em and clean it before she rolls it up to take it to the trading post. All of it really takes a lot of time. 

Cole: Would your mother ever get commissions for rugs? I know some traders told us they'd actually extend credit towards a rug. Or would your mother just wait until she was finished? 

Yazzie: She still does. She's done that for years. She goes to the trading post and she'll charge things on her account, and then when she finishes her rug, she'll go in and instead of picking out all the groceries there, when she brings in the rug, she's paying her bill, and then getting some cash for her rug. 

Cole: I'm sort of interested, with your mom, has the mobility of the Navajo people affected her as much, say, as it has you, with transportation and stuff? Does she come into <Gallup> much? 

Yazzie: The more traditional people, they don't seem to really want to go out as much. They would rather be around their traditional people. They'll spend more time going to maybe ceremonies, where they feel comfortable. I've heard some ladies say when they do go into places like a larger town, they feel uncomfortable. They do take care of the business that they need to, but then they would rather be home. My mother would rather be home. She'll occasionally like to go out and just have a different dinner than what she normally has at home, and maybe that's only a couple of times a month, but she would rather be home. She can't leave home for long, because of her sheep, too. She loves her sheep. She'll go somewhere and she'll worry about her sheep at the end of the day. She can't spend the night anywhere else. 

Cole: Does she do her own herding still then, or does she have anybody to help her? 

Yazzie: She's sixty-six years old now, so when she's going somewhere, she'll put hay out in the corral for the sheep. When it's real cold, she'll put hay out for the sheep. When it's warm enough for her to go out and watch the sheep, she'll dress for the weather and go out and stay close to her sheep. And the sheep do pretty well on their own, too. They go out and graze, and she'll just watch them, and when it's time for them to come back in, they automatically just come back to the house, to the corral, and all she has to do is just get 'em in and close the gate. 

Steiger: Does she still card and spin her own wool? 

Yazzie: No, she buys a lot of yarns from different stores that carry the yarns. She buys most of that to weave her rugs. Occasionally she'll card some wool, but not as often as she used to when we were little kids. I guess maybe it was our help that really--she was able to use more of the hand-carded wool. And the hand-carded wool is not appreciated as much, because of the lumpiness of the yarn; and when it's spun by machine, it's very smooth, the colors are all uniform, and so it makes a nicer rug. 

Cole: Do you have a special rug design that you like to weave? 

Yazzie: The only two designs that really strike me is the Ganado red colors, the old style, the Ganado red, with a lot of red in the background. I've been trying to use some finer yarns to make finer rugs, and I've done that within the last couple of years. I've been able to weave some more intricate designs. Every year I'm striving to do better and better. Hopefully one of these years I'll try my hand at maybe a tapestry--but I'm not ready yet. I will be in maybe a few more years--a little bit more experience. 

Cole: Explain how a tapestry rug differs from just a regular. 

Yazzie: It's the fineness of the yarn. The yarn is very, very thin--almost as thin as a sewing thread. Different people consider a tapestry starting.... Some consider a tapestry, there has to be so much weft to the inch. And I think you do well even if you have eighty wefts to the inch. Some say a tapestry isn't until you reach 120 wefts to the inch, and eighty, I think, is pretty good, it's very thin. 

Cole: And a weft would be just one thread? 

Yazzie: A weft would be one thread. 

Cole: Wow. 

Yazzie: And that would really take a lot of time to weave. I think that's why you don't get 'em in large sizes, but small sizes, maybe a foot-and-a-half by two feet is about the basic size they come in, the tapestries. 

Cole: How do you feel like you and Raymond have been accepted as traders? 

Yazzie: I like the idea, because we're able to help our own people, Indian artists, to sell their work. And at this time, it's needed, there's people that need to be there, stores that need to be there to help these different artists that want to sell their work. Every day we have Zuni people. Now that we're living in <Gallup>, we have Zunis even come in to sell jewelry and their carvings and fetishes; and a lot of Navajo people who come in and sell their work. We don't trade like we used to years ago. They have bills to pay. Like I told you years ago, it was basically you didn't have water bills, electricity bills, and different bills that had to be paid. Now they're wanting more of cash, just to pay those bills. So when somebody brings something in, we don't do any trading, unless they ask. We just give 'em cash for what they've made. 

Cole: And it sounds like you also do some consignment? 

Yazzie: We do. We have friends, we have artist friends that we've met through the years. For instance, one of the young guys that just got started maybe about three or four years ago, he used to live in <Flagstaff>, his name is Darrell Begay. He came here to <Gallup> because his wife was doing.... Oh, what do they call it? She finished her school at NAU, but she had to come and do some, what do they call it? 

Cole: Like an internship? 

Yazzie: Yeah, an internship with Rejoba [phonetic spelling]. So they moved here into town, and Darrell came out and visited us, and he came to visit the store. When we first moved in here, we told him he could pick a spot to show his jewelry. He does a lot of the different shows, so he's always trying to keep inventory. Instead of keeping inventory at home where it just sits until the next show, we told him maybe we could sell some in the store, and he brought some in, and he decorated the showcases really nice. A couple of days ago, a lady came in and liked one of his pieces. I called him, because the bracelet that she liked didn't fit right, and he came in and took her measurements of her wrist and made the bracelet for her, and she was very happy to meet him, and to have the bracelet made just for her. So it works out. We don't mind introducing the customers to the different artists that we work with. 

Cole: Are you still doing a lot of shows? 

Yazzie: Only in the springtime--we have three shows that we do. My husband has the Heard Museum show. We have another show with the Dawns [phonetic spelling] in <Phoenix>. And we have the Clark County Heritage Museum, which is in <Henderson>, a suburb of <Las Vegas>. Those are about the only three shows that we're able to do anymore. My husband only can do a couple of shows a year. He has a hard time keeping up with his orders, and getting inventory together for him is hard, because the work that he does is very time-consuming. Even one piece would take three or four weeks to finish. 

Cole: Describe for us a little bit about how going to a show works, as far as what you have to do, to do that. It seems like that's kind of become a big part of the modern trader. 

Yazzie: Oh, when you have inventory that includes rugs and pottery and jewelry and all of that, at the most you'd like to only do one a month, because three within one month, or even two, it's too much. It's a lot of work, because they have to be packed. The potteries have to be packed. Every time we do a show, we take our miniature case with us, which is glass, and we've broken it a couple of times. The packing part of it, and just hauling it from here to there, depending on the distance that you have to drive. Once you leave here, you've got to get it there, either without stopping, or with just short breaks, and be sure it's in a secure place. It's very hard, and then a lot of times we travel with our family. The school that they go to, they don't mind having them go to the shows, and they always catch up on their work, but it's hard on the children, too. We usually have one of our relatives who travels with us to take care of the kids when we go to the shows.

Once a month is good enough, but we seem to.... The three shows that we do just happen to be in March. We have done other shows, too, that were in the springtime. It seems like they're always in the springtime, and early January maybe. But we've eliminated some shows, so we can stay home and spend more time at home. 

Cole: You mentioned at Hubbell you became interested in Indian jewelry. Tell us a little bit about that, if you could. 

Yazzie: When I was a little kid, it was something that everybody collected. My mom loves jewelry, she always has to have a pin on her shirt--at least that. Even when she's around the house, she always has a beautiful pin to wear on her shirt. When she goes somewhere to sell her rug or goes to the store or to a ceremony, she'll put on a necklace and bracelets. When I was growing up, at times when it was my birthday or something, she'd give me jewelry. Some of the smaller pieces I still have. The way she introduced jewelry to me, it just stayed with me for years. I knew that she loved those pieces, and she wanted me to wear them, and it was just a tradition for us to have jewelry. I still do love jewelry, and appreciate it very much--especially the pieces that are more difficult to make. I've noticed that there are some pieces that take more time, and they're harder to make, and those pieces I really appreciate. And there are pieces that are collected--for instance, stones that you can't find anymore. You see those pieces, and have to keep 'em. May not be able to find them anymore later, they're collectible pieces. And there are still a lot of good artists who make nice pieces. 

Cole: Were there many jewelers in the <Ganado> area? 

Yazzie: There were not a lot of jewelers in the <Ganado> area. A lot of the ones who came to sell were from around the <Gallup> area, it seems like, and this is probably the center of where a lot of the jewelry is made. My husband is originally from this area, so he did. And that was a tradition for his family--his mom and dad were silversmiths, and when he was ten years old, that's what he wanted to do, to be a silversmith. And I think that's how the tradition has carried on with the silversmiths. 

Cole: How did you meet Raymond? 

Yazzie: I actually met one of his bracelets first, (laughter) and fell in love with that. (laughter) I was at the ceremonial in <Gallup> when I was about twenty- two. It was a couple of years after I started working for Hubbell's and started learning all about jewelry and rugs. I went to the ceremonial, and at the Joe Tanner booth, he had a beautiful piece of jewelry, it just caught my eye. It was silver and had tiny little almost like needlepoint, beautifully-shaped stones, one right after another, in such perfect rows. I hated to ask Joe to show it to me, because I knew I didn't have the money to buy it, but it was like maybe, maybe I might be able to afford it. But he took it out for me and I looked at it and I asked him how much it was. I don't remember what the price was--it was much more than what I was able to afford, I couldn't buy it--but I remember it in my mind. I was at Hubbell's and Raymond came to the trading post one time, and it just connected, he was the artist who made that bracelet, because at the time he came in, he brought another piece into the trading post at Hubbell's. "That's the artist who made that piece that I liked!" He used to sell to the trading post, and in about 1978, maybe, we became friends and got married in 1988. 

Cole: So when you think back through your years involved with trading and Indian arts and crafts, what are some of your favorite memories? 

Yazzie: One of the most exciting things for me is to meet the artists who make the pieces--especially pieces that are very well made. I think when you see something so beautiful, you want to meet the person, you're curious how they look, how they speak, just anything about 'em, what kind of personality they have. It's one of the things that really I enjoy. We had a guy come in yesterday. I bought this barrette. I can't remember where it was I bought this barrette a couple of years ago, and I thought, "Wow, this is really, really nice work, and I would like to meet the artist." Yesterday he came in and I just, "Wow! I would like to buy some of those barrettes that I've seen for years. I'm really happy to meet you, and I would like to carry some of your pieces." That's one of the neatest things about being in the Indian art business, to meet the artists. I really enjoyed that, and it's a big thing for me. Clarence Lee and Ray Tracey and a lot of artists. Ray has a real good personality, and Clarence Lee is kind of quiet, but a lot of his personality comes out in his jewelry with traditional storyteller bracelets and rings and things like that. The jewelry, the way it's made, it tells a lot about the person too. And when you meet 'em, they're really kind of what you thought of the person. 

Cole: So what do you see as the future of trading or the Indian art business? 

Yazzie: I have to admit that I think the old-time trading is really gonna fade out, because of all the computers and everything has just become more modernized. Having Indian art stores and galleries, I think it's very good. Every day, the weavers, the artists, are doing better all the time, and even Indian artisans are going into business on their own to sell their work, and they're doing very well. I think it's very good. 

Cole: If you could tell an Anglo about what they should understand about Navajos, what would you tell them? 

Yazzie: About Navajos? 

Cole: Yeah, just about your culture, your religion. 

Yazzie: It's very hard from my point of view. The only time I try to describe or either tell about--if they've run into certain situations where they have questions about what the person was trying to do or say, or the way they were treated, then I try to explain to them how the Navajo culture is. Growing up at the time that I did, I'm able to understand the more modern ways of life. And then at the [same] time, I also remember the traditional ways of life. So there are two. A person may--I've known of friends and relatives who have taken more traditional ways of life, therefore their ways are different in approaching who they talk to, who they deal with. And there are some that are very modern ways of life, and they also have their ways of dealing with the public and people that they meet. So that's kind of a two-party thing, where it's one or the other, or both. It's hard to describe.

Traditional way of life, a lot of things are not brought out into the open. For instance, there were some missionaries who came (chuckles) and visited a Navajo family, and these missionaries came there and they came to visit us. We were asking about their experience, having to go to these Navajo homes. This one missionary talked about how much he enjoyed being around the people and being invited to their traditional ceremonies. And one of the things that really stood out in his mind was, he was invited to a baby's first laugh. And when he got there, he said he was invited to come and butcher sheep, and he did. He said it was interesting how the whole thing is done. The family was very traditional, and they did the first laugh party. But not everybody is open to doing things like that. For instance, there are probably other people who wouldn't, if they were asked to help butcher a sheep, they wouldn't do it. They would just maybe leave, or really wouldn't want to be there. So there's people who accept the traditional ways of life, and then there are others who don't want to get involved.

We had a friend come the other day into the store, and he said the first time he went to meet some Indians, he said, "I went to meet these Indians, and I was thinking I was getting myself in trouble, because I was curious, I wanted to see what they were doing." It was a ceremony that was taking place, and he was going up there, and he was by himself, and he thought he would get himself in trouble by going there alone, not being invited. But it turned out that the people didn't mind having him there. He said he really had tears in his eyes; although they had modern lives to live, they were still keeping their traditions. And it was really, really sad that he was thinking that, he said there's some that fade out, and some people who never keep their traditions. And some are really fighting to keep their traditions. He said it was really a sad thing that he saw. He's starting to learn more about the different tribes, and he's supportive of keeping traditions alive. He said it was just a whole new world that opened up to him when he went to see the ceremony. 

Cole: If you could change your life in any way, would you? 

Yazzie: If I were to change my life in any way? 

Cole: Uh-huh. 

Yazzie: The first thing that comes to my mind is if I could, I would like for my children to speak Navajo. I would like to have them speak Navajo and learn more about the traditions. Because of the way I grew up, it was very hard for me to teach them the traditional ways, and to even teach them to speak their own language. They know very little. They know some words, but they don't know how to speak their own native language.

I really wouldn't change a lot, because so far I've really enjoyed my life, just the way it's been. 

Cole: Do you have any questions, Lew? 

Steiger: A couple. Early on you said when you were born at the hospital, there were these ladies that were helping name all the kids so they'd have a proper name. Did your family just call you the Anglo name? Is that what everybody called you? 

Yazzie: The only people that mentioned my name, I guess, were my family at home, when I was a little kid, and they called me "Leen." And that was just short for.... You know how somebody would have a name, maybe Raymond--his family called him Raymond, and some call him Ray, and I call him Ray. It's just short for Raymond. But they called me Leen, when I was at home.

This is funny. I don't know if I should tell you about this, but when I was a kid, when the nurse named me at the hospital, my name was Celina, on paper, on the birth certificate: C-E-L-I-N-A. And when I went to school, whoever maybe typed my name, the card, they slipped in an "O" instead of an "E." So my birth name was Celina, but it was changed to Colina when I went to school, and I stuck with Colina 'cause I like that better. 

Cole: You had mentioned that your mom taught you to weave. Did you learn as a young girl, or later as you were older? 

Yazzie: I saw rugs on looms--my grandmother and my mother's--and always thought that I knew how. All I had to do was set up a loom and I would make something. But it was not as easy as I thought it would be. I was in <Dallas> when I was asked to demonstrate weaving, and I told them I could do it, and I thought I could, but when I really started to set up the loom and started to weave, it was a whole different thing. I didn't have anybody there, nobody knew how to weave, so I had to do it all on my own. My rug started out to be this wide, and when I finished it, it was about like this, and nobody was there to guide me and train me or anything, how exactly it was supposed to be done. Until I came home, and I knew how hard it was, and I wanted to learn the right way, and have somebody there to tell me what I was doing wrong. But even then, it's more of something you learn on your own. You can guide and teach a person how to set up a loom, and you can be given yarn, but how you set your yarn, how you work your tension, how you design your rugs is really all up to you. The more time you take to practice, the faster you come to make better quality rugs. It's taken me twenty years to get as far as I've gone. I would say even within the last five years is when I feel good about the rugs that I've woven. But before then, it's not something that I was real proud of. (laughs) 

Cole: Are any of your children....

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B]



Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. This is Tape 2 of an interview with Colina Yazzie. It's Wednesday, January 26, 2000. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger. I was just going to ask you if any of your children were interested in becoming weavers or artists. 

Yazzie: My daughter is becoming interested in weaving. I set up a loom for her and she works on it when she gets interested. I really don't want to push her. I believe that when you're pushed into something, you lose interest in it. So when she wants to, I let her sit down and weave. She does have one small one started, and hopefully she'll continue to become more interested, where she'll do that when she grows older. 

Cole: Did you learn any stories behind the different rugs from your mother? 

Yazzie: No, I did not. She didn't talk about the designs in the rugs. The designs in the rugs I learned about when I started working at the Hubbell Trading Post. 

Cole: And one thing I'm sort of interested in, being on kind of the main drag in <Gallup>, we've heard that there's a lot of imitation Indian arts that are coming into areas like <Gallup> and stuff like that. Do you see much of that here? 

Yazzie: Personally, I don't go out to a lot of the different shops here in town, so I don't really get to see much of it. And a lot of what we buy is just people that walk in, we buy from. I hear there are some around, but I've never seen any in any of the stores. 

Cole: I didn't know if that had much impact on your business or not. 

Yazzie: Well, we try to deal with individual artists and introduce them, and let the customers know that they are actual artists that are living where they live, and that we know them personally, and we're able to sell the pieces better than just to buy a bunch of things from somebody, not knowing who it was made by. 

Steiger: I don't know if... you know... doing this project, we've talked to a lot of these traders.... We've heard real different opinions about when the DNA came in, and went to regulate the trading and all that stuff. There's different points of view. I wonder, were you aware of all that stuff? 

Yazzie: I've never had to deal with anything like that. 

Cole: Yeah, that was the pawn, the whole change in pawn regulations in the early seventies. 

Yazzie: I did hear about it. I know there are some people that weren't able to take pawn anymore. The pawn business is really a real touchy subject, especially for the Navajo people, because of valuables, things that they've had in pawn that have gone dead, and not being able to get it back. So I really.... There've been questions where if we will be interested in going into the pawn business, but my answer has always been no, because of that. I wouldn't feel right selling a piece of jewelry that belonged to somebody, and knowing that they just left it here for a short time and they would be back for it. It would be hard for me to put it up for sale. 

Steiger: But there was a lot of that, that went on? 

Yazzie: Well, they sign the pawn ticket, knowing that by a certain time they would be put out for sale, but the traditional Navajo people, they were never really limited to time. 

Steiger: Not really lookin' at the calendar. 

Yazzie: Yes. When they were able to get their money together and go in and pick it up, that's the way they dealt. Having a time limit on certain things is, I think, hard for them still to understand. 

Cole: How about when you were a child? Did your parents ever pawn items to the reservation trading posts? 

Yazzie: On the reservation, I don't know if they did. I don't remember ever seeing my mom going in to pawn anything until maybe in my twenties, I did see her going in to pawn things. She still does pawn things, I know. 

Cole: I was going to say, we've heard, it seems like there's quite a difference, at least how pawn happened on the reservation versus in a border town. I don't know if you were aware of that. 

Yazzie: No, I'm not aware of it. 

Cole: A lot of traders have told us that the people that were in the isolated posts on the reservation tended to hang onto pawn even when it went dead, because you have a limited pool of customers, versus in town, it was easier for them to sell the dead pawn. That's the story we get. The truth lies in the middle somewhere probably. 

Yazzie: I think no matter what pawn shop it is, I think if you know the people, and you've dealt with 'em for a long time, they're very lenient and you're able to talk to them and to keep your pawn. 

Steiger: I don't know if I should ask this. What we're trying to do is kind of set down this historic record on the big picture for the long haul. This might not be a good question, I'll try to say it right. In general, it's hard to tell from talking to these guys with this thing with the DNA when they came in and regulated those guys. Some people say there were a lot of traders that were out there that were out of control, and they were taking advantage of the people that they were supposed to be taking care of. And then there's a lot of other people that say, "No, the traders were out there doing a really good job," and all that stuff that happened there in the mid-seventies kind of did-in the old trading posts. I don't know, do you have an opinion on that? 

Yazzie: Well, I don't really have an opinion on how the traders dealt, because I really didn't deal with them, but I do know that the Navajo have, or Indians have, hard feelings toward traders, and that was the reason why we changed our name from Trading Company to Indian Art, because we notice when we attend a lot of different shows, other artists were approaching us. We've even been called a trader, which I guess is a bad name. At times we were asked if we really were traders. It didn't really mean anything to us at the time when we were being asked these questions, until it came to me that the "trader" name wasn't really a good name, because when artists would come to us and say, "Are you really a trading company?" and we started trying to find out really what a trading company is. They dealt with pawn--the trading posts. They dealt with having to sell something, not getting enough for it, and they have some hard feelings about the old trading posts and trading companies. That's what we found out, so we decided we're gonna change our name, because we don't have pawn, and we don't do trading like we used to at Hubbell, where I used to offer goods and hard cash. We didn't do that. So we're more just introducing art to people who come to visit. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Yazzie: What I've learned about Indian art has really been a great thing to learn, since the time I moved to Hubbell and started working for the trading post. It's a really wonderful art that the Indians have, and people who travel and visit and come to our store, you meet a lot of 'em that have that appreciation for the art. Not very often are they introduced to the artists. At times, when even my husband, people were trying to find out who the artist was, they've asked the business owners and they weren't able to give any of that information. About four years ago, there was a guy, he said he'd been all over, he went store-to-store in <Gallup> asking who this artist was, "I want to meet this artist, and I would like to have a special bracelet made for us," him and his wife. He met a Navajo person, and they knew Ray and told them where we lived, and one day I heard a hard knock on my door, and I opened the door, and there's this guy. (laughs) I opened up the door and he said, "Does Raymond Yazzie live here?" And I said, "He lives here, but he has a shop at another location. I could have you meet him." He says, "Well, I want to order something from him, and I would like to see him." This guy's really serious! So we got our stuff together and we just asked him to follow us. We drove to Ray's shop, and they met and made a special order.

For years Ray has been trying to get out and to do shows and carry his own work, and he was not able to until about maybe three or four years ago. Ever since then, things have been really, really good for us. And we hope that a lot of other artists are able to do that. If they can't sell their work on their own, they should sell their work to a place where they can be called or introduced when people are interested in meeting 'em. 

Cole: Great. 

Steiger: I'm trying to think of something intelligent [to ask]. It seems like we always turn the camera off, and pack everything up, and then we're goin' down the road and I think, "Oh! we forgot to ask about this or that." 

Cole: Well, thank you, Colina, for putting up with us for an hour or so. 

Yazzie: You're welcome. 

Cole: It was great. 

Steiger: Yeah, it was really good.



