William "Buzz" Belknap III- Part 4

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli

Camera by Sam Jansen

March 28, 2009



QUARTAROLI:  We mentioned a couple of personalities and stuff at lunch, but we haven’t said much about your mom, about Fran [Frances Spencer Belknap].  Did she get involved with the river trips, with your dad’s photography business, river guides, printed guides, anything like that?

BELKNAP:  Yeah, she did, but just to back up a little bit, she grew up at the South Rim of the <Grand Canyon>.  Her father, my grandfather, was the manager for the Hopi House, working for Fred Harvey.  So that was a wonderful place for her to grow up.  But she did a lot of, on those early trips, a lot of support, and helping get the food together on Dock’s early trips.  I can remember our front porch being just always cans, all the meals’ groceries and things being sorted.  She did a lot of help in that area.  But she got involved with the Fastwater Expeditions, going on a number of those trips, the Sportyak trips, and really loved it-rowing her own boat and everything.

QUARTAROLI:  What about <Grand Canyon> trips?  She probably got down at least once or a couple of times.

BELKNAP:  She went down a few times, yeah, I think.  Actually, she and my dad joined forces with Ron for a few years at Grand Canyon Expeditions.

QUARTAROLI:  Ron Smith?

BELKNAP:  Right.  She, I think, went on some of the Grand Canyon Expedition trips, yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  When you say "joined forces," were they....

BELKNAP:  Well, Ron asked my dad if he’d like to become part of Grand Canyon Expeditions at one point there.  It was, I would say, more of a trial basis, and I think that it was a good experience, and my dad had a lot to offer-and my mom too-helping Ron in the early days.  Then I think we got into doing the publishing, and my dad had more of an interest in the individual Sportyaks and that type of river running.

QUARTAROLI:  Okay.  Also, maybe we can, when we get you and Loie together, talk a little bit more about the family.

BELKNAP:  Sure.

QUARTAROLI:  And <Grand Canyon> and Michael Kaboti and things like that.  But some other personalities:  Georgie’s [White or Clark] name came up at lunch.  You had one little story about Georgie.  We’ll go over that, plus any other occasions when you ran into her, what that was like on the river.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, she was always coming through <Boulder> with her trips, and my dad had gotten to know her pretty well, and so she’d stop at our house after her early trips.  Then she was based, I guess, in <Las Vegas>.  But yeah, I was just telling you about Georgie when she had an upset, my dad always said she would say she was on a picture set, and when she’d describe one of her boats turning over, doing a little more daring run or whatever.  She was always fun.  I think this is a postcard I had from Georgie at one point.

QUARTAROLI:  This is July 3, 1961.  She was still based in <Los Angeles>.  "Woman of the River, Georgie White.  Hello, I tried to call you when I finished [my] last trip.  Boatmen are set up about November for the following year, so I didn’t need you this year.  Are you interested in 1962?  Georgie."

QUARTAROLI:  And what happened after that year?

BELKNAP:  That was after the jet trip, and then ’63, of course, they cut the water off.  I hadn’t seen that until I was looking through the boxes of photos and stuff.  I didn’t even remember that I had that, until a few days ago.

QUARTAROLI:  Do you remember ... the jet boat trip was going upstream, and Georgie was going downstream, you met at <Elves Chasm>.

BELKNAP:  We did.  That was quite a meeting.  She didn’t want to believe or admit that we had actually gone up <Vulcan>.  I think she claimed that we had hauled the boats up, or this or that or whatever-that they definitely had not been driven up.  So I know there’s some great pictures my dad took there on the beach at <Elves Chasm> of Georgie and Dock and Jon Hamilton, and I guess Jim Bechtel, talking to Georgie, probably saying, "Yes we did!" "No you didn’t!"  Whatever.  But that was a classic meeting, yeah, really.

QUARTAROLI:  What about other personalities?  Of course when you were down there, there were very few trips.  The idea that trips would see each other was pretty rare, even rarer.  Did you run into, do you remember....

BELKNAP:  I remember going up with my dad when Bill Beer and John Daggett came down.  We went up to Pearce Ferry.  I think the water was low, so that the river was just running through the Pearce Ferry area.  We went up and we were the ones who met the swimmers, Beer and Daggett.  That was quite a meeting.  Now we’ve got a couple of great pictures and one in the river guide, about that meeting. Let’s see....  Of course my dad met so many river parties.  A lot of time I probably just wasn’t aware of all of 'em that he did meet.  I guess the Nevills.  Nevills trips, you know, he got some great pictures of the Nevills, Norm and his wife, on his early trips-meeting him there at the upper end of Lake Mead in the canyon.

QUARTAROLI:  Do you have any idea how he managed to be there?  Because it seemed like every trip that came off, your dad was up there taking a picture pretty much.

BELKNAP:  Really.

QUARTAROLI:  He knew these people too, a lot of 'em.  So he kind of knew what their schedule was, if they stuck to their plan.  But you said he liked to go boating anyway, so maybe it was a combination that he just happened to be up there, too, [unclear].

BELKNAP:  Well, he just loved the lower end of the <Grand Canyon> out there, and Lake Mead.  I’m just sure Dock advised him of anything that he knew, too-trips coming through or whatever.  Here’s some pictures.  It’s fun to go through these, after not having seen them for twenty, thirty years.  Just a shot from the front of a paddleboat down on Lake Mead when I was little, with a duck.  But this is, I think, the 1950 trip, just a couple of shots on the Chris-Craft, Dock’s Chris-Craft.

QUARTAROLI:  And who’s....

BELKNAP:  So that’s my dad, Dock, and Loie and me there.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh, that’s fun.

BELKNAP:  Amazing to think that that Chris-Craft with the rudder and all, the propeller, all that stuff hanging down.

QUARTAROLI:  And then you go to the jets where there’s essentially nothing underneath there.

BELKNAP:  Right.  But unlike an outboard, it didn’t kick up if it hit something.  This is September of ’56 out at <Boulder City>, out at the airport, I believe.  A picture of P.T. Reilly and me and George Crockett from Alamo Aviation.  I guess we went up and took a flight.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh, I know what this one was, the Alamo Arch, and Keyhole Arch, discovered in the same year.  I was just looking that up a little bit in Dock’s collection about that, for the newspaper article.  Alamo Arch got the name from Alamo Airlines, is my supposition.  [Belknap: Oh, I see.]  Alamo means "cottonwood," so I thought they’re just cottonwoods, so they called it Alamo Arch.  And I thought while it was this Alamo Airlines scenic flight, and they named it after the company.

BELKNAP:  That would make complete sense.

QUARTAROLI:  I just saw this article, and you were in the picture in the newspaper, the Review Journal, Las Vegas Review Journal.  There’s a picture of you in there.  I’ve got a photocopy.  I’ll have to look and see if it’s this picture or not.  Oh that’s great!  George Crockett, Alamo Airways.

BELKNAP:  This is when we went up and were testing the Sportyak up at <Gneiss Canyon>.  That’s Tick Segerblom carrying the boat.  Well actually, that’s me carrying the boat.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, takin’ it up to run it back down again?

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  We did that all day long, it seemed like.

JANSEN:  All that sand!

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  It doesn’t look anything like that now, does it?

QUARTAROLI:  No.  (pause)  You talked about your dad with his love of the lower end of the canyon.  He was always goin’ up to do that.  You were around boating and swimming and water-based, doin’ all that, and it obviously rubbed off on you with all the trips you were doin’, startin’ out young.  What pulled you into that?  What was the attraction of doing river trips, or being on the water?  Any associations?

BELKNAP:  Just loved the water.  Meeting Michael Kabotie again yesterday-he came down to <Boulder City> a couple of times when he was quite young, to learn to swim when he was ten or twelve.  But he reminded me, he said, "You were just always in the water, like a fish."  I guess just that love of being around and in the water.

QUARTAROLI:  Was there something else, too?  You kind of grew up at the <Grand Canyon>, too, because of your grandparents.

BELKNAP:  Uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  Was there an attraction to the <Grand Canyon>, or to the Colorado River specifically other than just as kind of natural habitat for you with the family and everything?

BELKNAP:  I guess just sort of like being in our back yard, really, the canyon there.  We made so many trips up in the lower end of the canyon, just on weekends or whatever.  I guess being all those trips in the lower end, and then Dock finally asked me if I’d like to join his trip.  I just got hooked on it. My dad did a lot of hikes, too, in the lower end of the canyon.  And I remember him taking me down to <Supai> when I was in third grade.  I had to take a week off from school.  I can’t remember, he wrote a letter or something-I have it around somewhere-to the teacher, asking.  So she thought it sounded like a great thing, so she gave me the days off.  But it was Jorgen Visbak, and my dad and I.  Yeah, that was it.  We hiked down to <Supai>.  We got down below Havasu and it started raining.  It was one of those 500-year floods.  I guess the bridges washed out and it was just a torrent of water coming down <Supai> for a couple of days there.  Do you know where <Carbonate Canyon> is, the side canyon below the falls [Havasu Falls] there?

QUARTAROLI:  Not particularly.

BELKNAP:  But we got up there and found a big cave that first night.  The water in that little side canyon was just wall-to-wall, and we were up probably another fifteen feet above it, but it was just wall-to-wall water and rocks were coming off the cliffs above us.  [unclear]  Pretty spectacular.

QUARTAROLI:  You hadn’t even gone down to the village at that point?

BELKNAP:  Maybe I’m getting the....  Past the village.  And what is the most spectacular falls?  Not Mooney, the one up from Mooney.  Is that Havasu?

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, I think so.

JANSEN:  Yeah.

BELKNAP:  So we were down below the village, yeah.  So we were trapped down there for a few days.  Mainly I guess-well, the bridges being out and everything.  I remember there was somebody who had some camps down there-or he brought tourists down.  He had all these cowboy candy bars.  They were a coconut-type candy bar, so we ate those for about two days, because we had not planned to be down there that long.  So that was, I guess, probably ’52 when we were down there in <Supai>.  But we did a trip down Quartermaster-hiking trip-down Meriwhitica and Spencer.  Hiked down there.  We hiked down from the rim, <Thunder River>, coming down from the north side there.  That was with an Explorer [Scout] post.  He had an Explorer post.  That particular trip was with the Explorer post.  We did the hike down, of course, with the Explorer post, down to <Phantom>.  There was a hike down on <Emery Falls>, the upper part, coming down from the rim on that side.  So there was a lot of early fifties hiking.

QUARTAROLI:  You were too young to be an Explorer, so you were just taggin’ along?

BELKNAP:  I was sort of like the mascot.  I know so many of those Explorers of that Explorer post meant so much to him-all these incredible hikes my dad took 'em on.  Today they’re still talking about that it really changed their lives, things he did for 'em.

QUARTAROLI:  Well Dock has come up quite a bit in here.  He’s a seminal figure in this time period for river trips.  You got to do a lot of boating with him.  And there are several of us....  Both the posters I’ve done have a lot of Dock’s research in 'em, and one of the posters is his list of the first 100.  He did two lists.  Not a lot has been written about Dock in some things that show up in some of the books because he corresponded with a lot of river runners and anybody associated with <Grand Canyon>.  So when books come up, and they refer to Dock, sometimes it’s not in a great light, because he was a little cantankerous, his reputation and stuff.  I think that Dock should have a little more prominence nowadays in the river history, because he did contribute so much to it.  Like you, he was on a lot of seminal river trips.  There are several of us that are interested in Dock and trying to get more information about his personality, how he was on river trips.  He organized a lot of 'em, but then he was still an active participant while he was on the trip.  You did half a dozen trips with him.  Kind of what was Dock like on the trip, off the trip, and what did he do as far as more participation within the trip, that type of thing?

BELKNAP:  He always seemed really so well organized.  He drove the early trips on the Boo II, he was driving that boat.  He drove the Chris-Craft, which I guess was the Boo-I’m not sure of that.  The Boo II, of course, coming as the second boat.  I always found him just a wonderful person.  There were never, on any of the trips that I was on, I never saw any conflicts or words really.  Everything was always just really well managed and run, and just lots of fun, basically.  I never saw, and I’ve heard later comments, this and that, about Dock, but on the trips they were just always wonderful trips basically.  Very professional.  I know sometimes in the correspondence with my dad I think he would raise some little things.  There would be some little controversy here and there, but my dad would always kind of just be able to let it drop, and the problem would disappear.  Of course that ’63 Sportyak trip he was seventy years old at that point.  That was a month long, and being down there in the canyon, lining the rapids, he was doing his own lining.  He was always unloading camp gear and everything.

QUARTAROLI:  You said he organized a lot.  When you look through his collection you see all of these receipts.  He kept track of everything.  Very detailed.  Part of his engineering experience.  Things like that.  You can only assume that he was kind of like that on the trip too.  Did you find that, where he tried to stick to a schedule, and had plans?

BELKNAP:  Oh yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Probably up not necessarily early, but enough to get things goin’.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, definitely.  He was an early riser.  The meals were well planned, and his scheduling and everything.  Those early trips, he seemed to have a lot of sort of upper class clients or passengers along.  They were friends, and maybe he met 'em through the Bohemian Club there in <San Francisco>.  But Frank Masland, he owned Masland Carpet in Carlisle.  Joe Desloge was from <St. Louis>.  He was an industrialist, I guess.  When I was going to school in <St. Louis>, Joe had me out to his house there in <St. Louis>.  It was like a mansion.  I just couldn’t believe the size of it.  Really nice person.  Ed I’Anson, who was my co-pilot on the jet trip, had been on quite a few trips with Dock, and he had a Lincoln Foundry down in <Los Angeles>-manufactured a lot of machinery, equipment, made the Mustang motorcycle.

QUARTAROLI:  What about sense of humor?  I know I saw some things with the Bohemian Club, with their hijinks and plays and stuff they put on.  It seemed like he enjoyed having a good time.  What was his sense of humor like?

BELKNAP:  He just seemed to have a, I always felt, a good sense of humor.  He would always like his scotch after dinner and things, loosened up a little after dinner.  He never, on those trips I don’t think he ever-he never overdid it in his drinking.  I understand he might have in later years.

QUARTAROLI:  Was he a practical joker?

BELKNAP:  I can’t remember anything.  But Garth, his son, was on a couple of trips, and he was a totally practical joker.  And I’m sure that he must have gotten some of that from his dad.  And then his wife, Margaret Marston, she was a real nice person.  I can’t remember when she passed away, but she was maybe in the mid-fifties, or something in that area.  I remember on one trip-I can’t remember exactly which one-but Dock....  Maybe it was on that jet trip, I can’t remember exactly.  But Dock had-it was after dinner-put his bedroll a little too close to the kitchen.  My dad was finishing the dishes.  He had the five-gallon dish rinse or whatever, and threw it out, hit Dock.  He came roaring up out of his sleeping bag.  Soaked the sleeping bag.  But he didn’t-that was just no big deal.

QUARTAROLI:  Was he pretty adaptable on the river?  I read some things, when they first took down the outboards, and problems and steering cables, and performance and stuff-what he would do for the next trip.  He always had suggestions for someone else’s trip on equipment and stuff.  So what was he like when he ran into problems on the river?  You might have been on trips where things went pretty smoothly.

BELKNAP:  Yeah, they were, basically, yeah.  He always was talking about contingency plans and backups and two motors, multiple boats.  Actually, there was one trip, and maybe it was in ’57, I wasn’t along, but one of the boats was not tied up properly.  I don’t know if it was at <Vulcan> or some....  But they were looking at the rapid, and here came the boat down the rapid.  After that it was always two lines on each boat, and that type of thing.  I have one of my letters here from Dock, one of my assignments was to be sure that there were two lines on the boats, and double check the boats every night to be sure they were totally secured.  Yeah, this was in 1958, so it must have been the 1957 trip.

QUARTAROLI:  With the boat companies?

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  "Dear Buzz, will be good to have you aboard.  Enclosed is a running schedule and some suggestions on clothing.  There are not many ‘musts’ on the crews.  One is that we all must wear life preservers when the boats are under way.  There’s a special need that the mooring of the boats be checked at every landing.  Your special assignment is to check the mooring on your boat immediately after reaching shore, then check those of the other two craft.  Night moorings require two lines on each boat."  So that was probably the ’57 trip.

QUARTAROLI:  Some details about washing plates and cleaning up?

BELKNAP:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  Well after you did these trips in the fifties and sixties and came out with the river guides and stuff, but then you were in the Navy, and then <Hawaii>-have you done trips since, in the last thirty-something years?  What about continued boating?

BELKNAP:  Not too much.  I did a trip in ’88 when we were doing the major revision of the Grand Canyon Guide.  Did that when O.C. was leading the trip, and Eben was along on that trip.  I just took a lot of notes and I shot a lot of pictures of those geologic photo labeling pictures that we have in the guide.  That was the last full trip I’ve been down.  I guess it’s hard after seeing those early days before the dam, and just the nature of the river, and the wildness.  I have a hard time, it’s a totally different experience now.  I mean, it’s a wonderful experience for anybody to take, but I don’t know, there’s something about seeing it in those pre-dam days, it’s hard to see it now for me.  But like I say, it’s still a wonderful experience.

QUARTAROLI:  You know the Guides Training Seminar, we’re here for this weekend, and they do a river trip associated with it, so if you ever find that you’d like to get down a trip again.

BELKNAP:  Oh I would like to, now that I’ve....  I definitely would love to get back down there now.

QUARTAROLI:  Go down and impart some of your stories and knowledge to the boatmen that are on the trip.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.  It’d be fun.  I did just a short trip from <Diamond Creek> down in about 1995 or ’6, somewhere in there.  But in <Hawaii> I got into wind surfing heavily and liked that a lot.  And then I got into wake boarding, bought a ski boat, competition ski boat over there, and got into that for maybe three or four years.  That’s sort of my last water adventure.

QUARTAROLI:  Sam, you have any questions, or did we miss something?

JANSEN:  No, it seems good to me.

QUARTAROLI:  What do you think, Buzz?

JANSEN:  Anything we should have asked you?

BELKNAP:  I can’t think of anything.  I’m sure I will when I walk out of here.  But no, I think we’ve....

QUARTAROLI:  Well, if you think of something, we’ll try to get you and Loie together, and you could bring it up then.

BELKNAP:  Yeah.

QUARTAROLI:  I think that was great:  a lot of great stories and information, and fun.  Glad you were able to make it out and get a chance to do this.

BELKNAP:  I enjoyed doing it, definitely.

QUARTAROLI:  Well good.  Thank you very much.

BELKNAP:  All right.  Thank you.



