STELLA TANNER INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.17

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're in <Farmington New Mexico>. It's July 16, 1998. We're at the Fifth Generation Trading Company with Stella Tanner, and we're going to interview her as part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. Also present in the room is Joe Tanner, Jr., and Lew Steiger, who's running the camera and sound equipment. 

Cole: Stella, what we'd like to do is just start from the very beginning and have you tell us about your life. So the first question is, when and where were you born? 

Tanner: Well, I was born at <Kirtland New Mexico>. I always thought my birthday was on Christmas Day. I guess I was born just a few minutes before. Mother always had me celebrate Christmas Day, but the original, in <Salt Lake> records, is the twenty-fourth. I was born in 1906. When I was about a year old, my parents lived with Grandpa McGee, which they used to live down here, just above where Joe has his home down in the valley. Grandpa, they called him Pappy McGee, and he had seven boys, and they always followed Pappy, all except two of 'em wouldn't go--the wives wouldn't let 'em. And they went to <Idaho> to clear land. And so we followed 'em up there, and my dad traveled with him until I was thirteen. And then that's when we came back to <Kirtland>. At first we went to <Idaho>, and then to <Utah>--<Richfield>--and done different things. And then he and the boys ran a moving picture theater in <Richfield>, when they just had the kerosene lamps around to show the light. And then he decided they'd go to <Springdale Utah>, Zion's National Park. So by that time they had four children. We went up there, and there was no road at all, you know, going up to Zion's Canyon at that time. We went in a covered wagon, all of us. I can just see the horses today pulling 'em up over the heavy rocks. And when we finally landed in <Springdale>, Pappy McGee, my grandfather, was already there with his wife and a couple of the others. I remember so clearly that my mother got out of the wagon and looked all around, and she said, "Well, Elwood, all we need is a lid." Have you ever been up there? 

Cole: Uh-huh. 

Tanner: It's just round, you know. And so that tells you how she liked it. She didn't like it. And then we were there for about three years, and Dad worked on the road, when it first started to be built up there to Zion's Canyon. And then they left and went down to <Harrisburg Utah>, and he just was a farmer then, and raised cane and made sorghum.

My mother was a Hunt, you know, and her parents lived at--at that time they called it Jewitt Valley. That's where <Waterflow> is now. And they were the ones that was sent into <Tuba City>, pioneered into there--you know, the Hunts, the Foutzes and the Tanners, and I don't know how many more. But anyway, my mother's father was dying with cancer, so he sent my mother $500 to come home so he could see her before he died. Do you want me to go into this? 

Cole: Yeah, this is great. 

Tanner: So we loaded up. By that time there were seven children. We loaded all our possessions in that covered wagon and we left the twenty-eighth of March, and we got in Jewitt Valley on the twenty-ninth of April. It stormed on us every day of that trip. Us older children would have to walk on the back of the wagon. 

Cole: How old were you? 

Tanner: I was just about thirteen. And so when nighttime would come, my dad would build a big bonfire and have us take our shoes off and dry the shoes and socks, and make us a great big kettle of Postum--hot Postum, to get us warm. But that's how long it took us to come from <Harrisburg Utah>, to <Waterflow> by covered wagon. 

Cole: And <Waterflow> was where again? 

Tanner: Well, it's between <Kirtland> and <Shiprock>. At that time it was called Jewitt Valley. Every day was an experience. All of us kids never did get sick, all on that whole trip. But that's how long it took us in that covered wagon to get there. Comin' over the Salina Canyon, it really did snow on us, I remember. And so we stayed at a cabin on top of the mountain. It was empty there, along the road. It had a fireplace in it, and we all got our clothes dried that night and stayed warm. Then we finally got to Grandpa Hunt's place. He had a big ranch there in Jewitt. Should I call it Jewitt or <Waterflow>? 

Cole: Either one is fine. 

Tanner: But that's what it was called then. And then I'll never forget my dear mother. She hadn't seen her parents for about eight years, and how happy she was when they got there. Then Grandpa Hunt died about six months after we got there. Then he loaned my father another $500 to buy his little place there in <Kirtland New Mexico>. So that's where I finished growin' up. That's where I met Chunky Tanner. They used to have the biggest house there in <Kirtland>, and all of us kids that lived in <Kirtland>, we liked to go down there and play with the girls. One day when I was about fifteen, I guess, Josephine, one of the girls close to my age, said, "Oh, here comes brother Chunky." That's what they called my husband. His name is [Riold?] Lehi Tanner, but he didn't like it. Whenever we'd go down there, it was on a weekend, and I had real long hair and I could sit on it, and she always put it in ringlets for the weekend. And Josephine said, "Here comes Chunky," and he'd been down to Mesa. He came in, and I immediately fell in love with him, because he came up, took hold of one of my curls and said, "This is the one I'm waitin' for!" Of course, I believed him. (laughter) It went on for about another year, and he got engaged to somebody else, and he came home when I was sixteen, on Christmas I'd be seventeen. He had a falling-out with his girlfriend. Vera Burnham was her name. So he started goin' with me in November, and we were married in January. 

Cole: What year? 

Tanner: In 1924. I'd just barely turned seventeen. Chunky didn't have enough money for me to go to Mesa with him. He had a job down there with the Lily Ice Cream Company. So I had to wait a couple of months until he went down and earned enough money to put me on the train to go down. In the meantime, I found myself pregnant with J. B. right away. I went down there in March. J. B. was born in August--he was a premature baby, only weighed three-and-a-fourth pounds. Right in the heat of the summer, we didn't have any cooling system at that time, so we'd just wet a sheet in the bath tub and then roll up in it at night.

In the spring of 1925, his father wrote us a letter and said he wanted Chunk to come up to <Gallup> to help him sell turquoise. He gave the turquoise to the Indians to make jewelry with. So in the meantime we'd saved enough to buy a Model "T" Ford. On the first of June we went up here. J. B. was just a baby. He was from August to the next June, about eight or nine months old, and I was just really lookin' forward to goin' up and showin' our baby to my parents. We stopped in <Gallup> and spent a couple of days. Grandpa Tanner--that's Joe Tanner, you know. That's number one, isn't it? Anyway, then we went on over to see my parents at <Kirtland>. His brother-in-law, Willard Stalworthy [phonetic spelling], had a store down at <Montezuma Creek>, and he needed somebody to run that store. So we traded our Model "T" Ford as a down payment on that. Went down there, and his father was really upset with us for several years, because he planned on us being over there with him. But we went down there in 1925, in June. That was the end of nowhere. Do you know where <Aneth Utah>, is? 

Cole: Uh-huh. 

Tanner: Well, it's just below there a ways, <Montezuma Creek>. That's where all these fugitives were for a while. But there was no road, only just about like the ones we traveled in to go into <Springdale>. Got down there, and then had to turn the Model "T" back to Willard, and he drove it back. He went down and followed us down. Never seen a white person then for eight months. Just sit right there. The store was in pretty bad shape, but my husband was a real good Navajo talker, and he really built it up. We got 1,400 head of lambs that first fall, in 1926. He bought more lambs that year than he did before. The Paiute Indians were down there at that time, and I remember how frightened I was of them at first. But you know, those Indians became my best friends, and they're the ones that really taught me a little bit. I'd follow Chunk around and I'd say, "What did he say? What did he say?" And he said, "Oh, get this girl to tell you what they said." That's how you picked up the language, and I got to where I could tell 'em how much stuff was, and just gradually learned the language. 

Cole: Was that Navajo or Paiute? 

Tanner: Navajo. But of course my husband was a very fluent speaker, just like his father was. So we were there for two lamb seasons. That's how they did way back there. They'd have two pay days: wool season and lamb season. And the traders would carry 'em on the books. And then when they'd make a rug, they didn't make these real fancy rugs then, but they'd bring 'em in and the trader would tell 'em how much they were worth, you know, and write it down on a paper bag. They'd buy one thing at a time. And after they'd buy one thing, why, they'd have to know how much they had left. And then it would just take 'em all day to trade out that rug, because they liked to come into the trading post in their wagons. 

Cole: Would that all be done on the paper bag? 

Tanner: Uh-huh, trading out the rug. And we used to buy the rugs by the pound back then, because they didn't have the real fancy designs. They had some, but not real good ones. But in the fall of 1926, we went out with the lambs. That's the only time we left the trading post, is when we delivered the lambs into <Farmington New Mexico>. By that time I was pregnant with my second boy, so when we got in there with the lambs that year, Willard Stalworthy said, "Well, I've gotta have you out to <Tsaya>. I'm gonna sell you a half- interest in <Tsaya>. You've heard of <Tsaya>? It's between <Farmington> and <Crownpoint>. Why they call it <Tsaya>, it means "water under the rock." There's a big cave out there. 

Cole: Do you know how that would be spelled? 

Tanner: T-S-A-Y-A, [pronounced] Saya. And so we went out there in 1927, and bought half-interest in that. We were there for about eighteen years. Finally I had all my children except.... But during that time, the first two years we were there, the grass was so high.... Did you cross the reservation last year? Did you see all the flowers between <Gallup> and <Shiprock>? 

Cole: We didn't. We were out here in February. 

Tanner: But this year they weren't in bloom like that. The first two years we were at <Tsaya> my husband ran 1,500 head of ewes, leased from government land, along with the trading post. And that's some of the pictures that I have of <Tsaya> that I'll get for you. Maybe I'm goin' too fast. 

Cole: No, you're fine. 

Tanner: After about the third or fourth year, the grass began to--we didn't have any storm, and the sheep began to have trouble with their feed and everything. I think it was about in 1929, I remember my husband saying, "All these expensive sheep...." He paid eight dollars a head for 'em, when we bought in. And then the lambs dropped down to three cents a pound that year, in 1928 or 1929--delivered in <Kansas City>. (chuckles) And so we began to really having to be-- went really in debt, you know, because we still owed a lot on the sheep. Then in 1932, why, the ground--there wasn't any feed anywhere. So the government came in and they had the traders, all of them, cut down--and the Navajos, too--on all their herds, and they'd run 'em into these canyons and just slaughter 'em, because there was no feed for 'em. I'll never forget what a terrible ordeal that was for my husband. It was hard on everybody. 

Cole: Did they take all the sheep, or just a certain amount? 

Tanner: They just cut 'em down to where they'd have--they were allowed so many. But going back to the trading post, he ran the ewes each year or two, along with the trading post. In those days they didn't pawn like they do today. They'd come in and start to pawn a little bit. That's the first recollection I have of pawn, is they'd bring a bracelet or beads or something in, and Chunk would tell 'em how much they could have on it. Then he'd roll it up and put it in a paper bag and put it just in a drawer. We didn't have too much pawn. We carried it mostly on the book from one season to the other.

That was in 1932 when the Depression started, you know, when all that happened. If you want to ask some questions about some of the other stuff, before I go on. 

Cole: What was <Montezuma Creek> like when you moved out there? if you could describe the kind of building. 

Tanner: Like I said, that was the end of nowhere, as far as I was concerned. The only way you could get any freight in or anything, was in big wagons. I remember I'd watch over that hill, when I thought there was going to be a load of freight comin' in, which would only be about once every two months. You'd see that team of wagons comin'. It just seemed so good to be able to see somebody. And then one time we hadn't seen any white people for I don't know how long. There were a couple of men who came down to try to buy cattle. So we were glad to see them. They came and stayed there at the store. The Indians were happy to see 'em too, but this one.... The store was full of Indians one day, and Chunk had told 'em all to bring their steers in if they wanted to sell 'em--which they didn't have only one or two of 'em, each family, I guess. I remember the store was full of Indians, and this one guy was talkin', and the Indians were all lookin' at 'em, 'cause they were talkin' English and they couldn't understand 'em. This one guy, he had false teeth, and this one Indian was just starin' in his face. (laughter) And so he reached up and got his teeth and just __________. Of course they were really superstitious, and ___________ had had 'em for sure. (laughter) Boy, nearly everybody in the store cleared out of there in a hurry for a little while. (laughter) That was really funny. 

Cole: What were your living quarters like? 

Tanner: Well, we didn't have any. We had the store building, just about the size of this building here, and then a dirt floor. Then it went directly into the little kitchen we had. That's just one room there, where we cooked, ate, and slept in that one room. It was also dirt floor. 

Cole: What about water? 

Tanner: Had to carry your water from the <San Juan River>. The store was right up on top of the ridge from the river. When it was really muddy, why, you know how we cleared our water? 

Cole: Unt-uh. 

Tanner: We'd fill these--there were wooden barrels down there when we went down there. The Indians would carry the water up from the river and fill the barrels. We'd take a can of milk and put it in that fifty-gallon water and stir it real hard. It just clears all the water up. The sand and dirt all went to the bottom. That's how we got our drinkin' water and everything from the <San Juan River> there.

I went too fast. 

Cole: No, you're fine. 

Tanner: I was goin' to <Tsaya>, before I told you all about Montezuma. Is there anything else? 

Cole: We'll probably jump around a lot. 

Tanner: That's okay. 

Cole: What was the kind of typical trading experience at Montezuma, when a Navajo would come in? 

Tanner: There wasn't any of 'em that spoke English at that time--only in the summertime if one of the children would come home. And they were forced to send their children to school then. Sometimes they'd run away. Let me see, what was the question? 

Cole: About what a typical trading experience would be, when a Navajo would come in. 

Tanner: Well, they'd come in and buy their supplies. And like I said, we'd charge it on the books from wool season to lamb season. I don't recall of any pawn down there at <Montezuma Creek> at all. My first contact with pawning was at <Tsaya>. But they'd all come in, in their team and wagons. They lived quite a distance, and they had to haul their water from the <San Juan River> up to wherever they lived in their hogans. 

Cole: You said you speak Navajo. Did you ever have a nickname? 

Tanner: They called me Shimá Yázhí. That means "little mother." 

Cole: What about your husband? 

Tanner: They called him Dual-tendi-yazzi [phonetic spelling]. That meant "the little man that was hard to get along with." (laughter) 

Steiger: How would you spell those? 

Joe Tanner: How would you say that again? 

Tanner: Dual-tendi-yazzi. You spell it for 'em! 

Joe Tanner: I don't know! 

Tanner: You have to just spell it like it sounds. And that's the way you had to do with their names when they'd write it down on their books. We had one old fellow down there at <Montezuma Creek> that they called Big Thumb, because he had the biggest thumbs I ever saw on anybody. But they named everybody, you know.

Goin' back to <Montezuma Creek>, and goin' back to J. B.: He was premature, born at seven months. My neighbor gave me a great big bottle of castor oil that I felt like I needed. She gave me the whole eight ounces, and that's what brought everything. But anyway, he never seen a well day. We had to feed him with an eye dropper for the first two weeks when he was born, because he couldn't nurse or anything, and when he'd cry, he sounded just like a little mouse. Anyway, when we went down to <Montezuma Creek>, he was very ill all the time. Chunk was telling this medicine man about his little sick baby. And so one morning after he'd told him that, we heard a loud noise out in front of the store and the blatting of--I knew it wasn't a lamb, because it sounded different, and it was a goat. Chunk went and opened the door for him, and it was this old medicine man stood there. He had this milk goat, and he said to him, "Now, you give your baby this milk from this goat, and he'll get well," because he had diarrhea so bad he couldn't hold anything down. And from that day on, then he started to gettin' better. So I've always thought an awful lot of the medicine man, because I feel like he saved my oldest son's life with that. 

Cole: Did you have any other experiences with medicine men like that? 

Tanner: Well, I helped deliver a couple of babies out at <Tsaya> with the medicine men. That was quite an experience. 

Cole: I'm sort of curious, how did your husband come by his nickname? 

Tanner: Because he really was hard to get along with. (laughter) When he got mad at the Indians, he could talk so fast--you could put him in a room with the Indians, and listen to 'em all talk, and you couldn't tell which one was which--that's how good a talker he was. But when he'd get mad at some of 'em, they said he could really talk fast and mean. (chuckles) 

Joe Tanner: His father had taught him to speak Navajo? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. Well, he used to go with Grandpa Tanner when he was just out at <Tsaya>. After he was three years old, Grandpa would take him with him, when he'd go out to the Indians. By that time, he got over bein' mad at us, so he'd come around quite a bit. And he's the one that taught J. B. a lot. And then livin' with the Indians, and that's the only playmates they had. All the boys speak it, but he speaks it better than any of 'em. 

Cole: Grandpa Tanner.... 

Tanner: Joseph Baldwin Tanner. 

Cole: Right. When you got married, he was in <Gallup>. Was that where he'd always been? 

Tanner: Well, no. He had a big ranch in <Cortez> for a while, and then he had a trading post there, out in the outskirts of <Cortez>. Of course that's how his boys learned to speak the language, because they were always around the Indians, too. 

Cole: And then I was wondering, you said at <Montezuma Creek> the rugs they brought in weren't the quality they are now. What kinds of rugs were they? What did they look like? 

Tanner: Well, they weren't fine weave at all. They made mostly saddle blankets, and then a lot of 'em would make their wedding dresses, you know, for 'em. They used to wear those woven dresses when they'd get married, some of the Indians. But none of 'em was really.... It was after we went out to <Tsaya> that they started workin' with the Indians to learn more about how to weave and everything. 

Cole: What about the jewelry and other crafts? 

Tanner: There wasn't anything fancy with them either. Just after we went to <Tsaya> that they began working with the silversmiths. It was quite a while after we were there before they really.... I think when we were there about six years is when Chunk bought a rug, it was called "daisy rug," a circle rug at that time. And that was really a beautiful one. It had the round circles in it. That was made out of the fine. Then Chunk began tellin' 'em how to weave their wool finer. And then all the traders began doin' that in about the forties. When you interview the boys, especially Joe, his father, he's really knowledgeable on the rugs and can tell you--go back to the dates when they first started finding the good designs and all that. 

Cole: What about jewelry? Did Chunk have much to do with that? 

Tanner: No, his father did, but it was quite crude. He'd go down to <Bisbee>. He had an interest in a mine down there. I think that's where the Blue Gem come from, wasn't it? from his mine? And he'd sell 'em the stones and they'd make just the plain bracelets. Some of 'em were pretty nice, but not like they are today. Of course they're really gettin' fancy today. I don't care for the real fancy ones like they're makin' today. I like the old, old [pawn?]. 

Cole: When you were either at <Montezuma Creek> or at <Tsaya>, did you actually do trading yourself ever? 

Tanner: Well, I didn't when I was at <Montezuma Creek>. I baked bread for every day, about twelve. We had an old wood stove, and I'd bake the bread and the Indians would stand around waitin' for that bread to come out of the oven, and we sold loaves of bread. And I made the cookies for the store, because like I said, we only got supplies in about every two months. And so we had to make the bread and cookies that they bought. I made their skirts, sewed them up. We had a machine, and I'd charge 'em so much for sewin' up a skirt. They'd buy a new skirt and put it right on over the top of the old one. They didn't have the day schools until, oh, we'd been at <Tsaya>, I guess, about ten years before the day schools started to be built. Built some beautiful ones there across the Chaco Canyon from <Tsaya>. 

Cole: Now, did you still own partly <Montezuma Creek> when you moved to <Tsaya>? 

Tanner: No, when we left down there, Willard Stalworthy, brother-in-law, he bought our part back, and then turned it on <Tsaya>. But during the Depression, after he'd started, why, the sheep kept goin' down, and no grass and everything. We went broke there, and finally we had to leave. Willard took that back and put Ken Washburn out there. Then we went to a place between <Bisti> and <Tsaya>. Chunk had built a big reservoir, lake, there, and so he threw up a cabin and we started a little store there. We called it Crimson Hills. Then his health began getting really bad. We had to.... Well, let's see, it was in the early forties, I guess, we found out he.... Let me think a minute. After we left Crimson Hills, we were there for about two or three years and built it up pretty good again, and then moved. We finally bought a place at <Kirtland> and put the children in school. But before we did that, I taught 'em a little bit. Then we had a girl come out and teach 'em. But we bought this home down here at <Kirtland> and then Chunk went to work with his brother down at <Aneth Utah>. We were down there for four or five years. 

Cole: When you were out at Crimson, you said he built a reservoir. How'd they do all that? 

Tanner: Well, with mule teams. The Indians had some horses. You just close off a wash, and then when it'd rain, it'd fill up with water. It got to be a pretty good-sized one. And that's where we got our water from there. 

Cole: Did he do anything else with the water? Any kind of farming? 

Tanner: He raised a little bit of corn. Mostly we just used it for when we'd buy lambs and water them. And then we'd let the Indians come in and use it. 

Cole: When you mentioned at <Tsaya> that you had a sewing machine, was it powered by generator, or by hand? 

Tanner: No, it was a treadle. It was already there when we went down there. Whoever was there before us, Jess Stalworthy was a half-brother to Willard, and I guess he must have left it there. I made lots of Indian skirts there. It took about twelve yards. They'd buy the material, and then I'd charge 'em about a dollar for sewin' it up. 

Cole: How would you compare <Tsaya> to <Montezuma Creek>? What were the living conditions and things? 

Tanner: Well, the living conditions at <Tsaya> was a little bit better. Let's see, it had two bedrooms and a living room that went right into the store. Then the little kitchen. We built on one side of it, we built a kind of a porch. When the kids got big enough to go to school, we hired somebody to come out and help teach 'em. But the wind used to blow terribly out there. Whenever it did, I'd have to sweep up the sand off of the floor where it'd drift in through the windows. It wasn't very good, but it seemed good to me after being down at <Montezuma Creek>. 

Cole: Do you remember what the schoolteacher's name was? 

Tanner: I was tryin' to think. It was right after they'd built the first day school out there, and she was from <Kentucky>. Elizabeth was her first name. I'm tryin' to think of her last name. Anyway, she weighed about 400 pounds. She'd turned in, written about she wanted to go out on the reservation and teach. Instead of waitin' until she found out whether she got the job or not, she came, and she went to the day school. They wouldn't accept her because she was too big and heavy. She was just a young girl, too. She was about twenty- one, I guess. And so Chunk was over there, and she was cryin' and tellin' him her hard-luck story. She said, "I can't go back home and tell my folks I'm not teachin' out here." And so he said, "Well, I'll give you a job." So he hired her for two winters, and her folks never did know that she wasn't teachin' at the day school! (laughter) 

Joe Tanner: Did she teach your children? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. She laid on the bed and taught 'em, 'cause that's how big she was. 

Cole: Did she stay with you too, then? 

Tanner: Uh-huh, she stayed right with us. She had a bed. That's when he built that.... Oh, it was like they call the Arizona room now, when you have a trailer. You close in one end of it. And so she had a bed there, and I'd cook for her. But after the two years, we bought the place in <Kirtland>, and put 'em in there. She went back to her folks, and I guess to this day they thought she taught day school. It saved her life and ours too. I think we paid her fifty dollars a month and her room and board. 

Cole: It sounds like at <Tsaya> the arts and crafts business was a little bit better too? 

Tanner: Well, a little bit, but we had about three or four Indians, that like I said, made the circle rug, daisy rug, after we'd been there about ten years.

You've heard 'em talk about the piñon crops. (

Cole: Uh-huh.) 

Tanner: I remember out there, when we were at <Tsaya>, we paid five cents a pound for those piñons when the Indians would bring 'em in. So you can see how much they've went up. 

Cole: And what would you do with all the piñons that you bought? 

Tanner: Oh, we never did buy only just maybe.... They'd bring 'em in, in these great big wool sacks, and maybe we'd buy maybe two of 'em. We would have to clean 'em ourselves, and then sell 'em back to the Indians through the year. I think we sold 'em for ten cents a pound. 

Cole: And then at that point you moved into <Kirtland>? 

Tanner: Well, we bought this home, and then I was in there part of the time. Chunk needed me out at the store, too, to help. So my mother lived there, she helped raise--put the kids in school, too. That's when we were down at <Aneth> then. And after we were at <Aneth>, they'd buy the lambs in the fall, and they needed a place to graze 'em and fatten 'em out. And so Chunk and his older brother, Don Tanner, he had a flour mill there in <Bayfield>, and he'd take the lambs and they leased some ranches up there that had alfalfa and different kinds of grass on 'em. They'd buy the lambs at <Aneth>, and then take 'em up there and fatten 'em out. And then by that time we'd built our own little-- bought some property there, just this side of <Durango> a little ways, where they bought cattle and everything. We had a fixed space for fifty trailers to hook up, too, you know. We finally built a few cabins there to go with it. And then we put the children in school up there, after we bought that. 

Cole: And where exactly was that? 

Tanner: That was in <Durango Colorado>. But they'd send the lambs from <Aneth>, to fatten 'em out, before they'd sell 'em. And then by that time my husband was really becomin'--he had emphysema, and we had to send him back to Mayo's in <Rochester>. He was back there two or three times. He had to leave <Aneth>, because he couldn't be down there anymore. He finally, after he'd been back to <Rochester>, we finally sold the place in <Durango>. By that time, J. B. was married, and Don. They went out to work for my brother, Bill, at <Keams Canyon>. And there at <Ganado>, too--they went to work for the Wheelers--or he did. When Chunk became real bad, we had to.... Before that, though, we went, after we sold out in <Durango>, why, the doctors told Chunk that he had to go to a lower climate. We went to <Phoenix>. He leased a bunch of cabins right there by the courthouse, and I ran 'em for one winter. It didn't help his health, so we went back up. We just dropped the lease, and it cost us $5,000 for that winter, not making anything. We went back up and found out that <Montezuma Creek> was for sale again. 

Joe Tanner: ___________ to interrupt you, but at <Durango>, could [you] talk a little bit about what [you] did and how [you] traded at <Durango>? Did you say you had trailer courts there? What all did you do at <Durango>? 

Tanner: Well, we had those trailer courts where you hook 'em up to--had a lot of water there. He drilled a well. 

Joe Tanner: Didn't you have a restaurant there, too? 

Tanner: Uh-huh, and then I ran a little restaurant there--snack bar. I had all the doctors from <Durango> comin' out for chicken and noodles--fried chicken. 

Cole: About what year was that? 

Tanner: That was in 1949 or 1950. We sold that in 1953. That's when we went down to Mesa, or <Phoenix>. 

Cole: Was Chunk still doing any trading when you were living in <Durango>? 

Tanner: Well, after he left <Aneth>, he didn't, because his health became too bad. But after we turned those cabins back in <Phoenix>, he, like I say, found out <Montezuma Creek> was for sale again, and so he bought it and went back down there where we first started out. But his health wouldn't allow him to stay, so at that time, J. B. and Don both were at <Ganado>, working for the Lees and the Wheelers that owned it at that time. When he found out he couldn't stay down at <Montezuma Creek>, on account of his health, we went out to <Ganado> to be with the boys. I leased the restaurant. There was a restaurant off of the trading post there, and I ran that for three years, so he could be in the hospital. He was in the hospital most of the time. At that time they had a big hospital there in <Ganado>, which I think they still do, don't they? 

Cole: _____________. 

Tanner: Uh-huh. And then something happened that the Lees decided they didn't want J. B. and them to work for 'em anymore, so they went to work for my brothers out at <Keams>. Don and Birdy [phonetic spelling] run Piñon and that. So when I left there, why, I went down to <Keams> and leased the restaurant off of Keams' store, and that's where I was when Chunky died. 

Cole: And what year was that? 

Tanner: It was in 1956. 

Cole: Did you stay at <Keams> then after that? 

Tanner: Yes. I stayed there.... You mean after he died? 

Cole: Right. 

Tanner: I stayed there for about two months after he died, and then J. B. and Don decided they wanted to come in to <Gamerco>. They leased this big ol' tin barn. (chuckles) Opened up a store there. They called it Yah-Tah-Hey. And so then I followed 'em, naturally, and had a little snack bar in there. We did really well each year that that was there. But I'll leave that story for Buddy to pick up. 

Cole: And where was that at? 

Tanner: At <Gamerco>, just outside of <Gallup>. 

Cole: And how long were you there? 

Tanner: Oh.... We were there for about four years, I think. Then we lost it. I'll leave that for Buddy to bring his into--wouldn't you, Joe? 

Joe Tanner: Whatever you think. 

Cole: So how would you describe your relationship with the Navajo people? 

Tanner: Well, they became my best friends. I've always really loved 'em. When we used to have the stands there at the [Gallup] Ceremonial, I remember one year I was working there in our stand during the Ceremonial, and I was selling a necklace to a lady from <New York>, and I looked up and here come this Navajo woman, just runnin'. She seen me in there, and she come and she threw her arms around me, and I threw my arms around her. We were kissing each other, she was from way back over at <Tsaya>. And this [<New York>] woman said, "You let those old dirty Indians love you like that?! My goodness!" I said, "Well, she's the best friend I ever had! She helped me raise my children down at <Tsaya>." (laughter) I've always loved the Indian people, ever since I got acquainted with 'em. I was frightened of 'em at first, when we first went out there, 'cause I was just a little girl. 

Cole: What would have seemed most frightening? 

Tanner: Well, all my life when I was little, my mother used to tell us stories about how mean the Indians were in all of her travels, like I told you, that they followed Pappy McGee around. And she'd tell us that they'd go on the warpath and how frightened she was of 'em, too. And so when we went on the reservation, naturally I was really worried about it. But I soon found out that they were a good people. 

Cole: How long do you think it took for you to become more acquainted with them? 

Tanner: Well, I was very shy of 'em at first, and then my husband would say, "Well, now, these people are going to be good to you. I'm busy, I can't tell you what this means and that means." There was one girl down there at <Montezuma Creek> that spoke a little English, and he got her to teach me how to count to ten and how to say what money was worth. Gradually she'd go around and she'd tell me what salt was, and sugar. That's how I first started pickin' it up. Then when you're around it all the time, after you once get the basics, why.... My husband, he was always too busy. When he wasn't tradin' with 'em, he was out pitchin' horseshoes with 'em or playin' cards with 'em when they'd have their sings and everything. 

Cole: Would they actually have sings right at the trading post? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. In fact, now that brings up this necklace here. You know when they have these big sings for the sick, they have nine different places to go--or they did then. The last night, they'd have it at the trading post, and we always helped him with supplies and everything. Then they'd dance at night and sing. The married women, when they're married, they can't get out there and go pick a man to dance with--they're not allowed to do that. That's the way it was then. And so naturally they'd get jealous when their husbands would go dance with these single girls. And so one night when they had this big one there at <Tsaya>, several of 'em got in a fight. It was real sandy out there in front of the store. The next morning when Chunk got up, he went out and he come in and he held up a little piece of beads about an inch or two long. He said, "Come on out here and help me, because there's a lot of beads out here. They got in a fight and broke each other's beads." So that's how this got started, back more than fifty years ago. So I always wear these. He finally got it all matched up, and we found enough beads to make one strand. Then every time the pawn would go dead, why, if there's a piece that kind of matched, he'd buy it and add it onto it, and after a few years, why, he had this made. 

Cole: You mentioned they were playing cards. What kind of card games, do you know? 

Tanner: I forget what they called their main card game back there. I know they'd gamble with it. They played with the regular cards. They had a name for it. You can ask Buddy that question. We call him Buddy, the oldest one. 

Cole: J. B.? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. 

Cole: So they gambled quite a bit then? 

Tanner: Well, in those days fifty cents and a quarter was big gambling for them, you know. Oh, what is the name of that? We still play it quite a bit. Not "pitch," but.... Oh, there's a name. That's what they played. And they have 'em in these casinos now where you can play it. What do you call that game? 

Cole: We heard about one game called Cancun poker, but I don't know if.... 

Tanner: Oh, poker, that's what I want. 

Cole: Just poker, yeah. 

Tanner: Uh-huh, that's what they played mostly. 

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2] 

Tanner: ... happened with them. Way back there, you couldn't go to town when somebody got sick. A lot of times when my kids were sick, they'd bring me the herb tea and stuff. It was old medicine men, way back, they were so much different than they are today. They were really good people. Well, all of 'em are good people, but a lot of people don't believe in the medicine men--you know, our people, the white people. 

Cole: Yeah. What were some of the different experiences you remember? 

Tanner: And like I told you, I feel like the medicine man was the one that saved J. B.'s life. (aside about refreshments) 

Cole: (gives tape ID) Stella was just telling us a few of her thoughts about Navajo medicine men. 

Tanner: Well, I've seen Indians when they were just dying, and they'd have these sings for 'em, and prayin' over 'em, and feedin' 'em the herbs. And my grandmother, Grandmother Hunt, she was a firm believer in all those herbs, because way back there, the doctors weren't around much. She was a midwife, my mother's mother. But going back to the medicine men, one time out there at <Montezuma Creek>, I know, this lady was dying, they said, and they had a big sing for her. It went through all the rhythm of the whole thing, and they fed her.... Let's see, what's the name of this? Brigham tea is one of 'em. There's another one. What's the name of that brush? Oh, chaparral-- chaparral tea. This lady had sores all over, too. They made poultices out of the tea. They'd boil the tea and then just take the--it's like a sagebrush, you know, that chaparral. And they put that all over her, and she got completely well, and I saw that. Like I say, there's a lot of people who don't believe in medicine men, but way back there, they were different maybe. When my kids would get sick, we couldn't pick 'em up and bring 'em into <Farmington> or anything, because we didn't have the time or the money to do it. They'd tell us what kind of teas to give 'em, and they'd get well. 

Steiger: (aside about tape) What did transportation, gettin' back to <Farmington>, involve? How did you guys get around? 

Tanner: Well, when we went out to <Tsaya>, Chunk bought a new Chevrolet, I guess it was. But they didn't have heaters in 'em way back then. And so whenever we would go to town, which would be about maybe once every six months, and especially in the wintertime, we'd heat--we had these big rocks, and we'd put 'em in the fire and just get 'em real hot and then wrap 'em up and put 'em in the car, and that's how we stayed warm, with our feet. And in the wintertime, it was cold, you know, driving in. But they didn't have heaters in the car back there when we went to <Tsaya>. 

Cole: What about <Montezuma Creek>? 

Tanner: We didn't have a car down there. We turned our Model "T" in as a down payment. So we were down there for a year before we had a car. 

Cole: Did you ever go back to <Farmington> on horses? 

Tanner: After a year. 

Cole: What was your social life like then, as far as any religious things or anything like that? 

Tanner: When we were at <Tsaya>. But down at <Montezuma Creek>, like I say, we went down there in June, and when we brought the lambs in the fall, Chunk went in with 'em to deliver 'em, but I didn't go that first year. So I was out there a year before I got to see my folks, or went in town, or anything. And there weren't people comin' 'round. There were just no roads hardly--just take you.... Well, like <Aneth>, whenever, it'd take us two days to go down to <Montezuma Creek> when we went down there. That's how bad the roads were. 

Cole: You mentioned that Chunk took the sheep into town and left you there. So were you in charge of the store? Did you have other employees? 

Tanner: He brought a fellow by the name of Joe Hatch in to stay with me that first fall that we were there. But the next fall was when we came out to go down to--we didn't know we were going to <Tsaya> when we left to go in with the sheep that fall. I was pregnant with my second boy. So when we bought into <Tsaya>, after we sold our sheep and did so well, Chunk bought our first new car. (chuckles) But I stayed with my mother until--we went in the last part of November, and Bob was due to be born the first of January--and he was born on New Year's morning. And then after about a week, I went out to <Tsaya>. 

Cole: What were the roads like out to <Tsaya>? 

Tanner: The roads? Well, you couldn't go noplace, hardly, when it was stormin', because it was a clay pack. But the roads were just, like I said, it was just a trail out through the badlands there. Have you been out to <Bisti>, out this way at all? 

Cole: No. I've seen photographs, but I've never been out there. 

Tanner: You go through the badlands. It'd take 'em a good day to go into <Farmington> when we were first out there. And then they started workin' on the roads after a few years, makin' 'em a little better. 

Cole: How about, did you hire Navajo employees in the stores? 

Tanner: Not then, unt-uh. We didn't hire anybody the first few years we were there. But I was talking about this lake. Chunk was all the time building lakes, because he ran 1,500 head of ewes every year, you know. Wherever he'd see a wash when it'd rain and fill up, why, he'd close that wash off and make a little lake to have water for the sheep that he was raising. And he'd hire one or two of my brothers--they worked for us. They'd bring their teams out and help him with that. And then sometimes the Indians had-- wherever we could, we'd have the Indians that had teams, to help build that lake. 

Cole: What about any kind of fresh food? Did you have any chickens, cows, or.... 

Tanner: Well, we raised chickens. We always had a milk cow, and we'd raise a pig or two. All of our meat, we didn't have any refrigeration, you know, or freezers or anything. Chunk would take 'em.... At that time, they sold Arbuckle's coffee, and it'd come in big wooden boxes. So he'd cover them with burlap sacks and keep 'em wet--wet 'em, pour water over 'em-- and then that'd keep our milk and stuff pretty cool. But at <Tsaya>, he closed in this under the rock--you know, the spring there at <Tsaya>. It's about a quarter of a mile from the store. He closed that in, and the water was just the best water you ever tasted there at <Tsaya>. But we never did get it piped down to the store. We'd have to go up this hill and get it, carry it down. 

Cole: In those earlier years, what were the most traded-for goods? 

Tanner: You mean what did they buy? 

Cole: Right. Were there certain things they'd always want? 

Tanner: Well, we always carried lots of pork and beans, but their favorite dish was to buy a can of tomatoes and put sugar in it, and set there and eat that with crackers, when they'd be about tradin' on a rug. Settin' on the dirt floor, you know. Way back then they were very superstitious people. After their daughters got married, or sons, the mother-in-law was never allowed to see the son-in-law. If she did, she'd go blind. So they sometimes would come to the store and then somebody would say, "Here comes your son-in- law." They'd cover their face with a blanket and leave, so they couldn't see him. 

Cole: Were there certain items that women would buy more, and some the men would buy? 

Tanner: Well, we carried lots of material, and they made all their clothes. We never did have any, when I was out at <Tsaya> those first years. We carried Levis and shirts for the men, but nothing for the women. They had to make their--we'd make their velvet shirts, too--or I would--and sell 'em back to 'em--a velvet skirt and.... Sell 'em the material and the velvet to make it with. 

Steiger: I missed that. Not to interrupt.... The mother-in-law couldn't ever see her son-in-law ever? 

Tanner: After they were married. Now, they don't pay any attention to it. But I was saying, way back then when we were there.... 

Steiger: Not just during the ceremony. That was it. 

Tanner: After they were married, if they looked at 'em or saw 'em, they'd go blind. That was what they believed. 

Steiger: That sounds like a pretty good custom! (laughter) Sorry. 

Tanner: But that's the way it was. 

Cole: When a woman would come in and trade out a rug, would a family have like a family account? Or would it be in the man's name, or the woman's name? How would that work? 

Tanner: Well, it'd be mostly in the man's name. Sometimes you'd have just the women, because their husband wouldn't be around. It all depended. They each one owned so many sheep. And when they'd bring their lambs in to sell 'em, why, she'd sell hers, and then he'd sell his. Then you'd have two different bills, but mostly they were together. We didn't carry an awful lot of canned stuff. The main thing was pork and beans, and we had coffee in the packages, and tomatoes. That was their one biggest buy, was tomatoes with lots of sugar put on 'em. And none of the stores out there then had floors--they were all dirt floors, and they'd be just as hard as cement, because that clay dirt, when it hardens it gets that way. Then you'd have to wet it and sweep it up every time. But they'd make big messes. They'd all just sit on the floor and visit. When they'd come in, a family would stay all day. And like I say, they'd trade out--if they were selling a rug, why, they'd buy one thing and then this lady would say, (in Navajo) "_________." That means, "What else was it I wanted to buy?" She'd think a little bit, and then she'd buy one item, take that off. And then she'd say, (in Navajo), "________," "How much you got left?" She'd have to know after each one. Altogether different than what it is today. No drugs or like that out there when we were out there. It was people that would come and bootleg whiskey to 'em. And that was bad sometimes.

I was trying to think. Oh, I was telling the story about--reminded me of when Chunk used to sell.... He'd keep the best part of the wool from the sheep off of some of 'em that was a lot better for rugs, and he'd keep that to sell to the Indians, the women, to make rugs with. We had this big wareroom, and we thought it was big then--it was about half as big as this. He always kept a big sack of wool in there. But you know the Indians liked to think--well, they'd just slip--and we always had canned stuff back in there. Well, they'd sneak a can of peaches or a can of tomatoes and put it in the wool sack, and Chunk did that purposely after he saw what they were doing, because they'd weigh the wool, and they'd buy back the canned stuff, you see, because the can would be already in there. (laughter) But they thought they were getting 'em free, see--the Indians. He said that would compensate for some of the ones that they swiped before he realized what they were doing. 

Cole: Were there other tricks or things like that, that went on in trading, do you know? 

Tanner: Oh, let's see. I just thought of something a while ago. What was it? Oh, when they'd bring their lambs in to weigh.... See, we had to tie their legs together and then had this scale to hang up on the.... We put the lambs in a number three tub, and take so much off for the tub, and then had a rope that pulled it up on this big scale, hand scale. Well sometimes they'd get in that store with 'em, and then pick up a bunch of sand and throw all over in the wool and work it in there. That would make 'em weigh more. Or they'd put a little water in there, too, you know. So you always had to kind of figure that. But you had to watch all that stuff, too. That's the way they'd do. 

Cole: So would you just compensate on the weight a little bit if that had happened? 

Tanner: You tried to. One time this man--I said his name was Big Thumb. At <Montezuma Creek> he brought all of his stuff in the fall. Chunk told him after what.... He weighed all the lambs up and everything. He told him how much it was. Chunk had one of these little adding machines that you punch, you know. He told him how much it was, and he said, "No, that's not right." Some of those old people could figure in their head about as fast as you can add it up. And Chunk said, "Well, this machine here tells you the truth. I just punched all the weights for the lambs in that." And the old medicine man said, "That's true, but if you lie to the machine, it'll lie back to you." (laughter) So he had to be careful about that. He was trying to take enough off to eliminate the sand and a little bit of water that was put in. And they really liked to bring 'em in when it was raining a little bit. 

Cole: You had mentioned that a lot of the kids were sent off to boarding school. Did you help communicate with the children at all while they were away? 

Tanner: Well, Chunk would talk to the parents sometimes, but you know, those little kids, they sure didn't want to go. A lot of 'em, way back when they first started that, they'd run away. And we lost several children from out there at <Montezuma Creek> and <Tsaya> both. They'd run away and two or three of 'em died from exposure. That was when they had the schools like they have the big Indian school here in <Farmington>. What was the name of this one down here? And the same way in <Gallup> they had some, and they'd force 'em. They'd go out and say, "Now, you've got to send these children to school!" And they'd just load 'em up and take 'em. 

Cole: What would they load 'em up in? 

Tanner: They had their cars that they'd come and get several families' children. I used to feel so sorry for 'em. And then they got to where they exchanged the students. After that, they got better. They liked it better like that--different families would take 'em and raise 'em, you know. 

Cole: What do you mean? The kid would go live with a family in town or something like that? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. There's a lot of 'em in <Utah> that would take 'em up and really was good to 'em. 

Joe Tanner: Are you talking about the placement program? 

Tanner: Placement, uh-huh. But when they were forcin' 'em to go to school, they sure didn't like it-- especially the little ones. That's after the government decided that they needed to go to school. 

Cole: Would they come back in the summer then? 

Tanner: And go right back to their old traditions. (chuckles) But you were wanting to know about some of their trades. You know, way back there, it was like it was with the mother-in-law Indians--or the mother-in- law seein' the son-in-law. When they knew a person was going to die, they'd take 'em out of their hogan and take 'em up and put 'em up on the hill, away from the-- 'cause if they died in the house, they'd burn it down. That's the way it was when we first went out there. And then they'd come to the trading post and wake you up, no matter what time of night it was, and buy a Pendleton shawl. The trader would take it up and wrap 'em up after they died. My husband used to make coffins out of the Arbuckle boxes, and I helped him bury a lot of 'em too. They'd leave that up to the trader, 'cause they were very superstitious way back then. But now they're not that way anymore. 

Cole: Before there were traders around, would they just leave the body out then? 

Tanner: I think there were always traders from way back--even a long time ago, and they'd help. The traders were their best friends. I don't know what the Indians would have done without the traders when we first went out there, 'cause they depended on us for a living and to help. We helped with the sick, and helped 'em bury 'em, and everything. 

Cole: How often would--if you had a really good customer, like at <Montezuma Creek>--how often would they come into the store? 

Tanner: Well, some of 'em that lived quite a little ways, they wouldn't come in only about sometimes every two weeks. They'd come in with their wagon and get their supplies. And then when it was stormy weather, they had to provide for that, if they knew a storm was comin'. The government wasn't droppin' food to 'em when we were out there--and hay and stuff, and grain for their flocks. Nothing like that went on when we were out there for those first years. 

Cole: Were there any serious epidemics or anything like that when you were _____________. 

Tanner: They lost a lot of their children all the time because they had a lot of tuberculosis among them. And then they weren't eating right, and they lost a lot of their young people all the time. You've heard of Annie Waneeka [phonetic spelling]. (

Cole: Uh-huh.) She was Chee Dodge’s [phonetic spelling] daughter. After she grew up and had her education, that was her title. In Washington she was over all the health problems. And that's when it began to helping the people take care of that. They put in the hospitals in different places. She passed away here about six months ago. She was a very dear friend of all of us. But way back there, they just had to depend on the medicine man to take care of their sick. And they saved a lot of 'em, but the herbs and all of that didn't do all of it. And they were very religious about their prayers and things, too. 

Cole: I just lost my [train of] thought. So did you ever deal with mail at <Montezuma Creek> or at <Tsaya>? 

Tanner: No. After they got the day schools in, mail would come to the day schools. But the only time we ever got any mail before that was when somebody would go to town. After we were at <Tsaya>, we had a car and Chunk would go in every once in a while--every month or so--to order supplies, and then he'd come right back--go in one day and back the next. Then the truck would come out with the supplies. 

Cole: What about the Second World War? Did you see much impact from that? 

Tanner: Well, I wrote lots of letters for the Indian mothers. They'd come in and have us write letters to their boys. That was the only communication that they had, and they'd have to wait until.... They'd go to <Crownpoint> to get their mail there at <Tsaya>, until the day schools got goin'. 

Cole: Did the soldiers write in English, and you'd translate it? 

Tanner: Well, they would get somebody to help them write letters if they couldn't speak [i.e., write (Tr.)] English, wherever the boys were. And then I'd write back to the boys in English, 'cause I couldn't write in Navajo. And then they'd get somebody to read 'em. 

Cole: Do you know, were many of 'em drafted? Or did they join? 

Tanner: Well, we had several of 'em there at <Tsaya> that were drafted, I know. And some of 'em didn't want to go, but there were a lot of 'em that did. I wrote lots of letters during that time for the mothers. 

Cole: When the soldiers started coming back to the reservation, did that create any kind of change? 

Tanner: Well, mostly when they'd come back, when they first would go out to those schools and wherever they went, they'd go right back to--the biggest part of 'em--would go right back to their old traditions, up until after I left the reservation. Then they got to where the younger generation wasn't speakin' the language like they should the last twenty years. 

Cole: You mentioned--you were talking about Joseph Tanner. It sounds like he was a long-time Indian trader. Do you remember any stories about him, or what was he like? 

Tanner: Well, like I say, he spoke Navajo, Hopi, and Tewa. I know when Chee Dodge.... Chee Dodge was first president of the Navajo people. He was a wonderful friend to Grandpa Tanner. He used to come and stay with us whenever Grandpa was around. He spent a week at a time out at our trading post there at <Tsaya>, visiting with him. And they would be talkin' a language that Chunk didn't know. All my husband could speak fluently was the Navajo language. And I remember one time they were in the living room just goin' on in this language that Chunk didn't understand at all. And he come in and said, "I wish to hell you'd speak either Navajo or English so I could know what you're talkin' about!" And I remember Chee Dodge sayin', "That's the reason we're doin' this. We're talkin' Tewa." (laughter) But he was a very fluent speaker in the Hopi and the Navajo and the Tewa language--all three of 'em. And the Zuni--he could speak fluent Zuni. But he had a trading post there in <Cortez>. That was before I married into the family. He did really well with that, bought lots of cattle up there. Then after he left the trading, then he owned a part of the <Shiprock> Trading Post there for years--him and.... Oh, what was his partner's name? Anyway, there were two of 'em in there together. They had that there for years.

You know, the Indians used to have more than one wife. And the government was taking the women away from the men. They got on the warpath, and Grandpa Tanner was the one the government sent up there to try to get 'em to not have three or four wives. I've got some pictures of an old man that had several wives. He told Grandpa when we went up there, "Well, they're takin' my women away from me. They can come get my sheep and cattle, but they're gonna leave my women alone." But he talked to him and got him to come down. He stopped that war. I have a Tanner book that tells all about that. 

Cole: When you and Chunk were running the trading post, did you have leases from the tribe or the government? 

Tanner: Well, no. At <Tsaya>, that was on--you had your own clear title to that. But we had to lease the ground for the sheep to run on from the government at <Tsaya>. 

Cole: What about <Montezuma Creek>? 

Tanner: <Montezuma Creek> was clear. [We] didn't have to pay anything for that. 

Joe Tanner: Was it on the reservation at that time? 

Tanner: At <Montezuma Creek> [it] wasn't--it was across the river. It was on this side of the <San Juan>. But the Indians were on this side, too. I think it was on the reservation, but I don't know of anybody that had to pay when we first went down there, but later they did. I know my brothers at <Keams> and <Polacca> and all through there, they have to pay the tribe so much. 

Cole: Did you and Chunk ever belong to the United Indian Traders Association? 

Tanner: No, we never did. I don't know.... When we first went out there, why, there wasn't.... I never had heard of 'em until we'd been in there for a long time. 

Cole: I'm going to kind of back up a little bit and talk to you again a little bit about your parents. 

Tanner: Okay. 

Cole: You'd mentioned your grandpa, Pappy McGee, and then your mom and dad. What were their names? 

Tanner: My mother was a Hunt, and her father's name was William E. Hunt. Her mother was French. She was Smootz [phonetic spelling] before she married. Then my dad was Elwood D. McGee. My mother was Celia Hunt. 

Cole: And so then your maiden name was McGee then? 

Tanner: McGee, uh-huh. Now, let's see, you talked to Jewel and to Roscoe's wife. Their fathers were brothers to my father. 

Cole: And then you were telling us about the trip from <Springdale> back to <Harrisburg>. 

Tanner: <Harrisburg>. We left <Springdale> after Dad helped build that first road that went into Zion's National Park. We went down to <Harrisburg>, and he just leased some ground and raised vegetables, and raised cane and made sorghum--molasses, he called it. And then when we left to come back here to be with Grandpa Hunt before he died, that's how come we came back. He sent Mother $500 to come home with. ______ took us. 

Cole: How far would you make it, say, in a typical day on that trip? 

Tanner: Well, some days we didn't--I don't know just how far it is from <Harrisburg>. It's not very far. I know you can go there in a half a day, I think. Some days it was really storming, you couldn't go very far, but five or six miles. 

Joe Tanner: That trip took thirty days, Grandma? 

Tanner: Thirty days. It stormed every day on us. 

Joe Tanner: It takes about six or seven hours now to drive it. 

Tanner: Uh-huh, yeah. 

Cole: Was there any kind of trail or road? Or did you have to make your own way? 

Tanner: There was a dirt road all the way, but that's all. I know one time we could see a ranch down a big lane, a ranch house. And so Mother and Dad gave Harvey, my oldest brother and I, she said, "You go down and see if you can buy us some bread." It was about like you'd come through <Kirtland>--from the middle of <Kirtland> up to the top of what we called Lovers' Lane. It was all trees. And that's the way that lane was. And we walked down there, and sure enough this lady had just emptied a great big pan of bread, loaves of bread out. I remember how I thought, "Oh! that bread smells good!" And so Mother gave us fifty cents, and she [i.e., the woman who baked the bread] gave us two big loaves." And then it really started snowin', and so I remember how we had to pull our sweater up over the bread to keep it from gettin' wet, goin' back up there with that bread. It was our supper that night--bread and Postum. 

Cole: What would you eat nights that you couldn't get bread? 

Tanner: Well, they'd make us cornmeal mush, we called it--cornmeal cereal--stirred the cornmeal into the boiling water, just like you do the Cream of Wheat, you know. We ate an awful lot of that--tasted awful good, though. (laughter) 

Cole: I was kind of wondering, did you have to cross the Colorado River to get to <Kirtland>? 

Tanner: No. But comin' down that Salina Mountain took us a couple of days or better, it seems to me like. Gettin' down there I remember the horses would slip and slide in the snow goin' down that. 

Joe Tanner: Did you have to come across the ferry, Grandma? How did you cross that river when you came? Do you remember that part? 

Tanner: I don't remember crossin' the river. We'd had to [have] crossed that Green River, wouldn't we? 

Joe Tanner: (inaudible) 

Cole: Yeah, somewhere. 

Tanner: There must have been some kind of a bridge. About all I remember about it is how cold and how wet we'd get. (laughter) 

Joe Tanner: Do you remember what year that was that you made that trip? 

Tanner: Well, I was thirteen, and I was born in 1906, so that was about 1919. But we had everything we possessed in that wagon with seven children. Richard was a baby--he was sixteen months old. Then Mother had three more after we got--she had ten children, seven boys and three girls. 

Joe Tanner: You told us the story, Grandma, there was somebody who came into the camp when you were sleeping. 

Tanner: Well, I was just wondering whether I should tell 'em that. (laughter) On top of the Salina Mountain. I told you that we found this rock building that had a fireplace in it. Dad built a fire in it and made us a bed on the floor, all of us children, but the baby. And we were all bedded down and sometime during the night--and it was snowing real bad. Dad told us when he went out, "Now, keep covered up good, and I'll check on you real early in the morning." He said, "It's snowing really hard outside." But sometime during the night somebody came in. I get goose pimples every time I think about it. This guy looked us all over, I guess, and he decided that I was the oldest one, and he just come and he just felt all over me. But he didn't bother me. Pretty quick he just walked out. I didn't go to sleep the rest of the night, but I didn't dare go outside to the wagon because it was snowin' so bad, and I was frightened anyway. None of the other kids were awake, I guess, and that's what woke me. When Dad came in, I told him, and of course I was really still upset and cryin'. He went out and found a few of the tracks where they'd wandered off. But now, realizing--I didn't realize what it was all about then--but it sure scares me now when I think about it, what could have happened. 

Cole: You said that after Chunk died, you were at <Keams Canyon>. Then you moved into near <Gallup>. After that business was gone, what did you do then? 

Tanner: You mean after we left <Keams Canyon>? 

Cole: Yeah, [from] <Keams> you went to.... I can't remember the name of the town. 

Joe Tanner: To <Gamerco>. You were going to tell about that. 

Tanner: Yeah, we went to <Gamerco>, but I was leaving that for Buddy to tell. 

Joe Tanner: Well, he can tell about it, too. I think it would be good to have your [viewpoint (Tr.)]. 

Tanner: Well, the boys always wanted to have a trading post, all of 'em together--my sons. J. B. had went in town and he decided that he'd like to have one at <Gamerco>. That's just out of <Gallup>. And so he and Don talked it over, and then after Chunk died, we still owned one house there in <Cortez>. They made us sell that, and that's how we got started at <Gamerco>. And they had made [me?] leave <Keams>, and they used that first money to kind of buy the necessities and get it ready to go. We called it Navajo Shopping Center. Then Chunk's oldest brother came in and helped, loaned us some money to get that goin'. And that was a big business. We did really well there, 'til J. B. got to drinking. That's why I'm gonna let him tell that story, and he will. 

Joe Tanner: I think it's good to have your take of what happened there--if you want to. That's up to you. 

Tanner: What happened? 

Joe Tanner: Just to tell about the business. That was one of the first times that that kind of business had been done, wasn't it? 

Tanner: Well, yes, it was--where the Indians could come in and just.... We really bought lots of rugs there, and we had, like I say, Don Tanner came in and helped, loaned us a bunch of money. He brought all the boys in, all seven of the boys were there together for three or four years. That's how it got started, and it was one of the biggest businesses, and the first business like that in the <Gallup> area. 

Cole: What was different about it? 

Tanner: Well, the Indians would just help themselves, and then take it up to the counters and pay for it. Where out on the reservation, way back there, why, you just had to set in the bull pen and point to stuff that you wanted. 

Cole: And did they have a larger variety of goods? 

Tanner: Oh, we had everything in there, bought everything, and it was a tremendous business. 

Steiger: That was the first one of its kind? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. 

Cole: Did they do a pawn business there, too? 

Tanner: We had a big pawn business there. That's where really the first time.... Well, the last few years that we were running it there at <Ganado> and <Keams>, they had a big pawn business then. But see, that was quite a few years after we first went out on the reservation. But there at <Gamerco> they had the vault and everything and took care of [the pawn], kept it locked up all the time. Then we took in lots of pawn. The Indians all knew the boys and knew Chunk, and so they all came in to trade with us. 

Steiger: Why did they want to change? Or why did they think that would be more successful? 

Tanner: Well, they were starting to do.... They knew that bigger buildings or bigger businesses would eventually--there was one or two in <Gallup> at that time too--the Kirk Brothers and several others. But this one was really.... And like I say, we were all there together. Then they brought in some more partners--the Elkin [phonetic spelling] brothers--so they really made it a big, big business: bought lots of lambs and lots of wool and lots of piñons. (pause) But it went bottom up. 

Cole: Do you think the Navajo preferred coming to an operation like that, versus trading out on the reservation? 

Tanner: Oh, they liked it, yes. Well, they didn't hardly know how to do it at first, but they.... See, <Gallup> at that time had quite a few stores in it, but it was different from the trading posts out on the reservation. 

Cole: And was there more cash in the economy at that time? 

Tanner: Well, at that time they were sending a lot of the Indians out on the railroad to do work, and so they'd use one of the rooms in <Gamerco> there to have 'em come in and sign up for it, to go out, and that gave the Indians quite a bit of cash for a lot of years, that railroad business--and goin' out and helpin' in the fields in <Utah> and all through there. They found jobs for a lot of people. 

Cole: Would they still buy and sell on the wool and lamb cycle? Or did that.... 

Tanner: Well, we carried some on the book, but there wasn't as many as we had to.... They didn't depend fully on that, because they had ways of going out to work. We'd carry 'em on the book for some of that, too, on some of 'em that we knew that was honest. 

Cole: Sounds like a pretty big operation. What about employees? 

Tanner: Well, we had a lot of employees at Navajo Shopping Center, because it was.... How big was that big building? Gosh, it was.... Well, you've seen these big aluminum storage [buildings (Tr.)]. We had about three of 'em put together. It made an awful big one. It's still out there at <Gamerco>, but they've added to it, but it was real large, and we had quite a few employees. But like I say, each one of the boys had certain things to do, and then I had the snack bar in one corner of it. 

Cole: And did your family participate in the Gallup Ceremonial? 

Tanner: We always had a booth out at the Ceremonial, until we left there and Joe started his own--after we dissolved partnerships and lost it, had to turn it back to the guys that had loaned money on it, or bought-into it, you know. 

Cole: What was the Ceremonial like back when you first started ____________. 

Tanner: The Ceremonial used to be on this side of the tracks, you know. And goodness, a week before Ceremonial, when you'd go to come to <Gallup>, why, it'd take forever to get in here at the last few miles, because there'd be wagon [after] wagon--they all came in wagons then, just like the old pioneer days used to be, when they'd camp at night they'd make a big circle. But out here, it was more than that, because there were Indians from all over the reservation that would come. Those first few years that we were there at the shopping center, it was all wagons--very few cars. The Indians didn't have cars in those days much. It was a big affair. (chuckles) Something to see. Now, there's not as many people coming to see it as they used to. 

Cole: What would your favorite memories be from the trading post there? 

Tanner: Well, my mother and dad used to say, "I don't know why you want to be out on the reservation like that for!" But I loved it out there, and I learned to love the Indians. It was lonesome sometimes. When I first went out there, I was so young I didn't have sense enough (laughs) to know whether I was lonesome or what. Took each day as it came. That's what we had to do. But I always loved it out among the Indians. 

Cole: What did you love the most? 

Tanner: Well, I enjoyed seein' 'em come in, and I enjoyed while I was listenin' to Grandpa Tanner and my husband talk to 'em so much, because they'd tell 'em these wild stories in the Navajo language, and they'd be laughin', you know. So I always enjoyed that, watchin' them. I enjoyed goin' to town once in a while, too. (laughs) We got to where we went in about every three months at the last end, because the roads had been worked on a little bit. 

Cole: What was a trip to town like when you hadn't been in for three months? What would you do? 

Tanner: Well, we always went from out to <Tsaya>, every lamb season. We'd go and Chunk would just hire somebody to stay at the store, because that was a big get-together for all the traders--they'd all meet and ship their lambs out. Then we'd go to dances and have a big time. But it was something to look forward to every year. We didn't go in much on wool season, only Chunk would send his wool in. I usually stayed at the store. 

Cole: What were the different holidays like on the reservation? 

Tanner: Well, the first few years we didn't pay too much attention to 'em, but when my daughter--my daughter was my third child--when she was five years old, that was when the Depression first started. We knew they weren't going to have too much Christmas, but my husband went in and he picked out something for each one of 'em to have for Santa Claus. And we had a little Christmas tree all set up that we had candles on. I was going to just have them there for looks, you know, and the little bells and things. But we had a heater in the front room, and my daughter had a little broom. Christmas Eve, early, we were real busy in the store, Chunk and I. Pretty quick one of the boys come runnin', said, "Oh! Dorothy set the tree on fire!" She took this little broom (laughs) stuck it in the heater and she was gonna light those candles. As she did, everything burned up, and we had to throw the tree away and Chunk had to.... I said, "What in the world are we gonna do? We don't have anything left for the kids." It was all under the tree and they got burned badly. So he drove clear to <Farmington> and got back out there just as daylight the next morning with two or three little things for the kids. (laughs) That was quite an experience. It's a wonder it didn't burn the whole house down. The ceiling was muslin, you know, stretched across and then calcimined. So one end of it burned before we got it put out. There were a lot of Indians there, and they helped us put it out. 

Cole: Did the Indians at that time mark Christmas or celebrate that? 

Tanner: Well, they always called it "Kissmass" all right, and they come around wantin' you to give 'em Kissmass. We'd always give 'em some candy or something, and piñons. 

Cole: You mentioned that you met the Navajo lady that had helped raise your children. What did you mean by that? 

Tanner: Well, she'd come and help me with the washing, and then she'd just do everything for 'em, just like one of the family. We had her with us. She'd been to school for a little while and learned to speak a little bit of English. She was good with 'em. But when I brought 'em into <Kirtland>, and when I wasn't there, my mother took care of 'em. 

Cole: Did they come back out to the trading post in the summer then? Or did they stay [in town]? 

Tanner: My children? Yes, we all went out there in the summertime. 

Cole: And what kinds of things would they do? 

Tanner: Well, the boys were thrilled to death, because like I say, that's how they learned the language. My daughter never did like 'em. She'd just run and hide. She wouldn't have anything to do with the Indians. But the boys all liked to play with 'em, and they'd run and have races. Way back there when they were little, when they would have the sings, the boys would come up missing--especially the two older ones, Bob and J. B. And they'd get just as lousy as they could be, because they were with the kids all the time. Way back there, they really were lousy. You'd have to kerosene their heads every night to get rid of [the lice]. 

Cole: Do what? 

Tanner: Put kerosene all through their hair to kill [the lice], and change all their clothes. But they'd go right back and do it again! That's how they learned to be such good talkers. 

Cole: So that only happened when the sings were at the post? Or would they take off? 

Tanner: No, whenever the Indians came around, J. B. and Bob were right out there playin' with 'em. 

[END SIDE 2, BEGIN SIDE 3] 

Tanner: I was trying to think exactly about what year it was, but anyway, it was in the thirties--about 1935 or 1936. 

Cole: (gives tape ID) Stella, you were just telling us about some of the unusual events that happened at the trading post. Maybe if you could tell us a story about that. 

Tanner: Okay. Well, this was very unusual and very frightening, but we heard this plane.... Like I say, my father and mother had brought out peaches to can and sell in the store, too. And we were all busy doing that, and we heard this plane come over, and that was really unusual--we'd never heard a plane come over there. And we went outside and we could see this plane, and it was droppin' fast. The Chaco was about two miles from the store. We seen it go down just the other side of the Chaco. That was a big Chaco Canyon full of sand. And so Chunk and I got in the car and he closed the store and we went to see what happened. We got there, and the plane was crashed, tore all to pieces. The front end of it was pushed up against the two people that were in it, and they were begging to be killed. And then he told us that his wife was unconscious, but he was talking. And he said, "We left <Chicago> this morning and we were on a race with three other planes to see who got to <California> first." And they had this crash. He just begged Chunk to reach back and get that gun so he could.... They were in terrible pain, you know. And Chunk said, "No, I'm going to see if I can get some teams, and we'll pull this away from your legs and get you out and take you into <Crownpoint>. It took him quite a while. He went over and called <Crownpoint> and told 'em to send an ambulance out from the hospital. And then this old man, Pueblo, had a big team of mules, and he got hold of him, and then two other teams of horses, and they all came. At first he couldn't hardly get the Indians to come. They said, "Oh, no, that's ch’íidii." That means the devils took possession of the plane. And he explained to them that these two people were dying, and if they didn't get 'em out, they would die. And so he finally convinced them to help him. And they hooked onto the front of it and gradually pulled it a little bit at a time. Every time they'd pull, it'd hurt them worse. They had a bottle of whiskey and every little bit, Chunk would give each one of 'em a little swallow of that. And finally we got it pulled apart. About two hours later, the lady finally came to and she thanked us and cried and told us a little bit about what they were doing. We made them as comfortable as we could, and then the ambulance came, and the doctor, and they took 'em up to <Crownpoint> to the hospital. And then the next day Chunk and I drove up there to see how they were doing. We never got one recognition of that whole thing. Big write-ups in the papers about everything, but <Crownpoint> got all the deal. But they knew, and we knew--and God knew that we got 'em out of there. 

Cole: So were they okay then? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. They were in the hospital for three months there at <Crownpoint>. They saved their legs and everything, but that was really an experience way back there. 

Cole: What year did you think that was? 

Tanner: I think it was either in 1935 or 1936. 

Cole: You mentioned that Chunk went and called <Crownpoint>. 

Tanner: It was after they got the day school started, I know, so it might have been a little later than that. 

Cole: So they actually had phone service? 

Tanner: They had phones after the day school. And then the hospital there had the phones. 

Cole: And what about at your trading post? Did you have a phone? 

Tanner: Oh, no, we never did. We didn't even have any electricity. We just had kerosene lamps, until just about the year before we left out there. We finally got one of those lanterns that had the mantles on, you know. 

Cole: Uh-huh. (laughter) Did they have electricity out at <Crownpoint> at that point? 

Tanner: Their own--they had it built-into the hospital, just at the hospital. And the day schools, after they went in, they did. 

Cole: Now, could your kids have gone to the day school? 

Tanner: Not then--they weren't takin' 'em. We never did even ask, I don't think. I don't believe they would have then. They did later let the traders' children go. I know at <Ganado>, one of my two youngest ones went to school out there. 

Cole: If you could, describe your husband for us, kind of what he was like and what made him a good trader. 

Tanner: Well, like I say, he was born and raised to be a trader, just like my boys were. But of course I thought he was the handsomest guy in the world, and he was good-looking. He weighed.... I've got one tall boy, and the rest of 'em are.... When you see Buddy, you'll know what size his dad was--small. And he had black wavy hair. The Indians called him Dual-tendi- yazzi, and he was ornery and mean, they said. But Chunk had a terrible temper, all right, and he'd get mad at me and spout off, and then in an hour it was different, and he'd forget it the minute he'd say it, you know. But I didn't do that, and I'd pout. He said, "Toots"--that's what he always called me--"say something! I don't give a damn what you say, but say it!" (laughter) "And then I wouldn't be so ornery with you," he said. "I don't mean to lose my temper, but I do, so you just have to overlook it." And I've got a couple of boys that's got pretty bad tempers, just like their dad, but they don't spout off too much. But they forget it the minute they say it. Isn't that the way you are? 

Joe Tanner: Probably so. (laughter) 

Cole: So was that your other nickname, "Toots"? 

Tanner: That's what my husband always called me, was Toots. Toots or Tootsey. It was a great life. I loved it on the reservation. 

Cole: You mentioned you had a couple of brothers that were traders too? 

Tanner: Oh, yes. I've told you about Bill McGee, my brother--William McGee, but we all called him Bill. When we were at <Tsaya>, we took him out there when he was fourteen, and Chunk taught him the language, and Bill gives him credit for all his knowledge of the Navajo. Then he went to work for--after he learned that, we couldn't afford to have somebody out there, why, he got a job with Sunrise Trading Post, with the Wheelers. And then the younger boys worked for him, and that's where they learned. So all my brothers, all but two of 'em, were Indian traders. They loved it and did well. 

Cole: When you were a child, did you ever imagine that that's what you'd end up doing? 

Tanner: No, because I was always scared of the Indians, (laughs) the stories that Mother would tell. The Indians, some of 'em, are my best friends. 

Steiger: What kind of stories would your mom tell? 

Tanner: Well, you know, way back then, they used to tell about the Indians massacring the white people. That's what she'd tell us, and I grew up being scared to death of the Indians (laughs) until I got acquainted with them, and they weren't that way at all. But of course I guess the early pioneer people way back there did have a lot of trouble with especially the Paiute Indians were main, I guess. 

Cole: I was going to ask you, when you were at <Montezuma Creek>, did you have much dealing with the Paiutes? 

Tanner: Well, there were a few down there, and one time one of 'em came in and this little Navajo told Chunk, "That's the main leader of the Paiutes." And Chunk was a little bit leery of him, but he got to talking to him, and he could speak enough Navajo to where he could understand Chunk. Chunk said, "Oh, you don't need to be afraid of him, he's okay." Just told him that his ancestors were the ones that did all the mean things--they didn't do it anymore. 

Cole: What kind of changes have you seen over time in the trading business? 

Tanner: Oh, well, from the dirt floors and the Indians not speaking English at all, and coming in and just sitting around. That was a big holiday for them, when they'd get to come to the store and set down on that clean dirt floor and visit with their neighbors. So that's what I learned to look forward to, to see a bunch of 'em come in and just visit. It was a great experience to be in. Now, when I look back on my life and think of all the things that have happened, like from the wagons to the Model "T's" with the Indians, and then they finally began to get cars and come in to have their babies, and they have their funerals. Way back there, they didn't have 'em. Just a thing that the traders had to help 'em do, you know. 

Cole: How long did you then live in <Gallup>? 

Tanner: You mean after we started Navajo Shopping Center? 

Cole: Right. 

Tanner: Then even before that, that was our.... <Farmington> and <Gallup>, or <Gallup> especially, was the headquarters to come get, from <Tsaya>, to come and get our supplies from. I lived in <Gallup> from the time that Chunk died until twenty-two years ago. Then I moved to Mesa. I married Mr. Allen, an old friend of mine, but I just had him three-and-a-half months, and we found out he had cancer, and so we flew to <Houston> and he didn't get to come back. So.... 

Cole: How do you see the future of trading? 

Tanner: I wouldn't want to live on the reservation like it is now. There's too many drugs out there--the young people especially, it's got a hold on a lot of 'em. 

Cole: What do you think has caused that? Any ideas? 

Tanner: Well, just like it did with a lot of white youngsters, they dare each other, you know, and get where they have to have it. In fact, my youngest son died from the cause of drugs, which was a big heartache in our family. 

Cole: Which one was that? 

Tanner: Rick. It was a heartache. He drowned in Lake Lycita [phonetic spelling]. He was up there, and he went out on the boat. This young fellow that was with him started the boat up too quick and it jerked and Rick was standing up and went over backwards and drowned. He was a good trader too, just like all the rest of 'em. But he got with the wrong bunch and got started with drugs. It was an awful big heartache for all of us--and for him. 

Cole: When you look back upon your life, if you could change anything, would you do it? 

Tanner: (sigh) I wouldn't want to change any of the first part of it. I had a lot of heartaches and a lot of happiness. I look at all my descendants, forty- one grandchildren and fifty-four great ones, and two great-great ones, and two more great ones comin'. That's what keeps me goin', is my family. (chuckles) That's what makes life, and I love every one of 'em. (laughter) 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Tanner: I'm tryin' to think of.... If you can think of anything else you'd like to ask, I'd be happy to.... 

Steiger: I'm sure we're forgetting something. 

Tanner: Can you think of anything, Joe, you'd like to bring out? 

Steiger: We'll think of something as soon as we turn this camera off, or as soon as we put it all in the car. 

Tanner: If you can think of anything else you'd like to ask, I'll try to answer it. 

Steiger: I can't think of anything. 

Cole: I can't, not right now. Well, on behalf of NAU and the United Indian Traders Association, thank you for your time. 

Tanner: Well, I've enjoyed every minute of it. I like to talk about all those old times. 

Steiger: Oh, I've thought of one. What did you guys do for entertainment out there, like at the end of the day, out in those early days? 

Tanner: Well, Chunk and I played a little cards once in a while. And if we could find anybody that would ever send us a book to read. When we first went to Montezuma, we didn't take any papers or anything to read out there. I didn't know what I was going into. So we just depended on each other for entertainment. Like I say, the end of the day, we'd play cards once in a while. We rode horseback quite a bit, go for a little horseback ride. 

Cole: Did you have a radio out there? Or was there even any reception? 

Tanner: No, didn't have a radio for several years after we went to <Tsaya>. So we had to depend on each other. 

Cole: Did you own the horses? 

Tanner: We eventually bought some, but when we first went down to <Montezuma Creek>, we just bought us some from the Indians that were tame. We'd get Buddy and put him up on the horse with us and go ridin' once in a while in the evening. But Chunk never lacked for entertainment, because when he wasn't in the store, he liked to play horseshoes with the Indians and play cards with 'em. I felt a little neglected sometimes when he was doin' that. But like I say, I was young and didn't think much about it, just took one day at a time. 

Joe Tanner: So as you go through this life, Grandmother, what advice would you give? 

Tanner: Pitchin'.... 

Joe Tanner: So it wasn't regular horseshoes they pitched, the kind we use now? Just horseshoes? 

Tanner: They pitched the regular horseshoes off of the horses. (laughs) 

Steiger: That was a good question you were asking _____________. 

Joe Tanner: Well, I was just curious, about Grandmother and her life. I wondered what advice or what counsel, or what would you tell us as your descendants, to think about to live our lives? 

Tanner: Well, I'd say if you were ever put in the same position, just you and your wife way out in the sticks or nowhere, no way to get in, you learn to really appreciate one another, and you really love and depend on each other for everything. I think the younger generations, they're so busy keepin' up with all this fast stuff in life, that they lose a little of that closeness. I may be wrong. I know you and Julie are really close. But there's a lot of.... 

Joe Tanner: __________ good advice. That's why we're asking. (laughter) 

Tanner: But like I say, we had to depend on each other. We'd get mad at each other all right, but we couldn't ever stay mad over five or ten minutes, at each other, because we didn't have anybody else to talk to. Chunk did, but I didn't! (laughter) 

Cole: Describe how they played horseshoes for us. 

Tanner: How they played? 

Cole: Yeah, you mentioned it's not like they actually.... 

Tanner: Well, he's talking about the shoes they throw. 

Joe Tanner: We just wondered how they did it back then. 

Cole: Now they have the big shoes. 

Tanner: They just had the regular horseshoes in those days. We always had one or two horseshoes hangin' up in the store and in the house. That was good luck. And they'd throw that horseshoe and try to get it around that peg down there. That's when they won. Is that what you meant? 

Cole: Yeah. I was just curious if they actually used the shoes that they'd shoe the horse [with]. 

Tanner: Yeah, that's the one they used. 

Joe Tanner: Those were a lot smaller and probably harder to play back then. 

Tanner: Yeah, it was harder to play. But like I say, we always had several of them hangin' in the store and in the house for good luck, too. That's what they were called, is good luck shoes. (laughter) 

Joe Tanner: I had one other question. Seth was the first descendant that came into this area? 

Tanner: That was Grandpa Tanner's father. 

Joe Tanner: Were there any stories or things that were told about him that you remember? 

Tanner: Yeah. He was assigned from <Salt Lake> to come out and find places for the pioneers. He was comin' out one time, and they came to this place where there were just all these big piñon trees or pine trees or something, and he was on a mule. They couldn't bring the wagon on across, so he just got his rope out and he put it around this tree and had the mule pull it out. He didn't pull it out--he broke it, though. And that's where he got his name--they called him Shush. "My! you're just strong like a bear!" That's what Shush means. So that's why all of us have the name of Shush. That was one of 'em. 

Joe Tanner: And the Church sent him to this area? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. 

Cole: So the Church was a big influence on him and bringing him here. I was just wondering how that might have influenced your husband. 

Tanner: Well, they always thought of Grandpa Seth as a great man, because he was one of the people that helped to build this. And Grandpa Hunt and the Foutzes and the Tanners were one of the first ones that they sent out here to <Arizona>--<Pine>, and then they took 'em away from there, and sent 'em into <Tuba City>. 

Joe Tanner: They were sent first to where? 

Tanner: Down to <Pine> and that area--Grandpa Hunt and Grandpa Foutz. 

Joe Tanner: <Pine>? What area is that, Grandma? 

Tanner: You know where Payson is. <Pine> is on the road coming from Winslow. 

Joe Tanner: Oh, okay. 

Tanner: My mother was born in <Pine>. 

Joe Tanner: So they settled that area first, and then they went to <Tuba City>? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. 

Joe Tanner: I didn't realize that. 

Tanner: Oh, you didn't? Oh, yeah. Grandma Hunt, my mother's mother, she said that it was just all wilderness when they came. That's where most of her children were born, before they went to <Tuba City>. And then when the government bought 'em out, after they got the big farms goin' down there--we all went down there for Tanners' reunion, it's been four years ago, hasn't it? (

Joe Tanner: Uh-huh.) At the old places where Seth had stopped overnight or he had done something. Really interesting. So Seth has always been--I've always thought, "Oh, my, I'd loved to have known him." But I never did see him, because he died before Chunk and I were married. He went blind and Chunk was about eight years old, I guess. They gave him the job of leading Grandpa Seth around. That's when Grandpa had a store there in <Cortez>, and they had this big cultivating ditch, you know, with the water running down it. They had a log across it. Well, Chunk just walked across the log, and he led Grandpa Seth right through the water. (laughter) They tell that on him. (laughter) 

Steiger: Now, he wasn't a miner, was he? 

Tanner: Grandpa Seth? 

Steiger: Yeah. 'Cause there was a Seth Tanner that was in the Grand Canyon that.... 

Tanner: That's Joe Tanner. 

Joe Tanner: _________ Tanner Trail that comes through the Tamarind [phonetic spelling], and there's a Tanner Wash.... 

Tanner: That's the guy. And then him and his father.... 

Steiger: I'll be darned. 

Tanner: Uh-huh. Now you know who your Grandpa Seth is. 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Tanner: But you're going back to my husband: he was always a promoter with everything. When he was young, Grandpa was going to be gone for a week, and they had all this yard that all kinds of rocks in it. She said, "I don't know what I'm going to do with that Chunky Tanner this summer. He's driving me crazy!" Grandpa said, "Leave that to me." So he called Chunky and he said, "See all these rocks out here? I want 'em all cleaned up. I'll give you twenty-five dollars to have this all cleaned up when I come back next week." Boy, that sounded like a lot of money to Chunk. He said, "Okay," and went a couple of days and he didn't do anything. Mother Tanner got after him. She said, "I thought you told your dad you were going to clean this all up." He said, "I am!" And she said, "Well, when?!" And he said, "Well, starting in the morning." And she said the next morning she was wakened at daylight, all this noise of shovels and wheelbarrows and kids a-hollerin'. She went outside and Chunk was in the middle of the yard, and he was directing all these other kids how to do everything. By night, he had it all done. He paid them so much, and he had the rest. (laughter) He was a promoter. That's why Chunk always had the kids movin' gravel. (laughter) My boys, if they'd get doin' something he didn't like, he'd say, "I want all this gravel out here moved over here." And they'd do it. And then he said, "When you get that done, you can go play." And so they'd do it, and they'd say, "Well, Dad, we got it all done." He'd say, "Okay, now smooth it out." (laughter) That's what kept 'em busy and learned 'em how to work.

But he was a great trader all right. I got to where I could tell anything what they wanted in the store, and then just a common conversation, you know, through the years. But I've been away from it now for twenty- two years, so I kinda forgot. (chuckles) But I wouldn't change anything.

Anything else? 

Cole: I can't think of anything right now. (pause) 

Steiger: Well, I guess this is irrelevant. I want to hear all about Seth Tanner, but.... 

Joe Tanner: Anything else that you can think about, that you know of about Seth? We hadn't talked about that a whole lot. That's something that we don't know a whole lot about. 

Tanner: Well, see, I don't know too much about him, only just what I read about him. Your dad has studied it. When you talk to Joe, he's made a study of Grandpa Seth, and he can tell you a lot about it. 

Steiger: Yeah, 'cause we go right by his mine down there, and the trail and stuff. That's really rugged country, and people always want to know how that mine was and how it worked out. 

Tanner: Now, J. B. can tell you a little bit about Grandpa Joe's mine down at <Bisbee> and through there, 'cause he went with him a lot when he was little. 

Joe Tanner: Would he go off for days at a time, Grandmother? (

Tanner: Uh-huh.) 

Joe Tanner:Or weeks at a time? (

Tanner: Yeah.) 

Joe Tanner:And how young was J. B. when he would go down? 

Tanner: Three and four years old. 

Joe Tanner: And he'd leave with his grandpa? 

Tanner: Uh-huh. 

Joe Tanner: Would Chunky go with 'em? 

Tanner: Oh, no, just Grandpa and Chunk--or Grandpa. 

Joe Tanner: So he was three or four years old, and he'd leave for weeks at a time? 

Tanner: Uh-huh, he loved it. And then Bob was just two-and-a-half years younger, and Grandpa wouldn't pay any attention to him, so he bought him a new car one time, when Bob was about three years old, and he came out to the store to see us and spend some time with us. We were all in there talking, and we heard this "bang, bang," and went out there and Bob had picked up a rock and he busted both the headlights out of Grandpa's new car! (laughter) 

Joe Tanner: Had a little resentment, did he? 

Tanner: Boy, Chunk was gonna beat the tar out of him, he said. And I said, "I'm going to find out what was the matter." Of course he took off runnin' and I caught up with him and I said, "Why did you do that?!" He said, "Grandpa never takes me noplace--just takes J. B. or Buddy!" That was why he did it. So that's how kids are, you know. 

Cole: Does "J. B." stand for anything? 

Tanner: Yeah, it does, it stands for Joseph Baldwin Tanner. When he was first born, like I told you, he just weighed three-and-a-fourth pounds, because he was so tiny. When I took him to church to have him blessed or given a name, they said, "What's the name?" Chunk said, "Well, that's the name, J. B." And they said, "Well, surely he's named." And he said, "Yeah, he's named after my father." "Well, what's his name?" "Joseph Baldwin. But that's not this baby's name. His name is J. B. He's too damned little to have a name big enough like that." (laughs) That's the words he used. I shouldn't say that, I guess on [the tape]. 

Joe Tanner: Well, we want to hear just how it happened. (laughter) 

Tanner: That's how it happened. (laughs) 

Joe Tanner: So he was just given the two initials for a given name? 

Tanner: Uh-huh, because he was so little. Chunk wouldn't have it any other way. But Grandpa Tanner was a crude, cussin' man, laughin' all the time, but cussin', you know. 

Joe Tanner: So as the children and grandchildren hear this, what would you tell us about work and the principle of work? 

Tanner: Well, I always told all my kids work didn't bother anybody and it was good for 'em. I was gettin' after my son Ellis, the one that's coming to pick me up today. I said, "You're workin' too many hours," and he said, "It seems to me like way back there all my life I heard 'work didn't hurt anybody.'" (laughter) And it don't. Chunk always had the kids doin' somethin'. That's what's wrong with some of the kids nowadays, they don't have anything to do. 

Cole: I remember one thing I was going to ask you about. Did Chunk bring any livestock into the range to upgrade it, like bulls? 

Tanner: You mean like horses and things? 

Cole: I've heard that some traders actually would bring higher-quality animals into the herds. 

Tanner: Chunk brought the black sheep in when we were out to <Tsaya>. The first ones we bought were just all ordinary Navajo sheep. And he bought a half-a- dozen of these light-faced bucks, we called 'em, shipped in. He's the first one on the reservation that I know of that got them black sheep started. Makes better wool and everything. 

Cole: Would he then allow the Navajos to breed to 'em? 

Tanner: Uh-huh, and he'd just charge 'em so much for that. Then he used 'em for his, too. See, he had 1,500 head of ewes. 

Cole: And then would you start to see some of that color show up in the rugs? 

Tanner: Oh yeah, they really got good. Oh, I'll have to tell you something about the lambs. (aside about tape) About the fifth year that we were out to <Tsaya>, the drought came, you know, and the ewes would disown their lambs, 'cause they didn't have any milk for 'em. And this was the year that my son Don was born, in 1932. We had a big barn out at the back, and Chunk had hay stacked around to make a little rooms for the ewes that wouldn't claim their lambs, and they'd try to force 'em to let the lambs nurse. Some of 'em wouldn't let 'em, so he'd bring 'em in the house. We had lambs all over the kitchen floor and the oven door open to keep 'em warm. We'd feed 'em with the bottles. And I was nursing Donny, I called him, one morning when he brought two lambs in. He said, "Toots, I want you to do something for me. I want you to feed these lambs." I said, "Well, get me a bottle." He said, "No, I want you to let 'em nurse." And I said, "Well, that's where I draw the line. I done lost everything, but I'm not...." (laughter) But we sure had a time that year with the sheep not claiming their lambs. 

Cole: And then, I'm sort of curious again about the stock reduction program. Did the government actually send people out to do that? And was there resistance? 

Tanner: The Indians really hated that, but these sheep could get big worms in their head. We lost so many of ours. He'd split their heads open, and they'd just be full of great big worms. Then there was no feed for 'em to eat, either. So the government told 'em that's what had to be done, they had to cut down on their stock, which they did. They made 'em do it. They'd just drive these herds into the gulleys and slaughter 'em. 

Cole: Was that the Navajos that would do that, or was it the federal.... 

Tanner: No, the Navajos didn't do it, the government had it done. It was an awful year that year. A terrible thing. I know Chunk one time, Willard Stalworthy when he was in partners with, you know, I told you about it. They came out one day, Willard and his wife and two other couples, just come out to visit, all dressed in their Sunday best clothes, you know. And Chunk was out there, he was really workin' with all the sheep, and they come drivin' up. He had sheep all around the store there that day, and they drove up laughin' and cuttin' up, and Chunk said, "You just turn right around and go back, unless you want to change those Sunday-go-to-meetin' clothes and come help me take care of these sheep!" He was really mad at 'em, comin' out there all dressed up, when he was havin' so much trouble. That was a bad year. 

Cole: Do you think the stock reduction, over the long run, helped the range at all? 

Tanner: Yes, because it was a drought for a lot of years. In fact, the last two or three years is the first time we've seen a lot of grass on the reservation. And it seems funny to drive through the reservation now and not see these big herds. Each family is allowed about fifty head. That's about all they have--no big herds noplace. Now they raise a few cattle, I guess, along with it. But maybe if the reservation gets to growin' grass again, they'll let 'em raise big herds again. (pause) Buddy can tell you about those mines, and his dad can tell you about Seth. 

Steiger: Okay. I wonder how your dad's dad's dad ended up marrying a Cherokee. 

Tanner: Oh, you mean the McGees? 

Steiger: Yeah. 

Tanner: Well, she was a pretty girl. I've seen her picture, and she was a beautiful girl. They came from <Ireland>, the McGees did, and then they came down into Cherokee territory. 

Steiger: Is that the Dakotas? Is that where that is? 

Cole: <Oklahoma>. 

Tanner: <Oklahoma> is where they were. And then Grandpa McGee married--the great-great-grandpa--married a Cherokee girl. He was killed in his mine. He had a silver mine there in <Oklahoma>, and they claimed that he was making silver dollars down there, and somebody killed him. And then it was all covered over and closed up. My father's brothers and him went back there several times trying to find that mine. Never did. Of course I guess buildings are all over it now. But he's the one that married the Cherokee girl. My dad said I'm a thirty-second. (chuckles) But we never did get anything out of the boys--my father and his brothers and their father tried to locate the mine and find papers to prove that they had Cherokee blood in 'em, you know. They never did get the right papers, so they never got any of the money out of it. There was a lot of people that had the records got quite a bit of money. 

Cole: Well, thank you again, Stella. 

Tanner: Well, thank you for asking me. I was really happy about it. I hope I've done it right. (chuckles) 

Joe Tanner: You bet. 

Steiger: Okay, well, I'll turn this off, and then you can tell us something really good! (laughter) 



