Christa Sadler

September 24, 2007

Interviewed by Lew Steiger





STEIGER:  (preliminary greetings not transcribed)  This is Lew Steiger, and I’m talking to Christa Sadler, and we’re here in <Flagstaff Arizona>, and it’s September 24, 2007.  And this is the River Runners Oral History Project.  And now I’m going to give Christa the standard preamble that I do, which probably doesn’t need to be transcribed, but we’ve got a record of it.  (project description and verbal release not transcribed)

	[Min. 03:35]  Typically, the way I like to start these things, just to put everybody’s perceptions kind of in perspective, is just to ask you a little bit about your background before you got to the river.  What were your family circumstances, just a thumbnail bio of life for you before you ever got there, and then just kind of how did you end up bein’ a boatman in the <Grand Canyon>?  You know, brothers and sisters, what did your parents do, whatever seems significant.

SADLER:  Okay.  Well, I was born in <California> and grew up mostly in <California>, kind of all over northern and southern <California>.  My mom was a librarian, which now seems remarkably appropriate.  My dad was a businessman, he did lots of different things.  For a lot of my life he would be a general manager or a manager of some sort of radio or TV stations, things like that.  It was only in the last maybe ten years of his life that he became a real estate broker.  And I have one sister, so it’s kind of a small family.  I grew up as an incurable tomboy.  I mean, probably some of my earliest memories are of me getting in trouble for having gone into the ocean when I wasn’t supposed to, fallen into the water, gotten muddy.  There’s all kinds of pictures of me completely bedraggled as a little kid with a little bowl haircut.  So I think it kind of made a lot of sense that I would end up doing something like this.  I spent most of my life just outdoors.  And we grew up in the suburbs of these towns, so it wasn’t like we grew up in the country, but I was just outdoors as much as I could be.  And even when I was a kid, I remember being really interested in archaeology.  My mom would take me to local archaeology digs from the community colleges and stuff like that.

	My mom and my sister and I spent two and a half years in <Tucson> when I was seven, eight, nine,, right in there.  She and my dad were separated, so we moved to the desert, and I loved it there.  I was really sorry to leave.  When they got back together, we went back to <California>.  I was very sorry to leave, I loved it in <Tucson>.  But that was kind of my first introduction to just this part of the world.  My parents had met at the University of Arizona, so they knew about it, but that was kind of my introduction.

And my introduction to the <Grand Canyon> came when I was eleven, I think.  My mom and my dad and I took the mules down to <Phantom> Ranch> for Thanksgiving, so maybe I was twelve--1974, I think, so I was twelve.  And I just completely fell in love with it.  We were down at the bottom of the canyon, and I remember picking up a piece of the schist--or it probably was a piece of the granite--and the ranger telling me how old it was.  And of course I pocketed it.  I took it away....

STEIGER:  (mock shock and outrage) You stole a rock from the <Grand Canyon>?!

SADLER:  I stole a rock from the <Grand Canyon>!  I was twelve!  What did I know?  I just couldn’t carry anything large.  I was just so blown away by the whole place, and we kind of hiked around a little bit, and then took the mules out the next day.  And that was really my first introduction to the canyon.

My mom would always take me to Indian dances.  I grew up going to the Hopi mesas for dances, and going out to <New Mexico> for the pueblos there and going to their dances.  My mom loved this part of the world so much that this is kind of where I grew up.  Her interest in it was really cultural.  Mine, because of just loving being outdoors, mine just sort of started to evolve into more of a natural history interest.  So I was just fascinated by the rocks and the plants and that kind of stuff.  We didn’t come to the <Grand Canyon> too many times as a kid.  That was the one thing I remember--I still remember my mule’s name.  His name was Lafe.

STEIGER:  Lafe?  L-A-F-E?

SADLER:  L-A-F-E, yeah.  I still have my muleskinner’s certificate.  I’m an official muleskinner from the <Grand Canyon>!  I still have it.  But that was kind of my big introduction.  When we got to the bottom, it’s not like I looked at the river and said, "Wow, I have to come back!"  The river was just something we crossed to get to <Phantom> Ranch>.  I was more interested in the mules and the ranch and the cowboy lifestyle than I was in the river.

STEIGER:  Had you ridden before?  Did you have experience with horses?

SADLER:  Yeah, when we lived in <Tucson>, I "worked"--in quotes--at a couple of the local stables which are now business parks, I believe, and office buildings.  It’s very sad.  But I worked at some of the stables, just cleaning out stalls.  And so they let me ride, and gave me some riding lessons.

STEIGER:  This is like when you’re eleven or twelve?

SADLER:  I was actually nine at this point, because we lived about a half mile from River Road.  At the time, it was really rural, so there were just stables all along there.  I was nine, I was horse crazy.  I was a nine-year-old girl.  What else do you do when you’re nine?  You’re horse crazy.  I drew horses, I read about horses, I rode them.  So when we went and did the mules, I was just, "This is great!  This is what I want to do!"  And then I just loved the canyon, but not from the perspective of the river.  I just thought it was an amazing landscape.

I didn’t actually think about river running until 1985.  (reflecting) Was it 1985?  Okay, I graduated high school in ’80, I went to college, I went to UC-Berkeley and I studied physical anthropology.  So again, get out, dig around in the dirt.  Physical anthropology for me was fossil humans.  So I was studying all the east African, you know, Lucy, and all that stuff, and Neanderthals and all that really cool stuff.  So physical anthropology and archaeology.  Just as I graduated, I started to date a guy who his parents and grandparents and the whole family decided to take a Colorado River trip through <Grand Canyon>.  And I was like the big expert on <Grand Canyon>--right?--because I’m the only one that had actually ever been there.  And all I could tell them was, "Wow, it’s a really cool place, it’s really amazing.  What an amazing trip, I’d love to do something like that."  So they invited me along.  And it was seventeen members of their family, and it was a huge Hatch three-boat motor trip.  We took up one boat, and then there were two other boats filled with other families and other people.  And that was it!  That was it.  I’d just started to study geology at UC-Santa Cruz, for graduate school.  And Ted was a geologist--the guy that I was seeing--and so we were kind of the trip geologists, and we’d sit there and pour over the Hamblin books, the mile-by-mile guide, and we’d tell everyone, "This is what you’re seeing."  And I just remember sitting on the front of that boat, this big motor rig.  I was sitting on the front of the boat the whole time just [saying], "Okay, this is it, this is where I’m supposed to be."  It was really cool.

I remember I wrote about this, one of the most vivid experiences, other than falling out at <Unkar>, which was really fun.

STEIGER:  You fell off the motorboat in <Unkar>?  Oh shit!

SADLER:  I was sitting on the front--which is I know where you’re not supposed to be.  They brought all these boatmen like out of retirement for our trip, and it was so funny because they were just, "Yeah, whatever you guys wanna do."  And I was sittin’ on the front, and we hit a big wave.  It was high water.  It was ’85, so it was 45,000 or 50,000 [cfs].  It was still the high water after the big year.

STEIGER:  There’s a wave there, in particular, that comes to mind.

SADLER:  Yeah, well, that's probably the one!

STEIGER:  That one that feeds you left at the top, yeah.

SADLER:  Yeah, that’s probably the one we hit.  And I remember falling off the front, and just as I went over, I grabbed, they had a chain around the front that you could barely get your fingers on.

STEIGER:  Good idea!

SADLER:  You know, Ted grabbed my wrist, and I remember looking up at him and saying, "Don’t let go of me!"  And he pulled me back in.  So that’s a vivid memory.  But the one that really hit me was we got to the Little Colorado, and when the water’s that high, it pushed all the Little Colorado up into this unbelievable, blue....  It was June, right?  So before the rains.  It was just this incredible blue color.  And it was like this huge Olympic pool.  And there wasn’t a rock showing, and we motored a ways up and parked.  And we were standing there with these little orange boats, these little orange Rogue Rivers--didn’t know it at the time--but they came puttin’ on through, comin’ on down the river.  And there’s just this bronzed, blond goddess in one of these boats, and she’s got these four guys in her boat, and they kind of waved at us, and she went on out, and I just remember looking at her and saying, "Wow, I wanna do that!"  And it was Fritz.

STEIGER:  No shit!

SADLER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  (aside about technical difficulties)  Now, what year was that?

SADLER:  I think it was ’85.  I loved the trip.  It was a six-day trip.  I didn’t motor or, who cares, I’m in the <Grand Canyon>.  I remember seeing those little rowing boats and thinking, "I wanna do that!"  Although I did ask Ted Hatch for a job.  I was, what, twenty-three?  He did the sort of metaphorical equivalent of patting me on the head and saying, "Thank you.  Now run along and be a good girl."  I wrote to him and asked for a job, and luckily he didn’t give me one, because he might have, and then who knows, I might not have ever discovered rowing.

STEIGER:  Do you remember who the crew was on that trip?

SADLER:  Jim and Jane Blackburn were the two that really come to mind.  I think they were from <Alabama>.  They were the ones that were running the boat that I was on most of the time.  And there was a woman named Barbara, kind of a heavy-set woman.  A guy named Dennis--he just had this wild red hair.  And I remember him because he had a tee shirt that I think it was one of those geology pun tee shirts that said something like "subduction leads to orogeny," or one of those "ha, ha, ha, we’re so clever!" kind of tee shirts.  And then I don’t remember the other two, but there were six crew.  I still have a picture of all thirty-some odd of us sitting for our group photo on the boats.  Oh my God, that was a lot of people!

STEIGER:  A three-boater would have been more like forty some.

SADLER:  Yeah, it was a huge number of people.  I mean, I didn’t think anything of it at the time.  It was kind of like, "Oh, isn’t this how all the trips are?"  I remember we got to the end, and we flew out at Whitmore, and I remember I’m in my town jeans and my town shirt, and we’re waiting for the helicopter, and I....  God, it makes me sad even now to think about it.  I just could not stop crying.  I just went down by the water, and I was kind of pretending to wash my hands.  I was standing on a rock and kneeling by the water, and I just remember I was just crying, like, "I do not want to leave.  I have to come back here."  So that was my first experience with the river.  I mean, I know a lot of boatmen have had the same experience, either started out as passengers, or brought along by an older brother, sister, friend, whatever.  I know it hits everybody--or a lot of us--just the same way, just right between the eyes, like, "This is what you’re supposed to be doing."  In all honesty, I don’t think anything ever in my life has been as clear as that, before or since.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I can relate to that:  three-boat motor trip, cried and cried and cried at the end.  I didn’t think I was gonna be doing it for the rest of my life.  I thought, "I’d sure like to do that again."

SADLER:  Yeah, I didn’t think of it as a career, I just figured it’d be something I’d really like to do.  And then you start and you can’t imagine doing anything else.  But when you start, you’re in your early twenties--who’s thinking about the rest of your life in your early twenties?!  Two years from now was the rest of your life.  I mean, all you know is that you’re loving this more than anything.  You’re truly, incredibly, amazingly happy, and so just keep going.  Then all of a sudden you’ve been doing it twenty years, or thirty years ... or forty years!

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And then one day they don’t let you do it anymore.  Then you’re really fucked!

SADLER:  So you’ve got to find something else to do while you’re doing it.

STEIGER:  Yeah, that’s about the size of it.

SADLER:  Yeah.  So that’s my not-so-thumbnail sketch.

STEIGER:  Well, so that got us to the Hatch trip, but how in the hell did you get from there to actually gettin’ a job?  How’d that work?

SADLER:  Well, that fall I....  Let’s see, I’m tryin’ to remember.  I guess I hadn’t started to go to Santa Cruz yet.  That fall I entered Santa Cruz for grad school, and I wanted to study geology, but kind of started studying it sort of on my own beforehand.  And so that fall I went to school at Santa Cruz and I just said to myself, "Okay, I want to learn how to row, I have to learn how to row."  And so I started lookin’ around, and I checked into all these different schools:  Friends of the River had a school....

STEIGER:  ARTA.

SADLER:  ARTA, yeah.

STEIGER:  OARS.

SADLER:  Yeah, exactly.  And the one that....  I don’t know why I ended up with this school--maybe because it sounded like I would get more hands on than anywhere else, but I don’t know if that’s actually true.  It was a little school run by a company called Sierra Whitewater Expeditions.  They’re now out of business, but it was just a mom and pop organization out of <Oregon>, out of <Springfield Oregon>.  And they offered a school that was basically a week long, or five days, something like that.  You spend a day on land learning how to tie knots and load a boat and read water, doing all the ferry angles, the little "football" diagrams.

STEIGER:  Oh, they actually drew it out?

SADLER:  Yeah, they drew it out, and stuff like that.  And how to read rapids.  And then we went and did a four-day trip on the Rogue.  So I drove up there with my little blue 1972 Datsun pickup, and did it!  And it was fantastic!  I was not a star student, by any means.  I’ve never been a water baby, I’ve never been one of those people that just--you know, you hand them oars when they’re fifteen, like Katherine McDonald.  Brad said she was just a natural.  Well, that’s not me.  But I loved it, and I made some good friends there.  And they hired eight people out of that class, to work for them that summer, and I was one of those people.  So I went up in the summer of ’86 and ran the Rogue, the Deschutes [phonetic], the McKenzie River.  And I ran a bunch of rivers, which is actually really good, because I didn’t get stuck on one river, only learning one style of water.  Because they ran so many different rivers, while I never got really good at one river, I learned--like the Rogue is pool and drop, so I learned about pool and drop.  And then the Deschutes is kind of pool and drop as well.  But some of the other rivers were more--like the McKenzie was a lot more continuous whitewater.  I got to do that Upper and Lower Klamath, and those were really fun.  That’s some good whitewater.  I’d like to go back and do it now and see how well I do!  The whole time, everybody’s talking about all the places they want to run, and they’re talking about the Selway, and they’re talking about the <Illinois>, and they’re talking about all these gnarly whitewater rivers.  I’m like, "I want to go back to the <Grand Canyon>."  And it’s so funny, because everybody’s going, "<Grand Canyon>?!  That’s not very hard!"  "I don’t care about hard, I just want to go back to the <Grand Canyon>."  So I spent that season, and the next year, in ’87, I went back to school, but then I decided, "Okay, I gotta get to <Arizona>," and I quit.  And I came out here with the....  Oh, what was it?  The excuse I gave my parents is that I wanted to continue my master’s here in <Flagstaff>.  (laughs)  So I got a job at the museum, and I went back to school, but basically I just started knocking on doors all around the different companies.  I had one season’s experience on these rivers in <Oregon>.  It was the right time, and I must have talked a good line or something, or they were looking for women, or whatever, but I got four companies to give me four different baggage boats, so my first season I did four trips.  I worked for AZRA, Expeditions, Dories, and Can-Ex.  And of the four of them, Can-Ex was the one that had a job for me.  They were just starting, and they were looking for women, and they seemed to really appreciate the fact that I came with this natural history background, that I just wanted to do interp and talk to people.  They seemed to value that, which was nice.  I think in retrospect, all of them do, but at the time they seemed to.  So I guess I just bugged people enough to get a job.  And I’m not sure that would work these days.  I think the late eighties might have been this middle ground between the women of the seventies--Ellen Tibbetts and all the people Louise wrote about in her book--and then all the young gals now, seems like every company has a few.  But it’s like the eighties were sort of this weird time when a lot of the women from the seventies were kind of pulling out of it a little bit, but the new generation hadn’t come in yet.  So I guess I just got there at the right time.  I don’t know if you could do that now, just show up, "Hey, I’ve got a half a season’s worth of experience in <Oregon>.  You wanna hire me?"  I mean, now you’ve gotta have all this first aid and CPR and food handlers and six years’ of experience somewhere else.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you’ve gotta be pretty committed, don’t ya’?--committed to break in.

SADLER:  Yeah.  It was great, it was the best thing.  God, it was just the best few years.  You had to do six trips before you could get your guide’s license.  Well, I think I did seven trips, and my eighth trip was as a guide, with passengers in my boat.  Really exciting!  My parents were mystified.  I think they were mystified until the day they died.  I think they understood it sort of at one level, but their need to make sure I was gonna be safe, and have enough money, and be able to take care of myself, was overriding all the rest.  They’re like, "Why don’t you stop fooling around and get a real job?!"  And I’m sure every boatman’s heard that, too--or a lot of 'em.  They never got it, because they never went down the river with me.  And they got it in the sense that my mom certainly understood how much I loved the desert, and how much I love the outdoors.  But that was just so alien for them.  And it’s not that they expected me to get married and find some nice man to take care of me--it’s just that they thought I would take a little bit more traditional [path], maybe [as a] professor, or working in a museum somewhere, or something like that.

STEIGER:  Something that has a pension and health benefits.

SADLER:  Exactly!

STEIGER:  A salary.  (laughs)

SADLER:  Oh, that!  Yeah!  A paycheck.

STEIGER:  All that, yeah.

SADLER:  My story, I don’t think, is all that unusual.

STEIGER:  Yeah, sounds pretty familiar.  My dad [would ask me], "You goin’ down there again?"  (laughter)  "Didn’t you already do that?"

SADLER:  "How many times do you need to do it?!"  Think about how many times you’ve had a passenger say the same thing to you.  It’s like, "Well, I’ve done the <Grand Canyon> now.  I think next year I’ll go to..." wherever.  And then there are the ones who come along and they’re like, "Oh God, I’ve gotta do this again!"  And they try to come back every year.  And then they turn into boatmen!

STEIGER:  Yeah, you’ve gotta be rich to come back every single year as a customer.

SADLER:  Now you can’t come back more than once a year.  It’s really interesting how things are changing.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  See what you guys did?!  Tom Martin and Richard Martin.  I hope you’re happy!

SADLER:  Oh, I know.  I was involved in politics for a long enough.  It took ten years off my life.  I just want to do my trips now.  That sounds pretty pathetic, but in the end, I look at it this way:  the canyon will outlast all of us and our petty little squabbles about who gets to do what, when, where, and with how many.  I just want to take care of the place the best I can when I’m down there.

STEIGER:  Spoken like a true ex-president of Grand Canyon River Guides.

SADLER:  No kidding!

STEIGER:  It’s kind of magical how that works:  You’re in there, and you want to contribute.  Yeah, okay, it’s fine to be a director, and you go to those meetings, and there’s some pretty good parties.  And then finally you end up, it’s down to you to do that job.  And then at the end of that job you’re like, "Okay...."

SADLER:  "I am so done!"

STEIGER:  "I am so done!"

SADLER:  Well, and you know--I don’t know if you remember--but when I was president--not to say that there aren’t things going on every time, every year, but it was right when the CRMP was being resurrected, and the whole wilderness issue.  God, I mean, it just seemed like everywhere you turned, somebody was complaining because they thought you were....  The motor boatmen were out there, "Well, GCRG’s against motor boatmen!"  And then the row guides are, "GCRG’s for motor boatmen!"  And the outfitters were goin’, "GCRG hates all of us!"  It’s like, "Oh my God."  I just remember sitting and having so many discouraging conversations with the outfitters, and just thinking all the things we would really love to do are not gonna happen, because there are a lot of other interests at stake here.  And in all honesty--and this might be an unfortunate thing to say--but my big impression back then, and it still is, looking at everybody who’s arguing over this place, is less about taking care of the canyon, and more about taking care of how often you get down there, and how much money you can make in the process--whether it’s private boaters or commercial outfitters or commercial guides.  Actually, the guides and a lot of the private boaters who are not involved in this very vocal struggle, are the ones I think that are caring for the place.  But it just seemed like there were so many interests that had nothing to do with the canyon.  And I just got really discouraged.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  You know, I didn’t....  It was a long old road, the CRMP.

SADLER:  Yeah, it was.  And you know, my mind is open to how this works.  I know this is probably getting off the subject.  I haven’t been super-impressed with what I’ve seen this year, the first year of the implementation of the new CRMP.

STEIGER:  Did you go in April?

SADLER:  I went in April, May, and then I’ve done some hiking and some backpacking since then.  I’m seeing things that suggest to me that people are not taking the stuff as ... I wouldn’t say "seriously"--but they’re kind of ignoring things where they want to ignore them.  You know, like people camping at <Kanab> and <Tapeats>.  Now, whether those beaches should have been closed, shouldn’t have been closed, was anything being harmed, blah, blah, blah, I don’t know.  But the fact is, if we....  Somebody’s trying to make some rules to do what they think is the best for the place.  Maybe they were the wrong rules to make, but I don’t think it’s up to us to decide that.  I was finding in April and May, when it turned to May, we were finding piles of torn-down tamarisk branches for firewood, sitting on the beach--stuff that had been clearly gathered either from standing dead, or from up above the old high-water line.  Never mind the wisdom of burning tamarisk, but (laughs) it’s like, "C’mon, you guys, let’s take care of this place.  Let’s do what somebody has suggested.  If it doesn’t work, we can get together and say, "This isn’t working, this was a bad rule, let’s come up with something else."  But to just say, "Oh, I think that’s a stupid rule and I want to do something different," that’s just anarchy.  And that’s not about the place, that’s about, "I’ve always camped at <Tapeats>, I want to camp at <Tapeats>, I’m gonna camp at <Tapeats>!"  That’s just what really bothered me.  I know for a fact it was private trips, when I saw the people there, either on backpacking trips or on the river.  I’m not saying all privates are bad, but it’s like, "C’mon, you guys fought really hard to get more use, swearing that you would take care of this place, and you had every right to be down here, just like everyone else.  Act like it!  Be responsible."

STEIGER:  You know, my sense of that, I think most of the people who are going on private trips don’t even--I mean, I don’t think the community is what you’d call close knit.  I think people just show up, because they have friends and they have no clue what’s transpired in the past, or what’s brought us to whatever’s goin’ on right now.

SADLER:  Well, and a lot of 'em are coming from environments that are very different from a desert environment.  They might know a lot about boating, but say they’re from <Idaho> or <Montana> or <North Carolina>, so are they getting the education they need to get?  Is the park service able to keep up with the increased numbers and all the orientations they have to do?  I mean, they send them a DVD or something, but I mean, c’mon, do people really watch it?  And the fact that people are only allowed one trip now means that for better or worse, some of the most experienced private boaters who were able to get on a lot of trips....

STEIGER:  Aren’t there to tell....

SADLER:  Right, they can’t do it.  So we have people who are only doing one trip a year, and most of 'em are brand new to the canyon, or they do one trip a year.

STEIGER:  I cannot, for the life of me, understand why a private trip can’t just hire a commercial guide to go with 'em.  I honestly can’t, I don’t see what the reason is.  Why couldn’t you do that?

SADLER:  I can understand the reason from the outfitter’s perspective.  I don’t think I agree with it.

STEIGER:  Because they don’t want the guides poaching on their clientele.

SADLER:  Yeah.  Exactly.  Then it becomes this sort of gray area.  All I could say is you couldn’t pay me enough to hire out as a guide for a private trip.

STEIGER:  You’re gonna work yourself to death, but I mean....

SADLER:  Well, it’s not just that, but think about the liability.  And I hate to think in terms of liability, but you know how some private trips are--some commercial trips there’s a little bit of "errrr!"  So what happens, you get to <Hance>, and it’s right at that weird level, and you’re like, "Okay, guys, this is the run.  You could do that, but really this is the run."  And somebody says, "Well, I’m gonna go do that, because I like the looks of that better."  Or they do your run and they hurt themselves just because things happen.  I mean, who’s liable?  The guide?  And then can you imagine if they’re disagreeing with you?  You’re saying, "No, you guys, we can’t camp there, it’s closed," or "we can’t hike there."  And they’re going, "Well, we want to!"  Oh!  That just sounds like more headaches than it’s worth!

STEIGER:  I’ve gotta admit, the private trips that I’ve been on have all been so much more work than any commercial trip I ever did.  But I have all these friends who want to go--these big groups of friends who want you to go with them, and they can’t afford a commercial trip.  (Sadler laughs)  What are you laughing about, what’s so funny?

SADLER:  Well, I’m just laughing because when my permit comes up, I’m trying to figure out what to do.  One side of me wants to take me and a boat, that’s it.  Or me and a friend and one boat, and just go.  And then the other half of me wants to find all these friends of mine that can’t take a trip, and they really want to, and bring 'em down the river.  And I’m like, "But then I’ll be a guide!"

STEIGER:  Yeah, you gotta be.

SADLER:  Oh man.  Funny.  Anyway, that was off the subject.

STEIGER:  Well, I gotta say, I had absolutely no input into the CRMP.  I had all the chances to write my two cents down.  I didn’t say a goddamned thing, I didn’t do a goddamned thing.  I decided I already paid my dues.  Actually, I would have gone to the meetings and stuff, but it just wasn’t handy.  I was always workin’ or somethin’ was goin’ on, and I figured it’d get covered.  And when I saw what they came out with, I was like, "This is the biggest crock of shit.  This is so goin’ backwards, to increase the use so much, and do all these things."  But my experience this summer, I have to say, was pretty good, personally.  And maybe that was just that the trips that I did happened to launch in good windows or whatever.  I have to say it worked a lot better than I expected it was going to.

SADLER:  You mean in terms of crowding, you haven’t had a lot of crowding?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I did four trips, and I saw two days from hell:  one at <Deer Creek>--duh--and then one at <Havasu>.  I saw 250 people at <Havasu> in one day.

SADLER:  Holy crap!

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And because of that, we went to <Matkat> and stayed there instead, and we were just in and out of <Havasu>, just because it was so unbelievably crowded.  But that was just one time, and the rest of it was pretty good.

SADLER:  I haven’t had bad luck either.  My trip this year, we saw very few.  We had one day from hell, and it was all commercial trips with us.  It was all in the corridor right above <Bass>, like six trips, all trying to camp--you know, "adventure" camping.  But we ran into somebody a few days down who said that they were running with something like six private groups and a bunch of other commercial trips, and it was just several days from hell, they just could not get away from them.

STEIGER:  From each other, yeah.

SADLER:  It’s just windows, you know.

STEIGER:  Yeah, luck of the draw.

SADLER:  I guess I’m worried less about crowding, in the sense that if you know the canyon pretty well, you can figure out how to get around that.  You can figure out where there’s another cool hike, or hang back a little:  here’s an okay camp; speed up a little; skip something that maybe would be fun to see, but there’ll be something else.  I just worry about what I was always worried about, hearing that they were going to increase the use so much, was just, well, the canyon.  I’ve seen in the last few years with the flows so low, I’ve seen a lot of impact on the beaches.  I mean, there’s a lot of pee holes and little micro trash.  I’m seeing places where people are very clearly modifying campsites to their--you know, breaking off branches and....  And so to increase that use so much, that really scared me.  And what I suggested was they try and do a....  I mean, not that this would work, because this would actually require money.  But increase the use by, let’s say, 30 percent, and monitor for a few years, see what happens.  If it’s still okay, increase another 30 percent.  But everybody wanted their user days right now.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  My theory was they should take Grand Canyon Fund money and just buy out a couple of these little companies that are gonna sell anyway, to the big ones, who don’t need to get any bigger and just move those days over.  You know, when you think about Georgie White, they let Western River Expeditions buy that company for $150,000, for 3,000 user days.  There were several cases where big companies scooped up little ones.  And they didn’t need to be that much bigger.  Well, I mean, that’s third hand.  I shouldn’t be puttin’ that on tape.  This is what I mean about I get in trouble.

SADLER:  Another approximately 3,000 user-day company got sold for a lot more about fifteen years later.

STEIGER:  Yeah, the goin’ rate’s way higher now.  But that horse is already out of the barn too.  There’s no point in quackin’ about it now, but it’s too bad there was a missed opportunity there.  Like you say, I guess it remains to be seen, how bad the crowding’s gonna be, and will the canyon, deprived of the winter rest time and stuff, how is it gonna do over the long haul?

SADLER:  It just seems....  Like I said, the canyon will survive.  The beaches will survive.  It’ll be harder to find a few camping spots and things like that.  But it’s so important for us, even more so than ever before for all of us, the whole community down there, to really, really try and take care of that place.  It’s always been important for us to do that, and I think we’ve done a pretty good job overall, but everybody has to be in on it, and you just can’t have people deciding that because they’ve always camped at the mouth of <Kanab>, and they want to go to Whispering Springs, that they’re gonna do it.

STEIGER:  You saw a private trip do that?

SADLER:  Yeah, we saw a private trip there.  We pulled in, and there had clearly been someone there the night before.  We just pulled in to hike, and then we ran into a trip further down that said that they passed a group that was camped there, and one at <Tapeats>.  And then I’ve seen, on backpacking trips, people at <Tapeats>.  Okay, whether or not we should have closed those beaches, if it was really that big of a deal, I’m not gonna argue.  Maybe we shouldn’t have, but again, it’s not for us to decide right now.  So anyway, blah, blah, blah.

STEIGER:  Well, tell me a river story.

SADLER:  Oh, no!  Well, I could tell you about the time I sunk the dory at <Bedrock>.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  That sounds like a painful one.

SADLER:  It was a painful river story.

STEIGER:  Although I know that was a pretty good story, because it came back, didn’t it?  Did you hear Martin sunk a boat?

SADLER:  Yeah, I heard, Pete Gross’ boat.  Poor Dirt Bag!

STEIGER:  Poor Dirt Bag.

SADLER:  Oh, man!

STEIGER:  He just got a new one for $10,000, which was comin’ anyway, but....

SADLER:  It’s not the same.  It’s like losing a child.  Well, that’s how I felt.  I’ll tell you the story, and you can use it or not.  In my brief tenure with Dories, I rowed the Ticaboo mostly.  I was on a trip with Kenton many years ago, and it was gonna be fairly low water, and for the life of me now, I can’t remember if he....  He wanted to time it so that we hit <Bedrock> at a certain water level, and I think it was probably at the really low water level, because he wanted the pull to be easy or something.  And this is pretty early on in my career.  I mean, I knew how to row, but I was still getting used to dories, and there was this little thing about dories that I still hadn’t quite gotten the hang of--which works in rafts too, but in dories it’s like the thing’s on rollers.

STEIGER:  I know the thing you’re talkin’ about, how it goes where you point it!

SADLER:  Yeah, the second you turn to pull away from something, it tracks right towards it.  And I was making this beautiful pull, and I should not have changed my angle, but I changed my angle so that my nose was more towards the big rock.  So we just sucked right towards the lower <Bedrock>.  The bow hit the lower <Bedrock> and we swung, and if it had been slightly higher water we just would have probably just bounced off.  But it was low enough water that the back end of the dory, the stern, caught on that little rock that makes the kind of little cruncher hole at certain water levels, and it just bam! stuck fast.  It was so ugly.  I mean, the great thing was that the passengers could just climb right off onto the rock.

But the kind of amusing thing after that--not that I was amused at the time, I was horrified and just completely chagrined and crying behind my sunglasses and all that--but we tried to set up a "Z" drag, a mechanical advantage--and no offense against Kenton, the man was an amazing boatman--but dory boatmen don’t know how to do mechanical advantage, because you don’t normally stick dories on rocks, you break them or flip them.  We just set something up that was so completely not....

STEIGER:  Not happening.

SADLER:  No.  We probably made it....  Instead of the advantage of three to one [3:1] or six to one [6:1], we probably made it like negative ten to one!

STEIGER:  Just thinkin’ about that position, too, how do you get leverage to pull it the right way anyway?

SADLER:  Exactly.  We needed to be across the river.

STEIGER:  Yeah, goin’ completely the other direction.

SADLER:  Yeah.  I didn’t know enough about them at the time, but I recognize now what a fruitless attempt it was.  And that was during the time when the water wasn’t going from 3,000 to 30,000 [cfs], but it was coming up big, and the water was rising and rising and rising, and pretty soon there was nothing but a giant hole where the boat was, and the boat was completely buried.  I didn’t actually sink the boat, I just stuck it, and then the water came up and covered it.  And I remember....  Oh, shoot, what was her name?  She worked for ARR.  Oh, shoot, I can’t remember her name.  She was a great gal.

STEIGER:  Teresa?

SADLER:  No, not Teresa.

STEIGER:  Kim?

SADLER:  Kim!  Kim Claypool.  She came by, and I still remember....  Because we were warning everyone.  I think there was a rope across the river or something, and we’re like, "Don’t go...."  And she pulled over and then we got everything out of the way.  She came through and she pulled over, and she was just lookin’ to see if she could help, and I’m sitting up on the rock, and I’m crying behind my sunglasses, my hat down over my face.  And I just remember her saying--we didn’t know each other at the time--she’s like, "Oh, man.  Hey lady, I’m really sorry about your boat."  I’m like, "Me too."  And she took off.  It was the weirdest thing:  we looked down in the water, and all of a sudden there’s just bags popping out of the water and floating downstream.  And I had a guitar in the back cross hatch, the rear cross.  All of us thought, "Crap, the boat’s just broken in half, it’s split apart."  But what had happened was that with the wave that was pouring into the hole which was the boat, it lifted the rear cross.  It actually opened the rear cross and things started popping out.  And literally five minutes after that, all of a sudden we see this boat just....  Like this leviathan, it just rises up out of the water.  It was completely full of water.  All you could see was the bow and stern posts, and we couldn’t even tell if it was whole, but you could just see the bow and the stern posts, and this thing just kind of comes surging up out of the water, executes a perfect run....

STEIGER:  From there.  Wow, which isn’t that easy to do!

SADLER:  Yeah, because you hit the wall and everything.

STEIGER:  Yeah, the skeg dinger rock and all that stuff.

SADLER:  Yeah.  And then those guys pulled it over just below, on that little tiny beach where the <Bass> comes down, and they bailed it out.

STEIGER:  Yeah, like the little camp spot?

SADLER:  No, above that little riffle there.

STEIGER:  Well where were you then?

SADLER:  I was still on the rock with Andre.

STEIGER:  So you were there, and you saw it come up.

SADLER:  We saw it come up, but we still couldn’t tell if it was whole, or what the damage was.  And it turns out that I think once the rear cross was empty, the wave pouring into the rear cross--and then it came up, it had to go somewhere, but it was pulling against the boat, and it just lifted the boat off the rocks.  I mean, that was completely--that was the grace of God--or whatever--the river gods--because we weren’t gettin’ that boat back.  It was pretty beat up, we had to do some work on the gunnel and a couple of holes.  There was a hole, I don’t know, about eight inches across.

STEIGER:  Ach, that’s nothin’!

SADLER:  Nothin’!  (laughter)  I was horrified!

STEIGER:  I put a hole in the Black Mesa once, that was practically as big as that couch you’re leanin’ against.  It did this kind of "L"-shaped tear, got all the hatches on that side.  It was like, "Fuck!"  <Deubendorff>.  Made it through <Bedrock>!

SADLER:  It was really fun running <Deubendorff> after we patched the boat.  It was like seven o’clock at night, so it was getting late, and everybody had gone on to camp.

STEIGER:  Now you had to go, though, because you had the water.

SADLER:  Yeah, we had the water, exactly.  It’s like, "It’s high!  Go!  Go!"  But what I remember was so funny--and all the dory boatmen were so disgusted by this--you know how you guys are....

STEIGER:  Who’s "you guys"?!

SADLER:  You bring the paint the color of your boat, so that if you have to patch your boat, you can paint over it so nobody knows.

STEIGER:  Yeah, well, okay.  Tape is what I find....

SADLER:  So I had this big white patch on the boat, on, I think it was the right rear quadrant, down by the waterline.  And this is a big deal, about a foot and a half long.  So here’s this big white thing, and I just decided in the morning I wanted to have everyone on the trip sign it, like they sign a cast.  So I had all these people sign it, just like "Ouch!" and all these things.

STEIGER:  Oh yeah, I can see that.

SADLER:  And Kenton was not amused.  Nor was Andre.

STEIGER:  Not the Martin Litton way.  You’re supposed to cover those.  And here we’re talkin’ about this company founded by this dude that you couldn’t bail in site of another trip.  (chuckles)  Didn’t matter if water was pouring out the sides, you weren’t allowed to bail while there was anybody watching--especially not a motor trip!

SADLER:  Yeah, that was probably one of the hardest things that ever happened to me on a trip, just because....  I mean, you know those dories, they’re so beautiful, and you feel like you’ve just killed your child when you hurt them.

STEIGER:  That’s big of you to tell that one the first!  There’s people who won’t even talk about some of their dory wrecks.  They’re beautiful, and they’re really fun to row, and they’re so unforgiving.

SADLER:  Yeah, very unforgiving.

STEIGER:  I watch people trying to....  I mean, they teach you about every other kind of boat, too.  But I watch people that want to go straight to 'em and do 'em, and they’re so....  Like you say, that thing where you really gotta keep track of what the water’s doin’ on your hull.  Especially those Briggs boats, too, boy.

SADLER:  Yeah, and just working the water along the chine.  I mean, you can do some of those things with a raft, but it’s literally like the difference between an Oldsmobile and a Porsche.

STEIGER:  Well, there’s so much more hull in the water, and it’s so much more dramatic.

SADLER:  Yeah, the angles.

STEIGER:  Plus, for whatever reason, they tend to carry momentum more, way more.

SADLER:  That was a good lesson.

STEIGER:  Oh, God, what a painful experience.  And you kept doin’ it, though.

SADLER:  I did.  I could tell you about the time I dumped Arthur Levitt.  We talked about that.

STEIGER:  Okay, but before you tell me that, I want to hear....

SADLER:  Most of my stories are catastrophic ones.

STEIGER:  I just want to hear what it felt like the first time you actually rowed a raft down the <Grand Canyon>.  What trip was that, and how did that feel?

SADLER:  I was rowin’ a baggage boat for AZRA, and I was so completely out of my element and overwhelmed.  I mean, I thought I knew something from working in <Oregon>.  So in <Oregon> I’m working with fourteen-foot Domars, bucket boats, with eight-foot oars.  And I climb into a <Havasu> 3--bucket boat, but still....  You know, absolutely big fat tube, absolutely no kick to the bow and stern, and I’m rowin’ with eleven-foot oars.  I mean, it felt like I had telephone poles in my hands, literally.  And I was so completely overwhelmed.  I could not move that thing!  And I had no concept.  I thought I knew something about ferry angles.  Well, they don’t teach you a downstream ferry on the rivers of <Oregon>!

STEIGER:  It’s all upstream ferry, yeah.

SADLER:  You’re talkin’ behind rocks and things, so you’re usin’ an upstream ferry, and you’ve got these little tiny rivers.  I was so overwhelmed the entire trip.  I mean, I just was on edge the entire time.  There were very few moments where I wasn’t just like, "Oh my God, what am I doing here?!"  And I mean just classic, get to <Horn Creek> and they’re like, "Okay, it’s the right-to-left run."  It was fairly low water, it was probably like 8,000 or something.  And they’re like, "You see that right horn there?  You want to cut as close to that thing as you can, pulling as hard as you can."  I’m like, "What if I hit it?"  "Trust me, you’re not gonna hit it."  "But what if I hit it?" because where I came from, you could have hit that rock if you tried.

STEIGER:  Oh, I think you still can.

SADLER:  Yeah, if you know where to start, you could hit it.  But I wasn’t gonna hit it, I was nowhere near.  I was used to "wait, wait, wait, wait--tuck!"

STEIGER:  You gotta get some strokes in, yeah.

SADLER:  And I had no concept of momentum at all.  And of course, you know, just right into the guts of the whole thing, hit the rock at the bottom, sideways, almost flipped.  I had a tear in the bottom of the boat where the cooler buckles were below the cooler--the strap buckles.  And so I was up on the rock like that.  I mean, I was so overwhelmed.  I felt like a five-year-old kid trying to handle this boat.  Honestly, my memory now is that that’s how I felt the entire trip:  because again, I wasn’t a natural, I wasn’t a water baby, and I was working with some people who were a little bit trial-by-fire kind of guys--no names!  (laughs)  But they were sort of, (gruffly) "If you want to be a boatman down here, you gotta know how to do it!"  (laughter)  You know, we get to <Lava> and....  You know how at the very top of the right run, the water does this thing where you’re following it along, and then it kinda sweeps left, but then it goes back right, and you just have to wait it out.  I still wasn’t reading the water really well.  I remember we’re up there scouting, and I’m like, "Oh my God!  This is horrible!"  And we get back in the boats, and we’re pushing off, and one of the boatmen yells to me, "Hey, just watch out at the top, 'cause the water’s gonna do something you’re not expecting," and then he’s gone.  I’m like, "What?!  What’s it gonna do?!  Could you be a little more specific?!"  And so I went down there, and the water started to sweep left, and I thought, "Oh my God, we’re going into the ledge hole."  Because it was the only thing I could see the entire scouting time, was this massive....

STEIGER:  "Don’t send me in there!"

SADLER:  And of course so then I spun the boat backwards, because if I’m going into the hole, I’m gonna go in straight, not sideways, and I was set up more to spin backwards.  And we floundered down the right, just like you always do, but completely out of control.  It wasn’t until my next trip, which was days later with you, with Expeditions, that I....  I mean, it wasn’t like a month later, or three months later--it was three days later, or like two days later, that I went up with you guys to do that.  And that’s when I find, "Oh, okay, I recognize some of this stuff."  And I was rowing a Rogue River, which was like a Cadillac.

STEIGER:  So that boat seemed easy after that AZRA boat?

SADLER:  Oh, it was totally easy, even with the dance floor.  Remember how their baggage boats had....

STEIGER:  I remember it so totally.  Don’t get me started!

SADLER:  It had enough diamond plate to build a spaceship out of!  And even with all that, it felt so much easier than that <Havasu>.

STEIGER:  I never rowed....  I thought that those little Expeditions boats were really heavy.  Well, you’re a good bluffer, because you seemed totally comfortable.  I don’t remember you....

SADLER:  Well, except for my incident at <Bedrock>.

STEIGER:  Well, that could have happened to anybody.

SADLER:  It was wonderful, and I remember a few times when I’d sort of wake up in the morning and I  knew there weren’t any rapids for the day, and I just felt a little more relaxed and just finally able to look around and see the canyon, instead of this overwhelming feeling of whitewater all the time.  And those moments, I think, got me through.  I won’t say I was terrified the whole time, but I felt really out of my element and really overwhelmed.  But it slowly got better.  Oh, man.

STEIGER:  I didn’t have it in my mind that that was your second trip ever.

SADLER:  That was my second trip ever.

STEIGER:  Who was that?  That was like....

SADLER:  With Allan Hayden, and the Jeffs, Dennis Harris, and you.

STEIGER:  Allan Hayden, Jeff Gourley [phonetic], Jeff Behan [phonetic], Dennis Harris, and me.  Yeah.  Oh my God.

SADLER:  I remember the pre-<Lava> parties.

STEIGER:  What a swing!  What a broad spectrum of....  There’s the "good cop," the "bad cop."  (laughs)

SADLER:  Well, that was the thing!  I came off of that trip and like, "Wow!  Boatmen can be fun!"

STEIGER:  Yeah, that was.  Those guys were always so much....  I don’t remember ever doin’ an Expeditions trip where you weren’t just holdin’ your sides, rollin’ on the sand, laughin’ the whole time.

SADLER:  Do you remember--I’m sure they did this a lot--but I remember I think it was the pre-<Lava> party, Dennis was doing the weather reports, and this is when he talked about <Diamond Creek> flash flooding and <Peach Springs> was at the bottom of <Diamond Creek Rapid>.  But they all took magic markers, and they labeled everything on one of the boats--everything!  You know, the rubber--front right tube, front left tube--all the boxes, the oars, the spare oars--they labeled everything.  Oh, God, I still remember that.

STEIGER:  I can’t believe we did some of those trips and anybody ever hired us again!

SADLER:  (laughs)  It was very fun.  I think being with the boatmen....  I mean, it was truly the freest that I’ve ever felt.  I had some kind of wild times.  Just I’d never grown up in a community like that, and never been part of a community like that, where everything was just so much fun, and everybody was just--they worked hard, they played hard, and it was just really refreshing to me.  Even the people who were hard to get along with were working hard and playing hard, and there was just this true sense of being in this rather dysfunctional, but fun nonetheless, family.  (laughs)

STEIGER:  I think one of the things that lets you get away with it all, just that it’s only two weeks, if that.  If it was longer or shorter....  So you did those four trips.  So then how was it when you....  What else stands out about those early times for you?  Good.  I mean, good and bad, but good.  Something must have been working for you to stay with it.

SADLER:  You know, again, my story isn’t all that different from any of the boatmen.  To start with, I was in the most beautiful place I could ever imagine being in.  So to spend your days....  And I’ve always been a great lover of manual labor.  I mean, that’s part of the tomboy in me, I love manual labor.  So to spend your days just working, in such an incredibly beautiful place, it was like heaven.  Who needs to die to go to heaven--I’m here!  And the river was this wonderful presence.  She....  I always think of the river as a "she."  I suppose a lot of people do.  The river stopped being The River and became this personality.  So the river is kind of the ever-present mother, teacher, lover, friend, whatever it is.  So there was this wonderful presence.  And then, I’m not gonna lie, there is something so incredibly wonderful and powerful about having all these people look at you and say, "Wow!  You’re so incredible!  Look at you!  You can row this boat!  And you can cook!  And you can hike!  And you climb around in your little flip-flops!  You’re just so amazing!"  I guess I’m as vain as the next person.  It was like complete and utter acceptance for whatever it was you were doing.  You come from a world where, for whatever reason, you need to get better grades, or you need to do this, or you need to do that, or you’re not quite pretty enough, or you’re too whatever--just all the stuff that we have in our world up here.  And then you go down there, and it doesn’t matter what you look like, doesn’t matter how well you did in school, or what you might end up doing for a living with your life, or how much money you make or don’t make, you’re just loved.  That, at first, was really powerful.  It was really powerful.  And I think in more recent years I’ve come to recognize that we’re not any more special, I’m not any more special than anyone else, we’re just really good at what we do, and we’re doing it in such an amazing place that it seems incredible.  I think Tim Cooper said it really well when he said the actions of the men and women down there take on the grandeur of their surroundings.  And it’s true.  Nobody says, "Wow! thank you so much!" when you open the door at the post office.  So I think that’s faded a lot, but in the beginning it was just an amazing sense of just confidence.  I mean, I was beautiful down there.  Why do all those boatwomen wear these great dresses, and they put on all their best jewelry?  It’s because we’re beautiful down there, and the men are incredible.  It’s just this wonderful--in the beginning.  You start to see a lot more later.

STEIGER:  How’s that Vaughn Short poem go?  "Girls get prettier, the men get wittier."

SADLER:  Exactly.  Obviously I’m exaggerating, but I did, I felt so beautiful down there, just using my body all day long, using my muscles and hiking.  And then you’re in this incredible place, and you’re meeting people under the best of circumstances, which is both a positive and a negative thing in a way.  I mean, they’re on vacation, so they’re free, they’re not worried about the usual things that make people grumpy.  But they’re also in your care, and so that makes them a little more likely to ... what’s the word?  It makes it a little easier to sort of mold the trip as you want it to [be].  And I know that’s gonna sound really awful, but it also can make for a really cohesive experience, where everyone’s on the same page, and it’s really cool to be in this beautiful place and you’re all on the same page, which is, "Let’s go enjoy this place, let’s learn about it, let’s have fun, let’s experience it, let’s do everything we can possibly do."  You watch people, and they’re doing things they’ve never done before--or maybe they did when they were seven, but now they’re forty-seven and they’re not doing it anymore.  And they come to you in the morning and they say, "I couldn’t believe the stars last night!  I haven’t seen stars like that since I was a kid."  Or, "I’ve lived in <New York City> my whole life, I’ve never seen stars like that."  There’s something really powerful about that.  I think that’s part of what kept me going all those years.  And it was probably selfish, I was having fun and loving it.  But it was also just watching this place through these people’s eyes, and knowing that that’s what they were here to do.  So anything I did to help them do that was great.

STEIGER:  It’s funny, all that time you were talkin’, I was sittin’ here trying to think of <Grand Canyon> women boatmen I’ve known who weren’t beautiful.  I can only think of two (laughter) who weren’t actually beautiful anyway.  And I’m not gonna name those names either!

SADLER:  We’re more beautiful down there.  I mean, everyone’s more beautiful down there.  I still remember my passengers.  I think about the people on my trips.  Somewhere around Day 12, 13, whatever, somebody always makes a comment about, "Oh, God, I’m really glad I don’t have a mirror now.  I must look a fright."  You’ve heard it before, "Oh, my hair!" or whatever.  And without fail, absolutely without fail, to me, everybody, but thinking specifically of the women, as the trip goes on, they are more and more and more beautiful.  No makeup, they’re slightly sunburned, windburned, their hair is natural, they look happy.  They might be a little scared, too, but they look happy, they look relaxed, they look the way humans are supposed to look.  And I always tell them that, "Please, at the trip dinner, don’t put makeup on."  I love seeing that transformation in people.  It’s the same in us, in the boatwomen and the boatmen.  We’re at our most elemental down there, I guess, and I think we’re all beautiful because of it.

STEIGER:  I don’t know, I think there’s some guys that....  (laughter)  We don’t need to go there either!  Don’t get me started.

SADLER:  It’s been an interesting transformation over the years for me, because I have....  At first it used to make me really proud, and I’d feel really proud when people would say things like, "Wow, you’re like Wonder Woman!"  Every female boatman has heard this, especially if they’re not particularly large.  I’m sturdy.  But I can imagine like Ellen Tibbetts probably, or Ginger Hinchman and some of these, they probably heard this all the time, because there’s these teeny little people rowing these huge boats.  And at first I kind of ... I was very proud, and I was very, you know, it was like, "Wow, that’s really cool."  And then after a while, it stopped.  I stopped listening so much to that.  And that was good.  Not that I was getting arrogant or anything, but I started realizing, "No, you know what, it’s okay, I’m like anyone else, but I happen to be doing this really amazing job in this really amazing place."  And I think that allowed me to just maybe in some ways to be more present.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I went through a similar....  People are telling you how cool you are, and you’re thinking, "Yeah, they’re right!"  And then you go and you do it for a while longer, and you see these other fools who are getting the same response, and you go, "Oh, I get it, this happens to all of us."  It’s the mechanics of the situation, it’s just this is coming from all these different elements, and here we are in this strange environment in which we hold all the cards--all the cards.  I think psychologically it’s pretty easy to succeed under those circumstances, for the most part.

SADLER:  And for me it was a really important part of coming to some sense of who I am at the core, because....  I mean, how many of us get that kind of unconditional, "Wow, you’re incredible" in our lives?

STEIGER:  I don’t recall ever getting it anywhere else!

SADLER:  I didn’t get it when I was growing up, I know that.  And it’s not that my parents were mean or horrible, it’s just you don’t get that kind of unconditional love and support and admiration from people.  But rather than convincing me that, "Oh, yes, they’re so right, and I’m so amazing," it just reminded me at the core that in some way all of us are amazing.  It’s just where we find ourselves.  You take any one of our passengers and you put them in their environment--you know, the cardiac surgeon or the taxi driver in <New York>, or whatever--and they are amazing too, but they happen to work in an environment where people don’t tell them that very often, because people are in a hurry or whatever, and they’re not in this beautiful free environment where everyone feels free to say, "Wow, thank you for that amazing taxi ride!  That was just incredible, you got me here on time.  Thank you so much!"  Instead, they’re like, (quickly) "Oh, here, take the money!" and they run and they leave.  And so we’re just lucky because we get to hear it.  But it kind of reminded me that everyone has this inside them.  We’re lucky because we’re in an environment where people remind us of it.  How many trips have you done where you’re sitting around on the boats at night, and maybe one of the boatmen’s like, "Can you believe that guy?!  What a ..." dork or something, right?  Maybe he’s a little clumsy, or he’s asking silly questions.  It always used to make me really mad because first off, I felt it was really kind of an arrogant attitude.  It’s like, "This guy’s way out of his element."  But, you know, he’s from <Chicago>.  If I tried to hail a cab in <Chicago>, I’d be flattened!  They know their environment, we know ours, and it’s not....  Anyway....  You’re gonna have a hell of a time transcribing this one.  Probably gonna give this to the woman.

STEIGER:  We’ll see.  (aside about recording equipment)  I figured out a long time ago, my theory is it’s not my function to judge anybody that I’m carrying down the river.  And it just makes it so much easier.  "I’m not here to judge you.  I’m just gonna take you down the river, and if I can help you, facilitate you...."  And I used to think I was supposed to keep everybody comfortable or safe, and ward off any kind of discomfort or negative feelings of any kind.  And then I kind of got over that too.  It’s like, "No, I’m supposed to facilitate you having a good experience with this place, however that transpires.  I’ll do what I can, but it’s not up to me to define that for you, or do anything more than row the boat, tell you whatever stories I have to tell you.

SADLER:  I think that really hit me, that same concept really hit me.  There’ve been just a few events where it hit me, and I had a guy on a trip many years ago, his name was Dave, and he was, I think, probably in his early thirties or early twenties--maybe early twenties.  He was blind, and he’d lost his sight slowly over time, but think by the time he was about thirteen, it was pretty much gone.  I think he had the ability to see some weird shapes from the corners, but nothing that you could actually see.  And this guy hiked everywhere.  We got him to the top of <The Tabernacle>.  He went up and over <Surprise Valley>.  I mean, he was incredible.  I ended up being one of the people who hiked with him most times, and I think it might have been a combination of my height and....  But what he would do is basically I would go in front of him, and he would hold onto my backpack.  At first, I find out I’ve got a blind guy on my trip, I’m like, "What kind of experience is he gonna have?  How can we possibly do anything with this guy?  It’s the <Grand Canyon>, it’s a visual experience."  And it was so amazing to me, because his experience of the place obviously was very different from mine.  When I was hiking with him, I started off by trying to explain every rock in the path, "Oops, go to the left here, oop, we’re gonna step down."  And after a while he said, "You don’t have to tell me that much, I can usually feel it pretty well."  And it got to the point that towards the end of the trip we’d hike for hours and we would never say anything about the trail.  We’d have conversations, or we’d be in silence, but I just learned how to slightly exaggerate my movements, if I was stepping off a rock, so that he knew that there was a downstep, or step to the left slightly.  And the only time I would ever need to say anything was, "Oh, you’ve got about three inches between a prickly pear and an agave, so go really carefully."  And he loved it.  He would come back just filled with cactus spines, beaten up, scraped up.  We’d pull the cactus spines out of him and bandage him up.  I think that’s where I kind of--it really gelled, what you just said, that my job is not to do everything for these people.  My job is not to be everything, or keep them safe from everything, or make sure that they have this particular kind of experience.  My job is to be there, and help them have whatever experience it is they are gonna have.  And I asked him at the end of the trip--I remember asking him if he wouldn’t mind describing to the group what is your impression of this place?  What did you "see," experience, while you were here?  And he described the sounds, and he described how he could tell the differences between the side canyons, by the way they sounded, or the way the walls felt.  It was just a really powerful thing, because I wasn’t....  I mean, I was part of that in the sense that I helped him hike to those places, but I wasn’t part of it in the sense that he had completely his own experience.  I really appreciated that, I loved that.  To me, that was one of the best trips I’ve done as a guide.  It was like the true meaning of being a guide is to just be there to facilitate, but not to have the experience for the person.

STEIGER:  Let this guy hold onto your pack.  That’s beautiful.  Yeah, this gal, Kathleen Jo Ryan--did you see that movie "Right to Risk"?  We did this disability trip and she made a documentary of it.  It was pretty interesting.  It was my first one.  I had gone by and waved at a lot of those trips.  It was a very humbling experience, to see people coping with so much with such grace and dignity.  (aside about recording equipment)

SADLER:  What’s your burning question?

STEIGER:  Well, when you talk about facilitating the experience....  (aside about recording equipment)  [Min. 81:50]  My burning question was--well, it’s not a burning question, but I wanted to talk about your book, There’s This River.  I’ll tell you something, when you talk about....  Actually, I’ve got to confess, I kind of scoffed when you first had the idea.  I thought, "Oh, big fuckin’ deal.  That’s fine, but who cares?"  I did, I’m sorry.  It didn’t leap out at me that it was gonna be what it’s become, I think.  (aside about recording equipment)  It really has become a community resource.  I’m not kiddin’.  I have done so many trips where I see people reading stories out of that thing, to all the people that they go down the river with.  Like I do these GCE trips, and without fail, on every trip, just before <Lava>, somebody will sit down and read Cooper’s story.  It never ceases to amaze me, here these people will listen to this story, and it’s all about these people that they don’t even know, and a rapid that is totally changed now, that run isn’t even there.  And yet somehow it resonates, and I mean it really does.  That’s just one example.  As I’ve read through it, there’s so many neat little moments in there.  I think it was a really kind of significant thing that you did for this community, and so I just wanted to ask you little bit about sort of how that came about, and highs and lows of that whole process.

SADLER:  Oh boy!  Well, you’re actually the impetus for the book.  I don’t know if you ever knew this.

STEIGER:  I read that thing in the foreword.

SADLER:  It’s true.  I mean, seriously, there were two events that happened, and one of them I didn’t write about, and one of them I did, but it was your story "Glory Days."  Here’s this gal who--I’m pretty sure she was a teenager--she entered the trip halfway through, and it was probably four days into the trip, and we hadn’t yet seen a motor rig.

STEIGER:  I know, that’s in the foreword.  We don’t need to hear that again.

SADLER:  That’s the thing, is that it hit me that these are really universal stories.  It doesn’t have to be about that river or that kind of boat, or the people that you know.  It’s just these universal stories about life, and the mistakes that we made, and the triumphs that we have, and the despair and the hope and the joy.  And it just happens to be that it’s happening down there in that canyon, and so people can resonate with it, especially if they’re on a trip.  I don’t know....

STEIGER:  Was that not the first book that you ever published?

SADLER:  Yeah.  I mean, I had done some magazine articles and things like that, but that was the first book.  That was Red Lake Books that published it back in ’94.  Honestly, the main reason I wanted to do that book was because I’m so endlessly impressed with the talents of this community, the boating community.  I have always been impressed.  I mean, I’ve always felt a little bit like, "What the heck am I doing here?!  These people are really cool, and I should not be here."  Yeah, it’s a community, it’s a giant family, and like any other giant family, it’s got some issues.  I mean, there’s dysfunctions, and there’s crazy people, and there’s whatever.  But it’s this amazingly talented community--writers and song writers and singers and artists and painters and photographers--I’ve never seen so much talent wrapped up in one group of people.

The other thing that happened that really forced me to want to look at doing the book was my very first trip with passengers, as a guide not a baggage boatman.  I got to be really good friends with one of the guys, a lawyer from <New York>, really cool guy.  And he asked me some way through the trip where did I go to college.  And I said I went to UC-Berkeley.  And it was so funny because he said, "UC-Berkeley?!  What are you doing here?!"  And I looked at him, I said, "David!  Shame on you!"  But it really hit me.  He didn’t mean anything by it, but he was just surprised.  And I realized that I think so many people who come down the river think, "Wow, these are really fun people, and they’re really talented at what they do," but they don’t necessarily think beyond that, to the fact that there’s some amazing talent, brilliance.  And I wanted the world to know about that, as well as to know about what life in this place is like, because it’s unlike any other river trip on the planet.  A lot of people have done river trips, and they’ve done a two- or a three- or even a five-day trip.  There’s nothing like doing a trip in <Grand Canyon>.  And I just really wanted to have a thumbnail sketch of both the life down here, and the people that help facilitate this life.  I mean, I still don’t believe that I necessarily belong here, or somehow fit in, but I’m so--I said this in something I wrote--I am prouder to belong to this community than of anything else in my life; prouder than my master’s degree, and yadda-dada, all that stuff.  I’m really, really proud to have belonged to this community, with all of its attendant issues.  (laughs)  That’s what the book was for me, and I’m really proud of the book, because it’s not about me, having put it together; it’s about all these incredibly fun stories that people are really enjoying reading.

STEIGER:  Well, you should be, because it’s a really good thing that you did.  It has had an impact, I think, that I’ve noticed.  Argh!

SADLER:  I’ve told you this before:  I read your story every river trip I do.  I read it every backpacking trip I do.  "Speed."

STEIGER:  How can you read that to....  That’s too long to be read aloud.

SADLER:  No.  It takes about an hour, and I always stop about halfway through and say, "How you guys doin’?"  And never have we broken it into two times, I don’t think.  I think everyone always says....

STEIGER:  Really?  It seems to me like that would work good as about a three-parter.

SADLER:  Either way.

STEIGER:  I tell it on the river, and I usually break it into about three chapters, because it’s just too long.

SADLER:  I’ve gotten to the point where I’ve almost memorized certain portions of it, and it never fails to make me--I always get a lump in my throat at the end.  You said it better than I ever could.  Well, they said it better than I ever could, in the end of that.

STEIGER:  I think it’s partly because we know those guys.

SADLER:  Well, I don’t know, it has moved countless guests on our trips, and I don’t think it’s the way I’m reading it, I think it’s the story.  People talk about it the next morning, and so it’s....

STEIGER:  Well, thank you for sayin’ that.  I mean, it was nice to get to--same thing, just kind of be the conduit or whatever.  The one that gets me... Cooper: here’s Kenton up there lookin’ at the slot, "It’s feeding through.  Did you see it?"

SADLER:  "Right there!"  Yeah.  (laughter)  I know.

STEIGER:  That’s just him to a "T."  I mean, I can just visualize that.  And so many other good moments, too.  I really liked....  Is it Becca Lawton who wrote the Whale thing?  Oh my God.

SADLER:  Isn’t that beautiful?  Well, that one gets me.  I read that to someone who’s never been down the river, only been to the canyon once, doesn’t know anything about boating.  I read it in a car on a drive down to <Phoenix>, and I looked over at the end of it, and there were tears streaming down his face, so I figure that’s a testament.

STEIGER:  Yeah, it is.  It was a really nice story, too.  And job well done.  Good for you.

SADLER:  Thanks.

STEIGER:  I wonder if there’s anything else that I should be asking you about that.

SADLER:  About the book?

STEIGER:  Yeah.

SADLER:  Oh, you asked about the heartaches associated with it.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I mean, doin’ such highs and lows.

SADLER:  You know, when I decided to republish it myself, and take that task on, it was really exciting, but terrifying, because all the front money is mine.  I’ve got to do all the publicizing.  And all the mistakes are mine.  I can’t blame anyone and say, "Oh, you know, I never got to see the blue lines," or whatever.  It’s all mine.  And that was really scary, and it was an amazing learning experience to do that.  Brad was just invaluable to me--Brad and Tom and Hazel over at Vishnu Press, because they’ve done this before, and Brad, you know, he’s meticulous, and he has researched everything from ink types to paper weights.  And so talking to some of these guys, I thought, "God, what am I taking on here?"  And I really thought long and hard about it.  The only reason I decided to do it myself was because--okay, I’ll admit it, I’m a control freak--but I wanted it to look the way I wanted it to look.  I had a vision.  I wanted the stories in that I wanted.  I didn’t want somebody to say, "Well, this story’s a little too much like this one, so we’re not gonna put it in."  I love the cover image, Gourley’s [phonetic] cover image.  And there’s no way that a standard publisher would have put that in.  They would have had some picture of a boat in a rapid on the river, and it would have looked like every other book.  So that was the reason I did it, but it was scary, because that’s a lot of money to put up.  I’ve got ninety-three boxes of books sitting around my house, becoming furniture, and really hoping that I can keep it moving.  So I think that’s kind of the low.  But overall I’m really pleased with the result, and really glad that I decided to resurrect it, because it was dead.  I mean, it was out of print and you really couldn’t find copies of it anymore, and it was pretty well dead.  And so I thought it shouldn’t be dead.

STEIGER:  No.  Job well done--both times, for sure.  Seriously.  Not to belabor the point, but it’s in every library, and people have taken it out all the time.

I’m trying to think of an intelligent question here.  You said you told your parents you were comin’ here to get your master’s, had you already got it, or you came here and you actually worked on your master’s?

SADLER:  Yeah.  I did a year and a half of grad school at Santa Cruz, and just realized I didn’t really want to be studying in <California>, I wanted to be out here.  And part of that was 'cause of the river, but part of it was 'cause I loved it out here.  And I’ve always loved the desert and the Colorado Plateau, from being a kid.  Because I was raised to believe that I would, of course, go to college and then grad school, that was just how I was raised, I came out here and decided to do something, quote, "legitimate," unquote, with my schooling.  And so I got a job at the museum.  I just always figured I’ll finish my master’s.  I don’t know if I’ll do anything with it, but I started it, I should finish it.  So about a year after I got here, I went back to NAU and finished it, and finished it in ’91.  And I’m glad I did.  I mean, I don’t think I never need to go on for a Ph.D., but I’m glad I have it, because it’s opened some doors for me into other things than--to allow me some variety in my life besides just boating.  Because after twenty years of this, I still really enjoy boating, but if it were all I was doing, I would be insane.  So I wouldn’t be a very good guide anymore.  And it’s because I’ve always done other things as well, whether it’s teaching or writing or being involved in museum work or whatever, that I think it’s added to my guiding, and my guiding has added to all of those things.  It’s like the guiding is real-world experience--not just with people, but it’s also real-world experience with the geology.  There isn’t any better place to be if you’re a geologist or sedimentary geologist, to spend every day down there, and that’s your office.  I’ve learned so much just by seeing things.  Sometimes you see 'em forty times, and then all of a sudden (snaps fingers) "Oh!  Wow!  That’s what they mean when they say this in the book!"  And it clicks.  And so it’s been good for me to be able to have both sides to life.

STEIGER:  Now, your master’s was what?

SADLER:  Earth sciences.

STEIGER:  And after the river book, you’ve published a couple of others.  I’m sorry that I don’t know your whole bibliography, but I know I’ve seen several books.

SADLER:  You haven’t been following my career?!  (laughter)

STEIGER:  I can barely remember my own, much less those of my friends!

SADLER:  Well, I’ve got the book Life in Stone.  That’s basically sort of the history of life on the Colorado Plateau, so I’ve got that out.  And then just a lot of journal articles and magazine articles and things like that.  I like natural history writing, because it never felt to me like I was going to be one of those people who was out there doing primary research, being the P.I. in an investigation, and scientific research, and teaching at a college, and getting tenure and all that.  I love research, but I like the kind of research that goes with writing to translate things for the public.  That’s always been my love.  I’m glad that I have the training that I have, because it allows me to talk to researchers and translate their research, translate their results, and then turn it into something that hopefully is useful to people who aren’t trained.  I don’t know, I think geology’s really interesting.  (laughs)  And I think when people say, "Oh, geology, that’s really boring," it’s probably because they had really boring teachers, or nobody ever helped them connect the dots.  I mean, especially if you’re spending all your time in a place like the <Grand Canyon>.  But everywhere, it’s really fun to know what this place used to look like before we got here, and what it might look like in the future, and just to know how mountains were formed, or oceans were formed, or things like that.  And you don’t have to do anything.  It’s not like you have to go make a living with it, but just to know it.  I think that’s kind of become more of my focus with the river trips now, is doing like I mentioned, these educational trips, because there’s nothing saying you can’t do that while you’re also going downstream and having a blast.  So you can have the water fights and the hikes and doing all that kind of stuff, and having a wonderful time, and just sitting and enjoying the scenery, but it’s also, I think it’s really wonderful for people to have a sense of the place that they’re traveling through as well--all aspects of it, the biology, and how the river works, and the Indians that used to be there, and the miners ... and the geology.  And that, to me--and I think I’ve seen from my guests as well, it just adds to the place, it makes the experience richer and deeper.  And now maybe they won’t remember the age of the <Tapeats>, or exactly what John Hance was doing there, but while they’re there, I think it enriches the experience for them.  I like doing that, and that’s what I do with the writing as well, hopefully--I hope.

And I’ve just finished the first draft of a new book which is about the beginning of the age of dinosaurs, petrified forest, and the Chinle Formation, the <Painted Desert>, all that stuff.  So it’s not to do with <Grand Canyon>, but all that stuff was at <Grand Canyon>--it’s just eroded away.

STEIGER:  Just above.

SADLER:  Yup, just above <Grand Canyon>.

STEIGER:  You want to tell me any other river story?  I want to hear one more river story, and then I’ll get off of that.

SADLER:  Oh man, I’m tryin’ to think.  Obviously, most river stories that people remember are the ones....

STEIGER:  All the calamities.

SADLER:  The calamities.  I’ve had a few of those.  I haven’t had probably as many as some people.

STEIGER:  I count the story that you just told about the blind guy.

SADLER:  Yeah, Dave.

STEIGER:  I mean, tell me a guiding story--either/or, whatever leaps to mind.

SADLER:  I’m thinking of one in particular that I think in a nutshell it maybe helps explain part of why I’ve stayed there all these years.  And so it’s not so much about the canyon, but I guess it’s about what the canyon can do to you.  It was, again, many years ago, and there was a doctor from <Montana> and his wife, on the trip.  They were just great folks--young couple, I really enjoyed them a lot.  Had a really good time with them.  But I remember around Day 10 something really specific happened, and I met Jay--his name was Jay--at the coffee table in the morning, and he was drinking his coffee, and I looked at him, and I said, "What happened to you?  You look absolutely amazing."  And he did.  I mean, it’s like I never noticed it before.  It’s not like when he came on the trip he was all tense and nasty or anything, but his whole face had just softened, relaxed, and his eyes were clear, just incredibly clear and blue.  And he just gave me this huge grin and kind of laughed and didn’t really describe it.  We went on down the river, and the last day he’s in the ducky, and you know that little rapid just above 220?  It’s it Trail Canyon or <Fall Canyon>?  Which one is it?  Trail Canyon.  That real swirly thing up against the wall.  And he was like, "What should I do here, Christa?!"  And I said, "Jay, you’ve been in that thing the whole trip.  I can’t help ya’, you’re on your own now!"  And he blasted on through.  Okay, trip’s over, we all go out to the trip dinner, everything’s great.  About two months later I received a letter from him, and he told me about just all these things that had happened to him in the last few years of getting his schooling and becoming a doctor, and the tenseness.  I don’t want to divulge any details, but basically he said that that trip had completely broken him open.  It was partly the canyon, but what he told me, he said that it all came together when at the very last day I told him, basically, "I’ve told you everything I can about duckying, and there’s not much [else] I can do.  Now you’re on your own."  And he just told me something--and again, I know this happens with every guide, it’s not unique to me--but he said, "You helped heal a healer."  I saved that letter, I still have it.  This is like twelve, thirteen, fourteen years later.  And again, I realize it wasn’t so much about me, but I was so honored to have been present at that transformation for him.  Because it’s lasted, we’ve stayed in touch and it’s lasted, and he’s a really happy person now.  I was just so incredibly honored to have been present in the room when that happened.  And whatever role I played in that, I just felt really grateful.  And I think there’s something about the simplicity of life down there, that allows people to get a glimpse of who they really are, or who they want to be.  And whether they stick with it or not isn’t our job to determine, but to be present when those things happen is really an incredible honor.  And I know that’s all touchy feely and everything, but that one stayed with me.  And most of my really great experiences down there have had more to do with the people.  Most of my catastrophic experiences have had to do with the river!  (laughs)  And obviously there’s the incredible sunset, or the amazing watching the peregrine nab a swallow right out of the air in front of your boat, or whatever.  But the experiences that have really stayed with me, that have moved me, have been with the people.  And then there’s the time I dumped Arthur Levitt [phonetic] in <Sockdolager>!  I don’t want to tell another catastrophe story, because we’ve all got plenty of those.

STEIGER:  But now you’ve got me goin’, because you’ve mentioned it like three times.

SADLER:  Oh, all right, I’ll tell it to you.  It’s just funny, because it was a trip with Arthur Levitt, the former head of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and he’s in his seventies, and he gets these guys together--it’s all guys--he gets 'em together, and they go with Julie Munger wherever they go.  They love her, and they trust her, and so she puts these trips together.  And I happened to be on this trip, and it was a motor trip with Tour West, but then we brought three paddleboats so that we could....

STEIGER:  I saw you down there!

SADLER:  Yeah.  Didn’t I see you at <Phantom>?

STEIGER:  No, it was at the end.  It was like at the take-out.  Or no, maybe it was.  Maybe that was another one.

SADLER:  The trip of carnage.  But in any case, at first we’re thinkin’, "This is gonna be great!  We got a motor rig so we can tow the paddleboats, and then we hit the rapids and we jump in the paddleboats and we go!"  Which sounds great, until you realize that really it’s the flat water that....

STEIGER:  Tunes these people up.

SADLER:  That tunes these guys up, exactly.  So we get to <Sockdolager>, and I’ve got a couple pretty strong guys, but most of these guys, they’re CEOs and heads of various organizations, and they’re not used to paddling.  Things go the way they want them to go.  And it’s midsummer, it’s a high-water trip, it’s probably 18,000 or 19,000 [cfs] at this point.  And Arthur has decided to be in my boat for the day, and I’m not thinking anything....  "<Sockdolager>?  C’mon, we’ve always done this rapid, it’s really fun."  Ohhhh, we hit that top wave, and the boat went up on its side, and it was a classic dump truck.

STEIGER:  Was that the left?

SADLER:  Left side.  Well, no, actually you know what happened is we ran the left wave perfectly, and then the right hit us from the right, I couldn’t get the boat turned in time.  And we went up, and I almost had it, and then Arthur comes barreling into me, and we all go flying out of the boat.  The boat executes a perfect run, and I’m swimming through <Sockdolager> basically from the top, thinking, "I just killed Arthur Levitt!"  And the irony at the end was Arthur actually handled it really well, and he talked to the group about the lessons that he learned about being in control and giving in and just allowing what was going to happen, to happen.  And it was impressive.  Oh! that was so discouraging!  It was so discouraging.  Of all the people....  I mean, you don’t want to dump anyone, but there was just something about this [unclear 109:31].

STEIGER:  It always seems like it’s the last ones that you want....

SADLER:  ... to go, that end up going.

STEIGER:  On any trip.  You look at a group, and it’s always like you think, "Oh...."  You get to where--well, certainly in the dories....  I mean, a lot of times you say, "Okay, now there’s a boat that could go over."  (laughter)  Just because of whatever.  I mean, when you’re runnin’ right in <Lava> or whatever the heck.

SADLER:  That was truly carnage, because we went down the next day and flipped about the third wave in <Granite>.  And after that, it was a little bit questionable about whether people would get back in my paddleboat.  And we got to <Lava>, and we only had two paddleboats, Abby and Julie.  And Julie asked if I would go in Abigail’s boat, because it was her first time running a paddleboat through <Lava>, and we went into the ledge hole!  (STEIGER:  Oh no!)  So it was a really big trip.  And I just remember dropping into the ledge hole, and instead of being terrified, which I would have been if it’d been the first thing that happened that trip, my thought was just, "(sigh) Here we go again."

STEIGER:  And which did you then..?

SADLER:  Oh, yeah, we flipped.  Yeah.  So that was kind of a big trip.  That was the trip in which I learned that paddleboats are not always loads of fun.

STEIGER:  So you were runnin’ left, huh?  Didn’t quite get in there.

SADLER:  Yeah, and I warned her about it too.  We were scouting and I said, "Abby, I’ve been there.  I made this big mistake.  If you pull too far out, you’re not gonna get back in. just ride the eddy line.  Watch it, watch it, watch it."

STEIGER:  Start left, stay left.

SADLER:  Start left and stay left.  And we get out there, and you know how you’re not supposed to run someone else’s boat.

STEIGER:  You can’t.

SADLER:  Right, you can’t.  So she’s a little far out.  I’m like, "Okay, I’m gonna give her like fifteen seconds," and she just never got it.  And finally she calls a forward paddle, and I said, "Left, Abby!  Left!  Left!" and she saw it, but it was way too late by that time.  Oh man.  So anyway....  Not that great a story, but I really haven’t had that many carnage stories.  Either that, or I’ve blocked them out, which is entirely possible.

STEIGER:  There’s carnages, and then there’s just adventures, there’s epics, all those kinds of things.

SADLER:  I think I’ve had more epic adventures, really, than carnage.  We’ve never been washed away by a flash flood.  We had injuries and evacuations, but nothing that was so horrifying that it was [unclear 112:18] broken legs, broken arms, but yeah, I’ve been really lucky in that way.  I’m very grateful, because....  The adventure is great--carnage gets a little....

STEIGER:  I remember talking to Steve Bledsoe, and here’s a guy who ran how many trips?

SADLER:  Four hundred, or something.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And he never had a single evacuation.  Maybe I’m wrong on that, maybe I just got confused.  No, because it seems like....  No, I think he said that.  Isn’t that amazing?  I mean, what would be the odds of that--I don’t know.  Hard to say.

SADLER:  Wow.

STEIGER:  They had one guy that they should have evacuated, I think.

SADLER:  Those are always fun, too.  Monitoring.  You know, honestly, some of my favorite times in that canyon, besides some of the things that have happened with people, have been on hikes.  And one of the things I love the best about the river is that it’s this great vehicle to get you to places that you can’t get to otherwise--the places we get to explore by hiking.  And it’s so much fun!  I love doing bizarre, weird hikes, if I can, and trying to convince people to go on them.  Even if I know a million people have done the hike before me, if I’ve never done it before, it still feels like an incredible adventure, and I love that.

STEIGER:  Yeah, you were the one that told me--what’s the name of that canyon, 204½ ?  What is that, <Spring Canyon>?

SADLER:  Oh, <Spring Canyon>.  Yeah, 204 or 204½ .  That’s such a beautiful....  Snake laboratory, first twenty minutes of bushwhacking, looking for rattlesnakes.  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Someday, some winter trip maybe.

SADLER:  You’ve never done it?

STEIGER:  No.  I mean, a quarter mile up, but no further than that.

SADLER:  It takes about forty-five minutes to an hour to get up to the narrows, but it’s the most glorious narrows, it’s just incredible.  I probably shouldn’t put this in, but I got to go on a trip, my trip this year....

STEIGER:  Well, if we shouldn’t....

SADLER:  A place I’ve wanted to go for twenty years.  I’ll say that.

STEIGER:  Good recovery there.

SADLER:  It’s not like it’s not on maps or anything, but it’s definitely an all-day.  It was a twelve-hour hike, over boulders.

STEIGER:  So you’re doing as many hiking guiding trips as you are river trips these days, huh?

SADLER:  More, really.  Well, I mean more than river trips in <Grand Canyon>.  I’m still working in <Alaska> and doing some <San Juan> trips and things like that.  Yeah, in <Grand Canyon> I’m doing actually more hiking than river trips.

STEIGER:  How do those compare?  Whole different deal, isn’t it?

SADLER:  Yeah, it’s a completely different deal.  I miss the river.  I miss just the presence of the river and being on the river, because that’s so wonderful.  Just working with the oars and being on the water.  But I really enjoy the hiking trips because I love having everything I need in my backpack.  That’s all I need.  I mean, sometimes I’ve got so much crap on a river trip I can’t find it!  I’ll find something at the take-out and think, "Where was that the whole trip?!"  And so I love having everything I need in a backpack.  Plus, I’m not cooking for anyone.  I’m guiding, I’m talking about geology and history and archaeology, and everyone’s doing their own food.  And so people are under their own power, obviously.  They’re walking as well, I’m not carrying their packs for them.  So it’s a real different experience.  For lack of a better word, we’re more equals.  It’s not better or worse, it’s just a different experience.  Honestly, I think you have an even better sense of the canyon when you walk through it, because in ten days you may only walk through fifty miles of it, but you’ve felt it:  you’ve bled in it, and blistered in it.

STEIGER:  I agree.  I think it rearranges your depth perception.  Only hiking can do that.  You can go through in a boat and look up at the walls, but you don’t quite get how big this place is that you’re actually in, any other way.

SADLER:  Yeah.  It’s really funny, you pull out the map after you’ve been hiking all day, and everyone’s tired and exhausted, and they’ve had dinner and they’re ready to go to bed, and you pull out the map and you point out the half inch that you just walked.  And it’s always really funny.  It’s kind of sad, in a way, but it’s also just this wonderful sense of, "Wow, I’m walking in this place, and really, truly living in this place."  I think people really appreciate that.

	But I still do the river trips elsewhere also.  I mean, <Alaska> is....  The rivers in <Alaska> entered my life about fourteen years ago, and it’s an incredible complement to <Grand Canyon>.  I can’t give that place up either.  I flee the heat in summer and go up there and work Alsek and Tatshenshini [phonetic].  I don’t think I ever really understood what a true wilderness is until I started working up there.  As president of GCRG, there was the whole wilderness fight, and motors, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So I thought I had this sense of, "Okay, here’s what a wilderness is."  And yeah, a bunch of the <Grand Canyon> is wilderness, and the river corridor isn’t.  That’s all legal crap.  A wilderness is a place where--to me, and my experience in <Alaska>, yeah, there’s helicopters and planes that fly over, and we use a helicopter to do our portage, but that doesn’t destroy the wilderness character of it for me.  So it really isn’t about motors for me, but it’s about number of people, and it’s about an intact ecosystem.  And both of those things for me make the river corridor in <Grand Canyon> not wilderness, never will be.  And we’d have to get rid of 95 percent of the people that go down that river, and bring back wolves and all kinds of creatures that are gone.  And that to me is what I learned in <Alaska>, is that you go down the Alsek River and you may never see another group, so you and your ten or twelve or thirteen other people, that’s it.  And that’s it for hundreds of miles.  And there are bears, and there are wolves, and there are things much higher on the food chain than you are.  And for me, that’s what kind of reminded me of what a wilderness is.  And I know the legal definition might be something different.  So I feel really lucky to be able to spend some time there and experience that and still be able to have that as part of my life.  It’s not easy, though.  <Grand Canyon> is a much more relaxed trip.  You don’t have to wear tons of clothing, and if the weather gets bad, it probably won’t be bad for very long.  So it’s really different.  You never question whether you’re alive in <Alaska>.  Everything around you is bigger than you are, and there’s rock falls, and glaciers calving, and bears wandering into camp, and the northern lights.

STEIGER:  All that stuff.

SADLER:  All that stuff, yeah.  It’s a really different world.  It’s all green and blue and white up there.  And then down here it’s all brown and pink and gold.  Kind of a neat contrast.

STEIGER:  Well, you got a master plan now where your guiding’s concerned?

SADLER:  (laughs)  Oh, God, the question.  Obviously, I still absolutely love what I do, and I would love to continue to do a few trips a year--not a few in <Grand Canyon>, maybe one or two in <Grand Canyon>, and then one or two somewhere else.  What I’m finding as I am at this point in my guiding career is that I want to give back a little bit more than I think I’ve been doing.  And I know that as a guide you’re giving to people, you’re providing a service, but I think that I’m finding that I....  I’ve been incredibly lucky to live my life exactly the way I’ve wanted to, up until this point.  And there are a lot of people who haven’t had those opportunities in their lives--whether it’s little kids or people in other countries.  And I think that I want to go and try and find a way to use some of the skills that I’ve learned here--whether it’s organizational skills or teaching skills or whatever--and do that.  And so I’m looking at some different opportunities.

	I want to keep writing, because I love writing, but you can’t make a living writing--unless you’re Stephen King or somebody like that.

STEIGER:  It’s hard.

SADLER:  So I definitely want to keep writing, and keep trying to translate as much of the natural world as I can for the public.  This is hard, because I have some ideas, but I don’t want to say them, because if I say them, then they’re on tape.

STEIGER:  I understand.  Sometimes some of the important things, it’s better--if you have that feeling, it’s better not to.  You don’t want to jinx 'em or whatever.

SADLER:  I feel like I was given an awful lot of gifts in this world.  I have a good education and a good mind, and I’m still strong and energetic.  I need the wilderness for my own soul, for my heart.  I love being in these places and watching, helping facilitate other people’s experience.  I truly believe that people need to be in these places for some portion of their life, because that reminds us of our connection to the rest of the planet.  But I guess I just want to see if I can take some of these advantages that I’ve had, and see if there’s a way that I could work with people who haven’t had as many advantages.  And so I’m not exactly sure what form that’s gonna take right now, but maybe teaching, maybe....

I mean, if you promise not to put this in the actual printed thing....  I don’t mind it on tape, because that’s not a problem--it’s the printed thing.  I’ve applied for a position with Doctors Without Borders, as a logistical ... basically the person who helps the project come together.  So I’m not the medical person, but the person who’s dealing with transportation and supplies and that kind of stuff.  I’ve made it through several rounds, and the next step is to go to <New York> and go to their orientation, and then if we still both like each other, my name goes in the pool for a job.  I may never get a job, because they may always be asking for a mid fifties guy who speaks French, but I might get a job with them.  So something like that is of interest to me.

STEIGER:  Good for you.

SADLER:  But, you know, that’s also a six-month commitment, and right now I’m not sure I want to go away for six months.  And then I think about it, and it’s like, "Well, why not?"

STEIGER:  I think it would depend on where.

SADLER:  Yeah.  I mean, they send people to <Somalia> and all kinds of really interesting places.  They asked me in the application, "Would you go to someplace that was at war?"  Well, you know, I guess I would.  I would assume maybe you guys would maybe give us some training on how to deal with that.  I would assume that if you’re sending us there, we’re needed.  But I have learned some skills other than just rowing a boat and cooking meals, working on the river--and especially leading trips.  I’ve always been pretty organized, but you learn a lot about organization and sort of multi-tasking in the sense of thinking, "Okay, let’s see, we’re going down here, and these guys are ahead of us, these guys are behind us," dah, dah, dah.  "Okay, this person’s not having too much fun.  What hike can we do that’ll work with this group.  And then we’ve got the big hikers who want to do this."  You know, you’re always kind of thinking about a lot of things at once.  It’s not just "(happy go lucky) Well, I’ll go downstream, and we’ll stop."  I think the sort of multi-tasking and organizational skills that I’ve learned on the river--and also just dealing with issues, whether they’re personal issues between passengers and guides, or guides and guides, or calamities, flipped boats or injuries or evacuations or whatever, I’m hoping that those skills will serve me in some way, shape, or form.

	I imagine, and this you can say, I don’t think I will ever just do one thing in my life.  I can’t imagine.  I’m interested in too many different things.  I like doing too many different things, and I just imagine that my life will continue to have a lot of different aspects to it, and guiding will always be one of them--just at a reduced level.  I love it.  What other job in the world can you do what you do when you’re a guide?

STEIGER:  Just to get paid to go down there and be on a boat.

SADLER:  Yeah.  And the people.

STEIGER:  And then meet all these nice people.

SADLER:  You’re meeting people in the absolute best circumstances.  I mean, it’s wonderful.  That may be a selfish thing, but you’re meeting all these people, and everybody that you meet is in one way, shape, or form, wide open to the experience.  And some take a little more time than others, but they came there because they wanted to, for the most part--except for the occasional wife.

STEIGER:  Or husband.

SADLER:  Wife or husband, or brother, sister, whatever.

STEIGER:  Who has to pay for it all!

SADLER:  Yeah, exactly.  But for the most part, they’re there because they want to [be], and they want to experience this place, and they want to see it, and you get to be there, you get to be present in the room.  And that’s an incredible honor, it’s an incredible gift.  I hope I never have to give that up, because as much as I hope I’ve imparted or facilitated or taught, I’ve learned ten times that much, a hundred times that much:  from the folks, from the river, from the other guides, from the landscape.  How could I give that up?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I know that feeling.

SADLER:  So I don’t know.  Pretty vague about the future of my life, but like I said, the only thing, up until the time it hit me and ever since, the only thing that has ever been as clear to me as a thunderbolt out of the blue was I want to be there.  Nothing else has ever been so clear.

STEIGER:  <Grand Canyon>.

SADLER:  Yup.

STEIGER:  Three-boat Hatch motor trip.

SADLER:  Yeah.  I wish something else would hit me like that.  (aside about recording equipment)  I don’t know if anything ever will, though, and that’s the thing that you have to....  You know, when you get ready to either leave the river or cut way back on it, I think every guide--or many guides--have had this problem:  How do you follow that up?  How do you follow up that job?  I think a lot of us wait for something to hit us, like the river did.  And maybe if we’re lucky, it’s a partner or a kid or maybe we find another job, but I think a lot of people never do.  And I think that’s one thing that I’m learning to be okay with, that my life can be wonderful, even if nothing ever hits me like the river did, again.  That I can still have jobs that I love, and people that I love, and a wonderful, fulfilling, incredible, amazing life.  But nothing may ever, ever hit me again like that river did--and does still.  That’s a tough lesson to learn, but I don’t know, I guess it’s part of growing up.

STEIGER:  Boy, good for you for doing this other thing.  If that comes through, that is gonna be huge.

SADLER:  Yeah.  Well, the way I understand it, from the interview that I had with the woman in <San Francisco>, is that pretty much when you make it to this stage where they’re flying you out to <New York> for the orientation, you’re in, unless you’re so horrifyingly awful at the....  You know, they have a lot of talks and things, but you do a lot of case studies and problem solving, and it’s just three days of "okay, this is what we’re all about."  And unless you’re just so miserably awful at it, you’re pretty much in by this time.  Or if you decide, "Boy, this is just not for me."  So I don’t know.

STEIGER:  I know what you mean.  I’ve had that epiphany too about <Grand Canyon>.  "Uh-oh, this might be as good as it ever gets!"  Or it might have already been as good as it’s gonna get!

SADLER:  I’ve read and heard a lot of guides compare it to this:  it is like the love that you had when you were young.  You know, you fell in love with that man, that woman, that you still think of as "that was The One," but it’s not the one I ended up with, and the one that I’m with now is wonderful, and this is who I’m supposed to be with.  But there was that first love, or whatever.  And obviously it’s not quite that simple, but in a way it is, and you give you heart to the canyon.  Certainly you give your body to it! and you’re blood, and your sweat, and all that.  But you give your heart to the canyon, and in some ways to the people that you take down there.  Every trip you’re giving them a little bit of yourself.  I never learned how to just give 30 percent or 60 percent or 75 percent.  My whole career in <Grand Canyon> people were always telling me, "Christa! You go so all out!"  And I’ve never ever known how not to do that.  I don’t know how to back away and say, "I’m not gonna give 100 percent."  And now the trick is to just take that and say that I can do that anywhere else, too.  I can do that with whatever I do elsewhere.

STEIGER:  Well, I think the good news about your current plan is just that it seems like you really do get out of these things what you put into 'em, more times than not--not always, but more often than not.

	What intelligent questions have I forgotten to ask you?

SADLER:  (laughs)  Well, thank God you didn’t ask me about [unclear] my relationships!  (laughter)

STEIGER:  Thought I’d stay away from that!  Too close....

SADLER:  That wouldn’t have been a very intelligent question.  It would be a logical one, but not intelligent.

STEIGER:  I remember doing this trip with you, as a matter of fact, and it was like....  It was you and Dr. Petochnik [phonetic], me and Elena, and I think it was Kenton and Diane, right after he’d broken up with Denise.  We were all on this crew, and it was just like everybody was....  I mean, it was just like the most pathetic....  (laughter)

SADLER:  Oh my God, yeah.

STEIGER:  But let’s don’t even....  I’m gonna cut that out of there.  

SADLER:  No, it’s funny.

STEIGER:  I don’t want to name any names.

SADLER:  I will admit to having been very, very, very immature in my early days on the river.  And I guess it’s kind of a natural thing, but there are some things I would have done differently.  And then there are a lot that I just knew had to happen that way.

STEIGER:  Well, I think there’s a lot of things that have gone on in the community that were partly a function of the times, as well as that setting.  I mean just the values and things that were going on at different times.  God, it was fun while it lasted, though, wasn’t it?!

SADLER:  You always knew inside, though, that somehow it wasn’t really gonna last.  There’s no way that that could be sustained.  But I think what’s been really interesting for me is the....  I’ve been there twenty-three years now, which is not by any means--I still feel like a newcomer in some ways.  But then I look around, and then seeing these young kids--they’re the age that I was when I started, in their early twenties, mid twenties.  And it’s hard for me to think of myself as the elder stateswoman, or the hag, or whatever terms we’ve come up with for older boatmen/boatwomen.  I can’t think of myself that way, but then I look around like, "Oh yeah, I’m not twenty-two anymore.  But I thought I just was!"  You know?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  Boy, that went fast!

SADLER:  What was I doing all that....  Oh, that’s right, I was here!  I’ve spent half my life on that river.  I just turned forty-eight, and I started when I was twenty-three.  I’ve spent half my life on that river.  And every time I stop and say, "Oh, why can’t I figure out what I’m going to do with myself when I grow up?" it just recently hit me, I’ve had a career!  It’s not that I’ve been hangin’ out, waiting for something to come along.  I’ve had an amazing career--and not just boating, but teaching and writing and all that.  But the boating, I’ve spent twenty-five years as a boatman.  People get gold watches for less than that, but certainly that qualifies as a very respectable career.  When I started remembering that, and thinking of it in those terms, it was kind of a nice feeling, realizing that I have given an awful lot of my heart and time and effort and energy, and it’s been an amazing career.  And I hope it’s not over, but it’s just ... half my life!

STEIGER:  I just finished doing this video for my buddy Jim Arwood [phonetic], who’s now the head of the Arizona Department of Energy, and I remember when he started working for the state twenty years ago--and he didn’t really want to be the head; first he was in the Solar Energy Department and stuff--but it’s like he got this opportunity to do this job, and he did it because he needed to go up in his pay grade, because in two more years he can get out with his pension.  And now, by taking this job--and this guy’s my age, you know--no, he’s about ten years older, if that--no not ten years older--he’s gonna get out, and his pension will be like $36,000 a year.  And he’s gonna keep workin’ (chuckles), but it’s like he’s done the math on it, and he can’t afford not to get that pension and then have another job.

SADLER:  I’ve never made $36,000 in my entire life!

STEIGER:  I’m like, "Dude!"  (laughter)

SADLER:  That’s really different.

STEIGER:  It’s like, "Oh my God!"  It’s funny to me, because I used to....  I mean, he was always a friend, but I used to think, "Oh, God, I could never do that.  I could never go down there and run around <Phoenix> in the halls of government and do that shit."

SADLER:  I tried it.  Not <Phoenix>, but....  I tried a desk job for about six months.

STEIGER:  Well, the state.  But then, here it is, that was a fast twenty years, and then boom! the guy’s home free.

SADLER:  Yeah.

STEIGER:  Or whatever.  I mean, I guess it depends how you....

SADLER:  ... how you define "home free."

STEIGER:  Yeah, and how you define a quality life.

SADLER:  Well, and it’s like people--there’s lots of different ways to chose to live your life, or to live your life even if you don’t necessarily make a choice.  What was it Joseph Campbell said?  He said, "Follow your bliss."  I think that that’s what most boatmen--certainly me, that’s what I’ve done.

STEIGER:  That’s what we’re tryin’ to do.

SADLER:  I’ve followed my bliss, and it doesn’t come with a huge paycheck usually.  I wouldn’t have traded this for anything.  Even if I never set foot on that river again, it flows inside me.  And all the people I’ve been with on that river, there’s a little bit of them inside of me.  I wouldn’t trade that for anything.

	The one other thing I wanted to say that the river gave me, which was totally unexpected....  I mean, I’ve always loved to sing, but the river gave me music, because I never ever liked to sing in front of people, and I would just sing to the radio in the car or whatever.  But that canyon and that river gave me that.  That’s been an incredible gift.  I love singing.  And it’s not that I want to do it in front of people--they just happen to be there.  But I’m singing in the canyon, I’m singing for myself, for the canyon--whatever.  But I’m singing there, and that’s something I’ll always have.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  I know when it’s real, it always brings something to the party, too.  It’s real nice when people play down there.

SADLER:  Yeah.  I wish I had the tenacity to learn how to play guitar.  At least I’ve got the singing.  At least I’ve got that!  I know, I love it when people play down there.  It’s so nice.

STEIGER:  How did your guitar do when it popped up out of the Ticaboo?

SADLER:  Actually, it was fine, because it was in the dry bag.  I was worried that it had gotten smashed or something, but it just floated on by, and they fished it out of the water.  Yeah, it was....  That was probably the single worst thing that’s ever happened to me on the river.  Truly.  Because I just felt so....  It wasn’t even, "Oh my gosh, I just did a really stupid thing, and everybody must think I’m a geek."  It was, "I killed my boat!"

STEIGER:  The boat was underwater.

SADLER:  I’ve popped boats before, and ripped holes in tubes, and ripped floors.  It’s not the same.  I mean, rafts are just not the same.  That dory, she was my little girl.  Didn’t matter that everyone else had rowed her too--she was my little girl!  It was just awful.

STEIGER:  Well, for a while there, I felt like I was married to the Black Mesa, because I had hit more rocks in her than anybody I knew, by far!  And in more places.  You and the Tikaboo, that’s the luck of the draw, though.  Nowadays we’re walkin’ people around when we run it low, and we just run empty.  Of course the rapid’s changed a little bit.

SADLER:  Well now I would know what to do.  I’m better about my angles.

STEIGER:  You just happened to get--you were just in the wrong place at the wrong time.

SADLER:  I changed my angle, and I shouldn’t have.  If I’d stayed with the angle I had, I would have slid right by that thing.

STEIGER:  Dories are just so brutal.  This last GCE trip I did, this guy launched with us--a private trip--and he drives up, he’s from <Chino Valley>, a cabinetmaker.  He drives up with this brand new dory and puts it in the water, and he’s telling us this is the first time this boat’s ever been in the water.  He’s never rowed one before, he wants to go down the river.  And he was interested in any pointers we could give him.  So we all talked to him and told him different things.  (laughs)

SADLER:  This was a private trip?

STEIGER:  Yeah.  And so the guy ended up going down there and crashed early on, crashed in <Badger> and used up most of his repair stuff.  So we saw him again at Little Colorado and gave him some stuff.  And then we heard that he had gone down and smacked the wall in <Crystal>, goin’ left, and just totally splayed open his entire bow, poor guy.  And he was sittin’ there--I heard the story from a couple different places--he’s sittin’ there thinkin’ he’s gonna just abandon the boat.  Matt Fahey [phonetic] was on a motor trip....  I shouldn’t be taping this, but oh well.

SADLER:  You can....

STEIGER:  Well, I can’t, 'cause I’ll just run out the tape.  But anyway, Matt Fahey was on a motor trip and he was tellin’ him, "Nah, you can fix it.  Fix it and go on out."  And he did.  But that same day I’d heard later that there was an OARS trip that ran in front of these guys.  I don’t think that they were even necessarily there at the same exact time, but they were there, and shit, Scotty and Ghigliari [phonetic] both smacked the wall goin’ left, same place.  There’s a place where you go, if you run it when it’s a little too high....  I don’t know if you’ve ever been down there.  I have.

SADLER:  Oh yeah.  Oh yeah.  I haven’t hit the wall, but I’ve come awfully close.

STEIGER:  I’ve hit it before--luckily, in a rubber boat.  I’ve hit it in a motorboat, I’ve hit it in a rubber rowin’ boat.

SADLER:  It’s scary.

STEIGER:  Yeah.  You get down there, and it’s a little too big, and it’s gonna happen.  But the difference is, in a rubber boat you go, "Oops!"

SADLER:  "Boing."

STEIGER:  Or flip.

SADLER:  Hopefully you don’t flip, but yeah, even if you do, at least you’re swimming down the left side, instead of through the rock island at that point.  And I don’t think I’m a good-enough boatman anymore to row a dory.  Honestly.  I mean, I don’t think I am, because I have gotten too used to reading for rafts.  For a while there, I was too used to reading for self-bailers, because that’s what Can-Ex used, and that’s even worse.  "Oh, I can’t go through anything!" because you don’t have to bail it out.  At least with Tour West we’re using bucket boats, so I have to be a little more cautious.  But I’m not a good-enough boatman to row a dory anymore.

STEIGER:  I don’t think... "good enough" is not the....

SADLER:  I’m not practiced at reading for a dory.

STEIGER:  I think they’re just different.  You have to be more careful, you have to be anal, you have to be aware of these other things, but I don’t think it’s good or bad.

SADLER:  I guess I didn’t mean that.  I just remember my first trip with the Dories.  It might have been my first trip rowing a baggage boat for the Dories, so my fourth trip.  And we get to Badger, and they’re scouting it, and I’m over there, and I look at it, and I’ve got my run all picked out.  And then I walk over to where they’re standing, and the boatmen are talking about a run in a very different place, several feet away from where I was gonna be.  And I was like, "Uh-oh, oh no, did I pick the wrong run?"  I said, "Well, I was gonna go there.  Is that okay?"  And I think it was Kenton, actually, and he said, "Oh that’s fine for you.  But you see that little ol’ wave right down there?  There’s a rock there that we’ll hit if we go through that."  And I’m lookin’ and goin’, "There is?!"  I’m just not used to scouting for dories anymore, and I may have learned it for a while, but I’m not used to thinking about....  I don’t think I’d have a problem with the angles and things, but it’s where can I put the boat?  Especially with the water not as high as I’m used to seeing it.

STEIGER:  I think that’s one of 'em, and then just what’s the water doin’ on my hull?  That’s the thing you just have to so ruthlessly keep track of.  That determines should I keep pushin’ and keep pointin’, or do I give up and....

SADLER:  Turn and pull.

STEIGER:  Well, or just....  Yeah, whether you’re turnin’ and pullin’ or not, or are you goin’ this way, this way, all that stuff.

SADLER:  Yeah.  I’d love to....  I saw Ote a couple years ago at <Shinumo>, and we were on the GCFI trip, I think.  I saw her and pulled in, "Hey, how you doing?"  Big hug.  She said, "You need to come work with us again!  We need more women!  Come row a dory!"  I’m like, "Thanks, Ote, but I don’t think so."  I’m scared of those little boats.  I mean, they’re so beautiful.  I love seeing them on the river, but it’s just not....  I want to enjoy my trips.  I do so few now, that I want to just basically be able to go, "Eh! I can relax."

STEIGER:  I’ve got to admit, there’s times when we’ll get to certain places and I’ll be there on a dory trip goin’, "Why the fuck am I here in a dory again?!"  (laughter)  Like <Crystal>, there’s a certain tighty-righty stage where it’s too big to go left, you gotta go right.  It’s like, "Aw shit."

SADLER:  And <Crystal> has really changed.  Ugh!

STEIGER:  And the last time I did an OARS trip, I got on that boat, and it was like, "God, this is so practical!"  (laughter)  I can park anywhere.  We don’t have to scout.

SADLER:  And you don’t have to be constantly yippin’ at your people, "Could you move a couple inches to the left?  Okay, now don’t move!"

STEIGER:  "Get comfortable, but...."

SADLER:  Yeah, "But don’t move.  Don’t relax."

STEIGER:  "About a half inch back to the right!"  Yeah.  All that.

SADLER:  I know.  Well, see, it’s good though, you’re keeping up all your skills.

STEIGER:  I wouldn’t say all of 'em.  I’m just clingin’ on by my fingernails, tryin’ to stay skilled enough that I can just hide out down there, and escape the miserable life up here that I’ve wrought for myself.

SADLER:  Right!  Miserable life!  What are you workin’ on these days?  Are you mostly doing oral history stuff, or are you doing any films?

STEIGER:  Long story.  I need to turn off [the recorder].  I let this run because there was something where I thought we were going, and I forgot what I was thinkin’.

SADLER:  I don’t know.  My future?  My....  (laughs)

STEIGER:  You’re talkin’ about bein’ the old-timer, I’m sittin’ here, now I’m workin’ with the children of people I used to work with.  That’s when you know you’re gettin’ old.  You look around and it’s like, "Yeah, I used to work with your dad, your mom."

SADLER:  Yeah, I can imagine.  Well gosh, Emily and Ann Marie....

STEIGER:  Yeah, the whole new generation.

SADLER:  The Dale kids.  Wow.

STEIGER:  Yeah, all that.  Well, that’s nice.

SADLER:  It’s cool.  It is one of the neat things.  One of the things that I kind of noticed with some of the folks that I was starting to work with is that--some of the newer people--is that because they came in with a certain amount of experience on other rivers, they kind of came in just goin’, "Hey, I know everything there is to know about guiding, and you don’t need to tell me anything."  Not that I’m out there trying to pound anything into them, but there’s something really different about doing trips in <Grand Canyon>--not just for the passengers, but as a guide too.  And something that....  I was trained when I started.  Whatever attitude I had, I was trained, and some of the guys were not so nice about it, and some of them were great about it.  But I learned so much from the people that I was working with, the old-timers then.  And one of the things that I think I learned, although maybe I didn’t know I was learning it, is a little bit about working as a crew with people for two weeks.  When you come from dailies or overnights or even three- and four-day trips, you don’t necessarily have to hone your skills at working as a team, and all that that means.  It’s not all about the passengers.  It is in the sense that we’re guides and that’s what we’re there for, but if we aren’t working together well as a crew, they’re gonna know it, and it’s going to affect their experience.  So the thing that I really miss or was noticing a kind of a lack of, was just a lack of kind of training in some ways.  The boating skills are fine, and cooking skills are fine, and things like that, but I was noticing kind of a lack of an ability to work as a group, as a really good cohesive team, crew, whatever you want to call it.  And I suppose that that’s just something that happens with every new generation, and it just has to happen.  But I just remember....  It doesn’t have to be mean, like some people are to their baggage boatmen, but I just remember being trained.  It’s like, "Hey, this is how things are done, this is how it works."  And you can take what you want from that, and leave what you don’t want.  I think that it’s really important for the generations to pass things on to the next generations.  I’m really grateful for what I learned, even though it wasn’t always an easy lesson.  You taught me a lot, and a lot of people taught me.  And it’s kind of neat to see the continuum down the line.

STEIGER:  Yeah, I know what you mean.  There’s kind of an old school mentality about a lot of little things that go into it, where you just....  You move around, especially if you’re changing companies and moving here and there, and some of those things take a while to get across, if somebody doesn’t feel like it’s their place to spell it out.  But you’ve got to ask.  If you’re a youngster, you’ve gotta say, "Hey..." anymore, I think.

SADLER:  Well, one of the most important things that somebody ever taught me, and he taught it to me in the meanest possible way--I mean, it was absolutely brutal, and it crushed me, but I’ve remembered it, and I think it’s really valuable--is basically what he said was, "You’ve gotta keep your eyes open.  You don’t just do what your crew job is for that night, or whatever.  You’ve gotta keep your eyes open and see what needs doing--all around you.  And just do it, if it needs doing.  Screw it if it’s not your job.  It doesn’t matter, do it!  That’s how things work."  And I just remember that, and although I think he could have probably expressed it in a slightly kinder way, it was a really important lesson.  I like the combination of the old-timers and the newcomers and all that.  I think that’s really cool.  I just hope that we can continue this really cool sort of, I don’t know, this family that we’ve got going--all of us.

STEIGER:  I’ve got a new theory.

SADLER:  What’s that?

STEIGER:  More training trips.  Never mind the GTS, just more company training trips.

SADLER:  More company training trips, yeah.  I don’t know if they’re doing too many of them anymore.

STEIGER:  Well, we’re not doin’ enough of 'em!  That’s what I think.  I gotta turn this thing off.  What do you think, what are we forgetting?

SADLER:  I don’t know.  I’m just yappin’ at this point.

STEIGER:  Me too.

SADLER:  We’re fine.

