Call number: NAU.OH.74.2.5

Collection name: James Biglin

Narrators: Betty Tsosie, Ben Tsosie, Bennie Keams, and Floyd Skacy.

Interviewed by Frank Jensen

Interviews conducted in Navajo and English

Date of interview: 1974

Place of interview: <Tuba City Arizona>

Translated and transcribed by Bahe Katenay 2

Tape 74.2.5

[Note: This interview was conducted in the Dineh (Navajo) language, and unless otherwise noted. These are either both transcription and translations.]

[BEGIN BETTY TSOSIE INTERVIEW]

Interviewer: Out here, I have arrived at Ben Tsosie’s home. This is I making the ‘interview,’ Frank Jensen. He will make-it onto it [record] in whatever way he wishes, and I did not guide him to state it in such a way. Those of you who will hear this will act upon it according his words. He does have it neat out here where he resides. There it is, Ben Tso.

BETTY TSOSIE: [In English and is a transcription] This is Betty Tsosie being interviewed by Frank Jensen. I like to answer some questions which is being asked. And this is my own opinion towards school. Number One: ‘What in the Navajo way of life do you think is most important for your children to know?’

I think she should learn to speak Navajo and know her clans, and her relatives –in Navajo way. She should also know her cultures, her religion and her heritage. I know a lot of us don’t want this to be forgotten.

Number two: ‘How is the Navajo way of life different from the Anglo way of life?’ Our way of living and life is different in every way. Our culture, religions, heritage, and our language are different. Most important, our living doesn’t meet the standard of life in Anglo

Number three: ‘Here is a picture of a school. Can you think of any change that have occurred in the school system in the past ten years?’ Yes, the school have expand in building more new buildings for students to participate in different subject, activities and also in educational field system. More new equipments are being put in classroom for children’s learning ability.

Number four: ‘Here is a picture of a… Tell me about life in a hogan?’ I been raised in a hogan, and I know there is happiness and closeness among sisters and brothers, and also mother and father.

Number five: ‘Tell me a story about these two ‘man’ –two faces? What is each one thinking..?’ Well, I see a picture of an Anglo educated person and a traditional person. A traditional person knows only his traditional way of life. I cannot say he is uneducated to a certain extend because he is traditionally-educated by his parents way back when he was a boy. Therefore, he knows 3

what life is but not in Anglo way of life. Anglo educated man is educated in Anglo and traditionally, if he has any. For some young generation, (they) don’t speak or understand Navajo. This Anglo educated person, for others, knows two ‘language’ in life, in modern and traditional way. He will be respected in both ways if he knows –if he is taught right in both fields, in Navajo and traditional way.

I am saying our Navajo way should never be forgotten. I like my children to speak Navajo as well as English and to be brought up right to know how to behave and have respect for ours. In order to do this, there has to be some kind of discipline at school as well as at home.

BEN TSOSIE INTERVIEW: a translation

Interviewer: That was Ben Tsosie’s spouse who spoke to you. Now, Ben Tsosie himself will place more on top if it [record additionally], this gentleman.

BEN TSOSIE: This gentleman here, Frank Jensen, spoke to me about placing more on top of it, and how I think about it. This paper where there is English writing [B11l7’g11n1’ yii k’eh11shch7]7’ igii = this Anglo writing].

‘What in the Navajo way of life do you think is the most important for your child?’ [in English] When I think about this, things from the old times [past traditions] should be taught to them. Also the ritual proceedings of the past [!1[7k’iid22’ Hog0[7’ yaan’] to be not forgotten, for us not to forget them and in this way, our children should be instructed, for us. When they are still small and in the classrooms, they be taught the Dineh language and to write it as well, and this should become their learning. Certain schools are doing this I believe. This will make it so that the children will clearly understand the Dineh and because some do not quite hear [understand] the Dineh. You may speak to them and they just return a look at you. This even happens among those sitting at <Window Rock> [council at tribal headquarter]. They only hear the B11l7’g11n1’ and they cannot hear the Dineh. It is like they have to have a translator in order to… --well that is the difficult way.

The next thing is ‘How is the Navajo way of life different from the Anglo way of life’ [in English], it says? It is such that we, N11b44hw-‘h [slang for Navajo], are living with much difficulty. As for the white society, they seem to live comfortably. However, if they were combined like for the white person to come over here and live according to us, he/she will not fit in [cope]. Then if we went over to them, there will be much difficulty. An example is that if a white person went into a hogan he/she will not know how to make a fire. Then if we went into their homes, we would not know how to light the steel container for heat, or we would not know 4

where its door is or what to light it with. So we are being told ‘the Anglo way of life only’ and we all will probably exist in that way of life, but we wish not to forget the old ways.

Thirdly, here is a piece of paper about a school. ‘How do you feel about it in the last ten years’ it asks? The school we had once around here was located locally, it was similar to this, and the Anglo teachers that taught there were few, and beyond that, were the government schools. Now as I observe, the schools have become larger and the curriculum has become better and more efficient.

‘What things do I disagree with or do not like’ it asks me? I do not know. I am not certain as to how the children are being taught.

Fourth item is another piece of paper indicating a hogan. ‘What is it like inside the hogan’ it asks? It is just situated though it looks as if it is abandoned, but there is a lot that is happening inside. There is a ritual healing, prayer chants, family life, a fireplace, eating meals, and sheltering from the cold.

How people think about it I shall tell that, too. That depends on the individual person that resides within it. As you are aware, many of us grew up inside the hogan and it is beautiful place. There is nothing wrong within and it is nice like living in a house.

The fifth item is that there are two men standing. ‘What are they thinking,’ it asks, ‘both of them?’ In terms of both sides, perhaps. This man standing is dressed in the Anglo way, and that one dressed that way looks as if he went to school. He has a haircut and is casually dressed. Maybe he is on his way to work, I do not know, or on his way elsewhere. I do not what he is thinking and maybe he is talking to his kin relations. Maybe he is a missionary or perhaps, he is aware of both ways (of life). Or he decided to dress up but he is really going out to herd sheep and is still standing there. The other man standing has a blanket over his shoulder and wears moccasin like being dressed in the old ways. He may be returning from completing a chant ritual, or that the woman must have chased him out and is on his way outside.

[Voice from background]: Like starting a livelihood by being estranged from his spouse?

BEN TSOSIE: He is estranged from his spouse, maybe, and it is hard to tell since he is just standing there. How can one think about him or even tell what he is thinking. Perhaps, he stands before his own kin and he is speaking to him. Thinking about them again, one is educated and that is why he is employed, he hears both sides of the people [English and Dineh], and that is also why he stands firmly. The other man who hauls his blanket is the same way but from an uneducated perspective, this gentleman sings, conducts rituals, makes good decisions, makes it nice for people, and that is what we would say. Thus, both sides [of these two men] seemed equal. ---Okay.5

Interviewer: Thank you, certainly, Ben Tsosie. This is what I am traveling about for, to add on to it the way you feel and think about it. Amongst all others, you both have been counted-in now and with that, you have added it well. This [project] is not only taking place around here, but it is taking place everywhere like <Window Rock>, <Fort Defiance>, <Chinle>, ‘<Many Farms>’ [in English], <Ganado>, <Kayenta>, and <Tuba City>. Everywhere, they [interviews] are placed on them like this. Then somewhere they will meet about this and in some way perhaps, we will hear back about it. You see, ‘we want the schools to be good for us’ is what is being stated and which is the purpose of these efforts. It is I making the ‘interview,’ Frank Jensen. ‘Thank you’ [in English]. Thank you, Ben Tsosie. It is good that you live neatly.

BENNIE KEAMS INTERVIEW, Narrator spoke in English and this is a transcription.

Interviewer: [a translation] Over here, I have arrived at Bennie Keams’s home. It is I speaking, the one making the ‘interview.’ It is unknown how he will record on to it and it is a matter of his own thoughts, and that I have explained to him. I will ‘record’ [in English] it for him, and you will eventually hear about it. This is Frank Jensen speaking. Go ahead, Bennie Keams.

BENNIE KEAMS: This is Bennie Keams. ‘What in the Navajo way of life do you think is most important for your child to know?’ is question one. Should know at least some of the language, should know about clans, relations, should be able to talk with grandparents, and so forth.

Two, ‘how is the Navajo way of life different from the Anglo way of life?’ Yeah, white people has house with heat, running water, inside bathrooms, and so forth. –Well, this is only one room hogan, really no heater, just chop wood, and carry water by hand, has no heating water.

‘Here is a picture of a school. Can you think of any changes that have occurred in the school system in the last ten years?’ I think that, yes, there are some changes in ten years. Children of the same ages are packed together, elementary, junior high and high school are separated. Grades are sections so that no child would be behind.

Number four, ‘here is a picture of a hogan, what is happening inside?’ Mostly children and people, grandparents, fathers, mothers, and all relatives. Some of them are all packed in. People inside of the hogan, some feel happy and some of them, unhappy. It’s been a long time since I been in a hogan. So, really don’t know too much about what’s going on in a hogan.

Number five. ‘Here is a picture of two people. What does each one think about?’ I guess maybe the other one has been going to school maybe college degree and all that. So maybe he is thinking of going places, more different schools, and all that. ‘What will happen to each of 6

them?’ Well, one with the blanket over his shoulder might be going a ‘squaw’ dance or maybe to herd sheep, and he probably is going to look for his horses, and he probably is going to visit some of his relatives maybe friends near his area. I guess that’s about all I want to say now.

Interviewer: [a translation] I am at Bennie Keams’s home and I am about to leave from here. He has completed a good ‘interview.’ He was for a moment somewhat reluctant, ‘but that’s alright it’s like this the first time’ [in English], for those ‘interviewed’ and they learn when they will speak formal. He lives neatly and his children attend school from here. They reside in the ‘government quarters’ [in English] and hold employment as well. Also, there are some that are reluctant about this [interviews] but that is not what matters. He has stated it in an orderly manner. And in the same, you will make considerations accordingly. Also included will be the ‘questionnaire’ [in English] that he filled out. This is I speaking , Frank Jensen, ‘from <Tuba City>’ and making the ‘interview.’

FLOYD (SKACY) SK’IISII (Note: this section is a translation though few terms were said in English.)

Interviewer: I have met Floyd Sk’iisii at his home and I brought him to my home where I am making the ‘interview.’ We are doing this outside my home. It is not known how he will tell you and with his own thoughts and hopes, and you will make the considerations for his ideas. Here his nicely filled out the paper [form], and these folks are considerate in that they do what you asked of them. This I speaking, the one doing the ‘interview,’ and now Floyd Sk’iisii is seated before you and he will talk to you. Go ahead, Floyd Sk’iisii.

FLOYD (SKACY) SK’IISII: This here, with the group of words that is asking, ‘What in the Navajo way of life do you think is most important for your child to know?’[read question in English]. So this is what it states at ‘number one’ [in English] of this group of words. We who are Dineh that includes the histories of descendents and origins, and that as peoples, as ‘Indians,’ we were the first to populate K’ey1h’ [Everything Below One’s Feet meaning The Country]. Now what would our children be learning and how they can proceed on forth with goodness and this is the purpose for these interviews? We also wish that our children can have some adequate learning. Then we have the various individual Clans known as ‘Clans’ [in English], such as the Kiiy11]ii [Towering House Peoples]. They should thoroughly be told these parts in Dineh as well as using the Anglo language as a parallel presentation. In this way, they will think about it very well and with us talking to them clearly and eventually, they will have good learning.

Next item that follows is ‘How is the Navajo way of life different from the Anglo way of life’ it asks secondly at ‘number two [in English]?’ We the Dineh have a home known as, ‘hogan , [in English]’ which we exit out of, and the B11l1’g11n1’ [Anglos] have a ki]’ [rectangular house] 7

and has a fire which is called, ‘electricity’ [in English], and there is also the blue flame that they use for fire, too. What we have is ch’77zh7’ [firewood] which is basic and which we chopped and split, and that is how we reside. That is how the ‘Anglo [in English],’ the B11l1’g11n1’, and the ‘Indian’[in English] are different. The B11l1’g11n1’ also eats differently, and we also eat differently. The B11l1’g11n1’ has a platform that elevates their meal in order to eat. We the Dineh will sit on the ground with our legs crossed and unhinderedly [d0hwed77’t’eehe’h] enjoy your meal. This was the way we originated [grew up or came to being]. There is also a difference in how we visit. When the B11l1’g11n1’ visits a person they do this to the door [assumed to motion a knocking] and they will enter. The Dineh may approach (a home) and without pausing they will enter, people may be having a meal and the visitor may squat down (to join in) without being asked anything.

1 For B11l1’g11n1’, he/she might have wait outside until people are finished with their activities then he/she will be led in. That is how the B11l1’g11n1’ and the Dineh exist differently.

Next is the third item which is a paper that shows a building, a school. From inside originates learning and the different ways that will lead our children onto different paths. This building has its own fire lit [heating and cooking], running water, restrooms, and sectioned off areas that provide ‘offices’ [in English] for staff. However, a hogan is a circular home with its packed dirt roofing has only one room. The main elements like the fire and water are inside, but there is no toilet. Toilets, also known as ‘restroom’ [in English], were outside or short distances away from the hogan or that it took finding a spot out there.

Thus, it is now convenient that our children are being provided with buildings where they can be accommodated with education. There are several types of schools now situated on the ‘Navajo reservation’ [in English] or throughout (the reservation). So, in reference to this ‘which changes have made you happy’ [in English] and as it is written? This has been a marvelous event and it is something to be thankful for. There are plans to build the greater or higher schools like ‘college’ or ‘university’ [in English] as they are called.

Here it asks ‘which changes have made you sad or angry?’ What I am aware of is he/she attends school over there, where learning is good and is appreciated, but when they are finished with school in the afternoon, they are on their own as they make their way back. It is unknown how they make their way back, and they may encounter means to obtain t0’h t’s7]11ii[11h11’ [water that alters behavior, meaning alcoholic drinks] and drink it. And we have our child that has gone off to school but returns smelling like ‘wand’ [in English, but referring to wine] and drunk. We are bothered by this and ask ourselves ‘how do we deal with this?’ It is not only the boys that are affected but the girls also. These types of ‘breaking of things’ [violations] like returning in the evening drunk, and those are unacceptable by us.

1 Narrator here is referring to a man that may enter to join in on a meal and this because only a man would squat but a woman will sit appropriately and not squat. 8

The next fourth group of words refers to a situated round-hogan. It asks how life is practiced within it, the hogan, and looking at it from the outside, one may wonder what is happening inside. Maybe there is a B77’ J88 [Its Day, meaning in the conclusion ritual phase] or perhaps no one is home. Then one may be reluctant or may want to avoid going close to it. As for the B11l1’g11n1’, their house is very noticeable because they have windows and if there is visibility, you can notice. Or those inside can notice you approaching. As for this hogan, there are no windows and there is only the smoke hole [ch7l7’d4, exit-opening upward]. One is unable to see through the walls of a hogan, and not until you knock on its door and enter will you know.

Next it says again, at five - ‘number five’ [in English], there is two men standing facing each other. One wears a bandana, tied wrapped-hair, necklace, belt, bracelets, his pants are folded layers, and wearing moccasins. This is a true image of a time passed, and a time when our men folk existed and when there were no schools. The other person standing has a haircut, wears a certain type of clothing, shoes that lace up, and is dressed very causal. Now these two gentlemen standing are both very different of each other. The man with the t’siiy44[7’ [tied wrapped-hair] has a particular kind of lifestyle and perhaps has livestock which he herds. As for the other person, it is ‘a choice to be praised’ [11’11hwe]ehe’] and that he will travel the way of the B11l1’g11n1’, he has gone to school, the language is not hard for him, and he knows both Dineh and English. As he may go his way, he will find work or perhaps he will begin work for the ‘Navajo tribe’ [in English]. He will have no hardship, not look away all the time, not be ‘deaf’ [never learned English] and possess whatever understanding he can afford.

The next thing is what do each of them think as they face each other and how is that? It is uncertain how they both may think but they seem to be just looking upon each other. Maybe they are having a dialogue about what is news. One that is educated is probably talking about his way of life, and the one with the tied, wrapped hair might be talking about the way of life of the Dineh.

This will be the way I have told you my story, and now I am being asked by the ‘interviewer’ as it is noted, ‘do you have anything you would like ask me?’ I do not have anything to ask about –none. I will conclude here and thank you for allowing me to speak to you.

Interviewer: ‘Thank you, Floyd. This is Frank Jensen’ [in English] and the ‘interviewer’ [in English] is who I am. You have nicely placed it on here and this is the purpose to travel throughout Dineh country and record their opinions. That was the instructions you gave us, and it has been done accordingly here. I did not direct their words and it was their own spoken words. Your actions will be expected accordingly to his words, and we will await a response. ‘Thank you. Thank you, Floyd’

