FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Ford McElroy

Interview number NAU.OH.28.72





Ford McElroy, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1918. Interview conducted by Kristine Prennace on August 24 and 25, 1976. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, December 1999. 



Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview 

Tape 1, Side 1 

Born in 1898 in <Indiana> 

Parents 

May Isabel Rathburn, <Indiana> 

U.S. McElroy, <Indiana> 

When came to <Flagstaff> 

1918, registered for draft 

Why came to area 

Asthma as a teenager 

Traveling by train to <Arizona> in 1916 

Jobs held 

Made cactus candy in <Phoenix> 

Phone company in <Prescott> 

Town of <Prescott>, discussed 

Flu epidemic in <Flagstaff> 

Worked in Black Bill Park on potato farm 

Got flu 

Dr. Manning gave medicine 

Living conditions on potato farm 

Tiehouse from logging road ties 

More information about having the flu 

Room at Pine Hotel 

Left to go back to <Phoenix> area to work 

Work in <Glendale> area 

Loading cotton bales 

Ranch work 

Mining camps 

Top-lander job, described 

Muckers 

Gold composition 

Camp life, described

Tape 1, Side 2

Mining camp, continued 

Blasting – “shootin the raise” 

Moving water from Roosevelt Dam via canals from diversion dams into latro ditches eadaches from smelling powder fumes 

Blasting with dynamite 

Ranch work in <Phoenix> 

Irrigating 

Irrigated land layed out in borders 

Zanjeros 

Mosquitoes 

Bridge gang for Santa Fe Railroad in 1920’s 

Seniority system 

Work on Ranch 

Ray Cowden 

Work at Ingleside Inn (by <Scottsdale>) 

Dude ranch setting

Tape 2, Side 1 

Worked for Babbitt and Miller in <Palo Verde> 

Cattle feed operation 

Story about riding freight train back to <Flagstaff> and camping in woods 

Worked on the Weatherford Road in 1921 

Process of clearing rocks from road 

Weatherfords, discussed 

Work on pipeline to reservoir 

Work for Raudebaughs 

Doing road work for Ed Hicklin 

Lake Mary Road 

Spring Valley Road 

Having to migrate to <Phoenix> to find work 

Seasonal jobs 

Cabins to spend winter in <Flagstaff> 

Grubstake to make it through the winter 

Old Town area, described 

Saurs Power 

Millinery shop 

Jose Pete Chavez 

Mexican families in Old Town area 

Straightening out curve in railroad track 

Took out cabins to move track 

Lumberjack cabins for winter 

Stores in area 

Paul Rodriguez 

Arizona Lumber and Timber Company (Saginaw Mill)

Tape 2, Side 2 

<Oak Creek> settlers 

Albert Thompson, George and Walter Jordan 

National Guard service 

Guarding prison at <Florence> 

Different companies within state prison system 

<Fort Tuthill> 

Summer encampment for National Guard 

<Fort Huachuca> – 10th Cavalry black regiment 

How began working at <Florence> Prison 

Story about man with metal hook and rope 

Prisoners at <Florence>, described 

Charlie Gilmer 

Murder of an inmate 

Solitary confinement 

Father died in 1940 

Left National Guard 

World War II 

2nd draft for WWII 

Worked at dispensing engineering supplies, compressor man

Tape 3, Side 1 

Work for <Coconino County> 

Work on Mormon Lake Road after washed out 

Trumbler’s Lodge (Mormon Lake Lodge) 

Area flooded 

Personalities working on road 

Equipment available 

Mule drawn plow 

Living conditions in road camps 

Lot Smith and his dairy 

Playing banjo for ranch dances 

Slim Johnson’s stories about <Arkansas> 

Stillyard hog story 

Working at Greenlaw mill 

Other mills discussed 

Mill capacities 

Stoking Shay steam engines

Tape 3, Side 1 

Working at Greenlaw mill, continued 

Stoking Shay steam engines, continued 

Water glass accident 

Living at mill camp 

Others working at the mill 

Ott Morrow, Claud Takitt, Hazel Hopkins 

Living at the Ideal Hotel 

Ernest Lange 

Living with the Heisers 

Citizen’s Cemetery, discussed 

"Cussing" Heiser 

Mother worked at California Inn in <Phoenix> 

Use of first pressure cooker 

Work on Anderson Mesa roads 

People worked with 

Louie Wilson, Dave Lovell, Roxie Doole 

Ranger station at <Mormon Lake> 

“Bar D” Jones ranch 

Other encounters with cattlemen and homesteaders 

Charlie Bigham, Les Hart, Dave Broyer





This is an interview with Mr. Ford McElroy, who came to <Flagstaff> in 1918. The interview is being conducted on August 24, 1976, at Mr. McElroy's home, located at 101 South Park Street in <Flagstaff>, by Kristine Prennace representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [Lots of background noise--lawnmower, passing car, train, and airplane traffic, construction equipment--makes hearing participants difficult. (Tr.)] 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Mr. McElroy, when and where were you born? 



FORD McELROY: I'm a native of <Indiana>. I was born in <Clear Lake Township>. I was out in the country, of course, _____ county. Northeast corner of the state. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What year, do you mind saying? 



FORD McELROY: Quite a while ago, 1898, to be exact. Ninety-four years. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And I want to go ahead and for the record get who your parents were. 



FORD McELROY: They were native in that country too. The McElroys, as I stem from came from County Monigan in <Ireland>, but my folks were both - my mother was born in <Fremont Indiana>; and my dad was born on a farm out there close to where I was born in <Clear Lake Township>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And what were their names? 



FORD McELROY: Mother's maiden name was May Isabel Rathburn. She was a Rathburn. My dad was named after old Ulysses S. Grant. He was born shortly after the close of the Civil War, of course, in 1869. Grandfather was a Civil War veteran, and he served - I don't know whether he served UNDER Grant or not. He did serve under old General Burnside. He had quite a lot of respect for those old generals, and he named Dad after Grant - Ulysses Simpson McElroy. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When did you come to <Flagstaff>? 



FORD McELROY: Well, I was first in <Flagstaff> to be around here in 1918. I registered for the second draft in World War I, September 12, 1918. But I was [genned?] and classified, but I didn't get to camp. It was over with before they got around to calling me. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, what brought you to <Flagstaff> to begin with? 



FORD McELROY: Well, I guess the prime reason was in my early teens I commenced to be bothered with asthma up there in <Indiana>. I thought maybe comin' to a better climate, I'd get relief, which I did. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you have any friends here or anything? 



FORD McELROY: No. Well, there was some people in <Phoenix> that had moved out here about five years previous. Mangrew, Gabby Grew(?), he had a farm back there, and he had a son that was - [Glommer?] they used call him - had a case of TB. They moved out here on account of his health. They came here the year that - I believe that's the year <Arizona> became a state, 1912. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you serve in World War I then? 



FORD McELROY: No, the war was over before I was called to the camp. I was waitin' to go, but I didn’t get called. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did you come in on the train when you came into <Flagstaff>? 



FORD McELROY: Yes. I wasn't financially able to buy a Pullman ticket, but I managed to get one in the chair compartment, and ________ okay out here. (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Those chairs weren't real comfortable though, were they? 



FORD McELROY: Not too bad. They come through along towards evening and rent you a pillow if you wanted to lower them back. They would recline, you know, and you could lay back. And if there's no one in the seat that faced you - you could turn 'em so the two seats faced each other - and if no one faced you, you could have a place to put your feet up there. That helped to rest you quite a bit. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, that's a long trip out here. 



FORD McELROY: About three or four days and nights, something like that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was your first impression of <Flagstaff>, then, as you got off the train? 



FORD McELROY: Well, I didn't get off here, I went to <Phoenix>. I really came to <Arizona> in 1916, but I didn't stay down there very long. Just kind of an exploratory trip, I guess you could say. Then I came out in '17 and I came through here and all that, but I went on to <Phoenix>. I didn't get up into <Flagstaff> to be around here 'til the fall of 1918. I went to work, got a job in <Phoenix>, and worked a while down there. In the spring of '18, I left <Phoenix>, came up to <Prescott>, and I worked for the Mountain States Telephone Company. I worked for them for about four months. After that job was over, then I gradually worked my way up into.... I stopped in <Williams>, and then I came on over to <Flagstaff>. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of work did you do once you got here? 



FORD McELROY: The first job I had was for old D.A. Donafree [phonetic spelling] in <Phoenix>. I worked in his - well, it was kind of a combination deal there on North First Street, just up the street from Berryhill's [phonetic spelling]. Berryhill's was an old landmark place there in <Phoenix>. He had on the ground floor, in the front, was a floral business. And in the back they made ice cream, and in the basement they had a candy factory. You've probably heard tell of cactus candy. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think so. 



FORD McELROY: In that basement they made cactus candy, too. It was quite a novelty, you know. I remember an old fellah, had a one horse and an old spring wagon, light spring wagon, that he used to go out in the desert and bring in those - the Spanish name for 'em, I guess is misnaguas - barrel cactus. They have hooked thorns on 'em. That's what they used to make their cactus candy. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: And you worked in the candy-making business? 



FORD McELROY: I worked in the candy-making part. I wasn't a candy-maker, I was just kind of a roustabout, I guess you could [say], down in there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: In <Prescott>, when you worked for the phone company, was that a big operation? 



FORD McELROY: Well, they built a new line from <Prescott> to <Ash Fork>. The route they followed, they called it sixty-six miles, I think it was. And at the same time, they tore down an old line up through there, and built this new one; reeled up the old copper wire and cut down the old posts, and dug holes for the new posts and strung wire, cross arms - all that stuff. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did many people have phones at that time? 



FORD McELROY: Oh, I don't suppose they were overly numerous. I had no occasion to check on anything like that. It'd be just a guess of whatever they did have, as far as I was concerned. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was <Prescott> a large town at that time, in comparison, like to <Flagstaff> was at that time? 



FORD McELROY: I suppose <Prescott> maybe was larger in population, because <Prescott> is an older place, quite a bit older than <Flagstaff>. The business district looked much the same as it does today. Of course I guess they've increased population like everyplace else. Pretty good climate around <Prescott>, and people move there for the benefit of that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So let's see, in 1918, when you came to <Flagstaff>, were you able to find a job right away? 



FORD McELROY: Well, after I left that Mountain States Telephone Company, my dad was back in <Indiana>, and he thought he might come out here, which he did. I kind of hung around <Flagstaff> and waited for him to show up. We got together here. 



I often thought - the first epidemic of influenza was bad at that time. And I hadn't felt anything like the fact that it was comin' on, but after Dad got here, we was standin' around on the street up there one day, and a fellah I never saw before - later he became a good friend of mine - named Jack Weams [phonetic spelling], came up to Dad and I and asked us if we – he’d sized us up as a couple of workin' stiffs, I guess - would we be interested in goin' out and workin'? At that time, they raised quite a lot of potatoes, spuds, here in Flag. He had been commissioned by a man that had a crop of spuds out in Black Bill Park, to go out and look around, pick up some hands and take 'em out there. So the morning we was gonna go out, I got up feelin' pretty bad, shouldn’t have went out. I couldn't eat any breakfast, did drink a little coffee. Dad seemed to be all right. He said there was some people that were sick on the coach that he came out on, and they probably had flu, I imagine. He never did take it, but I guess maybe he might have brought it to me. Of course, I might have got it anyway, as lots of people had it, and a lot of people died from it. But I did go out there. Before I went out, I went down and saw old man Doc Manning, old Tom, the father of.... He had two boys, Tom Junior, and Felix. He kind of looked me over and gave me - I don't know whether he gave me a prescription or.... Seems to me like he just got into his pillbox and gave me a bunch of pills to take with me, and I went up and rode out. It's about ten, eleven miles, I guess, out there. Rode out in a team and wagon. By the time I got out there, I really was feelin' rough. 



A fellah named Dennison, that we was gonna work for, had the spuds, he didn't have any sleepin' quarters for the boys that went out to do the work, except an old tie house, laid up out of logging road ties. They used to salvage those. They made pretty good buildings, you'd lay 'em out, you know. He had an old tie house out in the yard at his place there. And he had a pile of straw and he told the boys, "You can get some straw." Everybody at that time, of course, had to carry their own bedrolls. If you went out on a job, why, that was part of your baggage, was to take your own bedding along with you. Dad, he did most of the preparation of the bed. He got some straw and we had a wagon sheet canvas and our soogans that he throwed in there. I went to bed, and I laid in there a week! (laughs) I never did see a doctor but the one time when I saw old Doc Manning. 



And finally after.... Some of the boys was able to work, and they did go ahead with the spud harvest. But the lady, the wife of the man we was workin' for, was very good. She'd send down something that she thought a sick person could eat - maybe a bowl of hot soup or something like that. I might eat a few spoonfuls, but I couldn't eat much of anything. 



Finally, there was some old boy that had an old Model "T" Ford touring [car] - had the top up and the side curtains on. He was comin' to town, and Dad and I decided that would be a good time for us to come in. So we did, and got a room with Alf Dickinsons, down at the Pine Hotel. Alf was an old-timer around here, from way back. There were several of those Dickinsons. He lost two boys, by the way, at that same time, with the flu - about my age. We got a room with Alf and I went to bed and stayed in bed another week! (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was it all in your chest? Was it that kind of flu? 



FORD McELROY: I never did have pneumonia. That's what killed lots of 'em, was lobar pneumonia. A lot of big, red-faced, husky guys died from lobar pneumonia at that time. Those two boys of Alf's, they were here in town all the time. They must have had pretty good care, but that didn't keep 'em from dyin'. I've been to their graves; they're buried out in Citizens Cemetery. 



And finally, after I'd spent a week in the Pine, why, I got up on my feet. We decided we'd go to <Phoenix> - not right into <Phoenix> - because everybody in <Phoenix> at that time had to wear what they called a "flu mask" if you was out around in public, you know. And we decided that rather than to put up with that, we'd stop in <Glendale>, which we did. We got a room with old man Gant at the Glenwood Hotel down there. I spent about a week or so kind of gettin' recuperated up. That was the time that I never had such an appetite as I did then. I hadn't eaten anything for almost two weeks, you know. Dad and I'd go into a restaurant and we'd order up an ordinary meal. I felt about as hungry when I got through (laughs) as I did when I started in! So Dad, of course he didn't have no such appetite as that. But rather than to have people think that I was starvin' to death (laughs) I'd go to another restaurant and I'd eat another meal. Yeah, actually eat another meal, in order to get kind of filled up. Of course I was young then, I was only about twenty years old. I got way behind with my eatin'! (laughter) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah! So did you stay in the <Phoenix> area for some time then? 



FORD McELROY: We'd stayed down there.... Well, finally I think we did go into <Phoenix>, but we stayed awhile, worked out of <Glendale> on some of those irrigated ranches around there. I think Starbuck and Banks [was] one of the places we worked. And we worked for - there was an old lady - I don't know how old she was, but she must have been a widow, I guess. She had some ranch property, more than one ranch, out north of <Glendale>. Her name was Hanson, and we went out and worked for her awhile. 



Among other things, we helped load some bales of cotton, I remember, there in <Glendale>. That was the time when the big cotton boom was on, you know. Everybody went crazy about cotton. It was a dollar a pound, and people plowed up alfalfa and pulled out orchards to make room to raise cotton, you know. Five hundred dollars for a 500-pound bale, they thought they was gonna get rich! I guess some of 'em did do pretty well at it. 



But before that, <Phoenix> was - they had some citrus fruit down there, but it was a lot of alfalfa and dairying, too, at that time around <Phoenix>. I guess <Phoenix> probably was about 35,000 then, population. But I guess they finally got a roof built over <Salt River Valley> down there. I hardly ever go down there anymore - so crowded and many people. 



We stayed around there. One place we worked, I remember we went down and worked for old man Renwick [phonetic spelling], way down in the Avondale country, west of <Phoenix>. It was so long ago, it's kind of hard to connect up with these various places, you know, that you worked. I'd have to keep a book on it, I guess, in order to get it all tied together. A pretty good place to work. None of those ranch hands - oh, I guess some of 'em did stay pretty good, but there was quite a turnover. They'd work awhile, and then move on to another job, you know - kind of like the lumberjacks used to be, workin' in the big woods. They'd stay about so long and then move on to another job. 



In 1919, we worked.... I guess after we left that ranch work, Dad and I got a job workin' for old man George U. Young, out at mining. He had a mining camp out east of Mesa, about fifteen miles. They called it Gold Field. We worked about four months for him. I worked as a top-lander out here, and Dad framed timbers for the mine. He was pretty handy at that kind of work, handy with carpenter tools. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was your job again? 



FORD McELROY: Top-lander. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, what did that consist of? 



FORD McELROY: Well, over the shaft, they had what they called a headframe made out of big heavy timbers. If you've ever seen a picture of some old mine, you might have noticed the headframe is the most conspicuous feature around a mining camp. Usually it's, oh, maybe thirty feet high, something like that. And up on top there's a big… what they call a shiv [phonetic spelling] wheel that carries the cable that goes from the hoist house and the boiler room that generates steam for the hoist engine. Have to have a hoisting engineer. At that time, they was hoisting muck with what they called a buck rake, a big ol' steel bucket that looked kind of bell-shaped - big in the middle and small at each end - made out of steel and had a big heavy bail about an inch, or maybe an inch-and-a-quarter, of steel, but lifted just like a water bucket, you know, on the same principle, only there was an eye in the middle of this bail where the cable hooked. And then the… it was quite an involved proposition. The shaft there was 425 feet deep. The cable ran from a drum on the hoist engine up over the headframe, over the shiv wheel on the headframe, and down into the mine. It had to be long enough to reach way down in there, you see, clear down to the bottom of the shaft. They had little dinky cars, like the Red Cars, down in there. They had two buckets, and while one was being hoisted up and dumped, the other one would be loaded by the muckers down in the mine. All of the miners, of course, drilled and fired their rounds - put in what they called a round of shots down in there. And then they'd blast, and that made a lot of loose stuff that had to be shoveled into these buckets and hauled out of there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's what the muckers did? That was their job? 



FORD McELROY: That's what the muckers did, yeah. Muckers was the ones that loaded the muck into the buckets. The miners, of course they did the drilling and timbering. Every so often I'd have to send down a bucketload of these what they called "square-set timbers." That's what my dad was doin', was framin' them. And then they had what they called a "laggin'" - short pieces about two or three by twelve stuff that if they was framin', doin' the timberwork as they mined, kind of boxed the work in, you see, and these heavy square-sets was the framework, just like the frame of a house, that held the thing together, you see. Took quite a lot of timber down in a mine to keep up with the development work, that’s what they was doin' at that time. They called it development work. They wasn't takin' out any muck that was ore-producing. That was gold down there, gold composition. They were just doin' more exploratory work and development work, and gettin' ready to.... When they did locate a.... The stuff laid in pockets. And they were branching out and drifting around, tryin' to find these pockets, you know. When they did, why, they could be pretty rich. There was one old stope back of.... There was an old stamp mill that wasn't bein' used when I was there - had been used: steam boiler and engine and they brought, I guess, maybe a twenty-stamp mill. That's quite a number of stamps. That's what crushed the ore - the stamps, you know, crushed the ore to separate.... They had an amalgamation process. They used cyanide. That's the way they separated the gold from the ore - the process of amalgamation. The old stamp mill was out back of the operation where we was workin'. The old stope was there where they had taken out a million dollars in gold, in the earlier days of the history of the camp. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What was the camp itself like? Was it pretty rough? 



FORD McELROY: Oh, no, they had a kind of duke's mixture of employees there. They was Mexicans from Old <Mexico>, and a crew of Finns, about six or eight, I guess, of these Finns. And they had a contract of “shootin' the raise” - what they called a raise. They drifted over.... There was a shaft there that had a headframe that wasn't bein' used, but the shaft was about 225 feet deep. And they drifted over under this shaft from the old workings, and raised up into the bottom and shot out what they called a raise. These Finns had the contract of this raise work. They'd go down there and drill a round of holes, and fire, and muck out, and timber up. They, of course, had the timber as they was goin'. Put in the square-sets and laggin'. It didn't hardly ever… it took 'em eight hours to drill the rounds and fire and muck out and timber up. That was one of the operations that was goin' on underground. 



Then they had what they called "the winds" down in there. They were talkin' about puttin' me down there to run that, but I never did get to do it. That was a hoist that run the compressed air. They also had to have an air compressor to pipe compressed air down into the mine to run the jackhammers, you know, and the drill machines. They called 'em machines. A machine miner is a man that runs an air-compressed, compressed air drill. This hoist they had down there, it would have run by steam. Of course, any engine that'll run by steam would run by compressed air, too, the type of fluid(?), you know, would have enough pressure. I don't know how much pressure we carried anymore. Maybe a hundred pounds, anyway. Takes about that to make a jackhammer or a machine be able to work right. It took good pressure to keep the muck, dust from the muck, blowed out, you know. I has to come out. That's what makes.... Used to kill a lot of miners off dry drillin'. I seen those Finns come out, they was drillin' dry. Of course in order to get away from that, they had to hook up a water line, run that in with their drill. When the air was on and the thing was drillin', they was supposed to have water goin' in there to keep the dust down. But of course, contractin', they worked to suit themselves. I've seen 'em come out of there when they looked like they'd been workin' in a flour mill. If you was ever (chuckles) around an old flour mill, you've seen men workin' there, how they.... 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2] 



FORD McELROY: Was that a sign that something happened on it? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, I had to turn it over. 



FORD McELROY: They'd drill and shoot. They wouldn't care whether they got that - what did they call it? There's a name for that. A lot of people called it miner's consumption. There's another name for it. Silicosis! That's it. Silicosis is what it was. Rock that had silica in it was especially bad, as you breath that dust. The miners used to say that it goes down into your lungs and never comes out - it stayed in there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just coated ‘em. 



FORD McELROY: Yeah. Many a man died in the prime of life from silicosis. They got away from that after they put in what they called water-liners, and used water that kept the dust down, didn't fog up like it did before. 



Another job I had, besides taking care of the muck, when the muck come up, it was kind of an involved process. If you never saw anything like that, it's hard to get a picture of it in your mind. The hoist engineer, when there was a bucket ready, down in the mine, ready to come out, they had a system of bell signals. And the man down at the bottom of the shaft, when he had a bucket of muck hooked up and ready to hoist, why, he'd pull on the bell wire or cable. That controlled the bells in the hoist room, where the engineer was. He could hear 'em whenever he'd pull. There was a whole bunch of signals. One bell meant to hoist 'em up. If the bell just rang once, that meant that there was a bucket of muck ready to come up. Of course he'd get his engine into gear and hoist it up. When it got clear up under the shiv wheel, why, there was a short piece of cable fastened up in the Gallus [phonetic spelling] frame that had a hook in the lower end of it. The first thing I do after the bucket got up there under the shiv, was to hook that in a ring in the bottom of the bucket. Then I'd hand signal down to the hoist engineer. He could see me up there in the headframe, signalled down to him to lower away, and he'd slack off on the cable. When the bucket got low enough, why, that cable and hook that I had hooked to the ring in the bottom would turn the bucket upside down. And before that happened, I had to throw a chute back into the frame under the bucket so that that would catch the muck when the bucket dumps, you see, and it'd run from there down into my muck car, down underneath. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How large were the buckets? 



FORD McELROY: Oh, it was probably as big as - you know how big a fifty-five-gallon oil drum is? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, it wasn't that shape, of course. It was bigger in the middle like a barrel, all reinforced with steel straps and one thing and another. It was well rivetted. It was probably four feet high and maybe three feet across in the middle in the biggest part of the middle of it, and then a little smaller at the [aft?], probably, oh, maybe two feet across at the top and bottom. When he'd lower the bucket down far enough, why, just like you're dumpin' the bucket by hand, holdin' the bail and raisin' the bottom, why, the contents would run out, you see. Then he'd raise the bucket when I'd signal him. Of course I had to have a shovel up there with me, because that muck is kinda damp. Some of it wasn't exactly soupy, but it was wet enough to be sticky, and it would stick in the bottom of the bucket. And I'd have to take my shovel, and while it was still suspended up there, upside down, I'd have to reach up in there with my shovel and loosen that stuff that didn't want to come out, you know, so that it would run out. Otherwise, the bucket would gradually kind of fill up and cut down the capacity of the thing, you know. It wouldn't hold a full bucket if you didn't keep it cleaned out. 



And that muck was all shot through with powder fumes. Did you ever smell the fumes of dynamite? You know how it smells after a shot's gone off? It forces the fumes into the muck that's bein' blasted, you know. And if you ever smelled it once, you’d never forget it. It's got an aroma all its own. (laughs) I'd have to get my head kinda up in there, to see what I was doin', to get that stuff chiseled loose with my shovel. And doin' that, I'd have to breathe some of these fumes, and you can get a powder headache. Did you ever hear tell of a powder headache? A man that handles dynamite very much, there's a certain amount of, I guess it's the nitroglycerine that's in there that kind of gets on the outside. It's wrapped in heavy waxed paper. Did you ever see a stick of dynamite? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Not up close. 



FORD McELROY: There's some different sizes, but the kind they generally use in a mine was about seven-eighths [of an inch] in diameter, and about, oh, probably eight inches long - about so big around, and so long. It's fired by a blasting cap. In order to make a primer, you'd have to - after they drill a hole - that's the miner's job, drill a hole and then he has a tamping stick, and he has to have his cap crimpers. That's a combination tool that you use - it's a cutter and crimper together - cut fuse, you know. The mines way up there use what they call blackwater fuse. After they got their holes loaded, why, they'd put in there what they call the primer, the last. That fired the thing with a length of fuse on it. It depended on how many shots they had, how big a face they was drillin' in. These lengths of fuse would be stickin' out there, so far from the face. They had to be cut long enough to give the man that was lightin' 'em, time to get away from there before they went off. He'd generally light them with his carbide lamp. All miners - you've probably seen pictures of miners with a lamp on their cap, carbide lamp. And he'd light them, and it was "fire in the hole" as they call it. Get out of the way. The thing would finally go off. It depended on how long - I think that fuse burned at the rate of - I believe it was something like a foot a minute. I may be wrong about that, but it wasn't too fast. It didn't want to be - blow somebody up. 



That pretty much covers the mine work, as far as my end of it was concerned. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's great! Okay, then what did you do after you worked in the mine? 



FORD McELROY: Oh, I left. They had a change of superintendents down there. That's the reason I left. They had a good man when I went there, a fellah by the name of Tingle, but he left. Young got rid of him for some reason or other - I never did know why for sure - and he got another man in there by the name of Shehan. And Shehan wasn't the man for the job. He wasn't very well-liked by the miners and the crew workin' there. But he stayed for some reason or other. I guess he did run a cook or two off while he was there. Somebody said after I left that he went into the cookhouse with a six-shooter and run the cook off. (laughs) Of course, I don't know why, but he thought he had a reason, I suppose. That all happened, of course, after I left there. 



Then I did a little work on ranches out of <Phoenix>. Used to work at that. Didn't pay very much, but it was better than nothing. They used to pay about $1.50 a day and board down there on those irrigated ranches. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That was pretty good money, wasn't it? 



FORD McELROY: Well, it was about goin' wages, I guess, for ranch work. But nobody ever got rich! (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. No, you break it down to an hourly wage, it wasn't much. 



FORD McELROY: No. It was mostly at least ten hours. Farmwork, you know, there's always lots of hours. They don't believe in shortin' ya', they give you plenty of time to do a day's work. (chuckles) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: About fifteen cents an hour, then, huh? 



FORD McELROY: Yes, that's about what it figured up to. Somethin' like that, yeah. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, that's pretty hard work. 



FORD McELROY: Oh, yes. Sometimes it was irrigatin'. I worked on ranches where sometimes I'd fall heir to the job of irrigating nights, and that was from six in the evening 'til six the next morning. They'd give ya' a big pair of rubber boots. They always bought a big pair of boots, because if a man with big feet come along, why, (laughs) he could wear 'em. If a man had ordinary size feet, why, he could wrap his feet in gunny sacks or burlap or something to kind of take up the slack. I carried a lantern and a rod about four feet long with a goose-necked hook on the end so that you could stick that in the ground. You always had to have a lantern if you was workin' at night, you know, because you was out there in the dark. In order to tell where the water was, you had to go off around it, which was alfalfa which was up, say, knee-high. You couldn't see the water on the ground, you know. You gotta walk around in there to tell where the water was goin'. Did you ever notice that irrigated land, how it's laid out in what they call borders down there? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I didn't really look that closely. 



FORD McELROY: Borders are ridges spaced so far, maybe, oh, twenty-five or thirty feet apart - dependin' on the ground, I guess. And they were probably a foot-and-a-half high, maybe, if they were in good shape. Just a ridge of dirt that ran from one end of the field to the other, and with the slope of the land, of course, so that's where the water ran, was between these ridges of dirt. And you turned in so much water into part of the main ditch that brought the water in, into these borders, depending on how big a head of water you had. If you had a lot of water, you could water more borders at one time. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Where did they get their water? 



FORD McELROY: It came out of canals. There were two canals over on the north side, I think the Grand and the Arizona Canal both, furnished. But it came from Granite Reef, out there, oh, call it fifteen miles from <Mesa>, up by.... There was a big butte there they called Granite Reef Butte, I believe. And they had a diversion dam on the river there, and the water came down to that diversion dam from Roosevelt [Lake], way up on the <Salt River>, up there on.... Oh, one of the main drainages fed that lake was Tonto Creek. And I guess water drained in there from the Sierra ranges and from around the Four Peak Range. It drained quite an area of country. Have you ever been to Roosevelt Lake? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Un-uh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, it's a pretty good-sized lake. That was the first irrigation project in <Arizona>, I guess, that is of any consequence. It was built there during Theodore Roosevelt's administration. That's the reason they named it after Old T.R., Teddy. It come down to that diversion dam and then the reason the diversion dam was there was to divert the water from the river into these canals that took it down. Then there was what they call latro ditches that carried the water where it was needed for the farmers to get it to irrigate with, you know. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Each farmer had his own pump system? 



FORD McELROY: No, they had what they called a zanjero, a man that - I don't know how many of these men they had, but that was one job. The zanjero, if you had an irrigated farm under one of these latro ditches, why, he'd come and notify you when the water was going to be available to use, you know. It was so much time and water to do what irrigating you wanted. And then the next man below took his turn, you know. He'd use whatever he needed. That's the way it was allocated, I guess you'd call it, for use. That's the reason why they had to irrigate at night, because you had to take the water when it got to you. If it was in the middle of the night when it got there, why, you had to be ready to take it, you know. Not a very desirable job, because sometimes there'd be those old stock tanks that had stagnant water in 'em, around the fields. Ideal place to hatch mosquitoes. I remember irrigatin' thirty acres of barley one time for old Jess Norwood south of Cashion, I believe it was. There used to be a little town west of <Phoenix> called Cashion, named after old man Cashion that had the best-equipped and developed farm or ranch in that part of the country. Jess was down south of Cashion's place. I went down there and worked for him awhile, and he had, among other irrigation projects that he had to do, he had thirty acres of barley. It was up and headed-out, but it was still green as grass. And the mosquitoes, they were down at the bottom of the lower end of the patch where the barley was. There was an old tank down there that caught a lot of this water that was excess from the irrigation. It'd run on into this tank, and it had cattails and reeds growin' around there - it'd been there a long time. And it hatched lots of mosquitoes, and that's where the mosquitoes came from, I guess. Seems like every stalk that I disturbed as I would go down - I had to wade through the barley to tell where the water was, you know. You couldn't see it, because the barley was up and had the ground covered. You had to wade around to tell where the water was goin'. And every stalk of barley seemed to me like it had a dozen mosquitoes on there! (laughs) And every time I'd scare up a bunch of 'em, they'd all take after me. (laughs) So that, among other things, made the ranch work not the most desirable kind of work. (loud noise of passing traffic obliterates comment) It was really better to work around the mine than it was to do ranch work, because it paid better and.... 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: How much did you get paid when you worked at the mine? 



FORD McELROY: When I worked there, I didn’t have any specialist's rating. I think I got about $2.50 and board a day. I had my own bedding, of course. The company furnished the bunkhouse and cots and mattresses, but you had to have your own blankets. As you did if you did ranch work, too, of course. 



Then one time I went out on a job as bridge gang for the Santa Fe Railroad; worked for them. I didn't have very good luck on that job. They laid off a crew over in <California>. I went to work for Baker up at Aguila down in <Wickenburg>. Shipped out of an employment office there in <Phoenix>. That used to be customary. If you was in town, lookin' for a job, why, you could go to one of these employment agencies. The man, that's the way he made his livin', you know. He'd charge the people that hired out of his office so much for a job - maybe two, three dollars, dependin' on the wages. If it was a good-payin' job, he'd charge you more. I shipped out of Brandman's Agency there under the old Phoenix Hotel. Went up on this job, but there was a fellah by the name of Rogers that was a bridge carpenter, went out at the same time. I went out as a bridge helper; sounded like a pretty good job. I was gonna get fifty-four-and-a-quarter cents an hour. I don't remember what bridge carpenter's wages was - it was somewhat more than that, of course, 'cause it was skilled work. But [I] went up there, and I'd been workin' around on those ranches around <Phoenix> there for about $1.50, and 54.25 cents an hour sounded like quite an improvement over about 15 cents I'd been gettin'. But they laid off a crew over in <California>, over around Amboy somewhere. I think a man named Allen was runnin' that job. I didn't have any seniority, and I guess Rogers didn't either, and of course we got - they used to call it "gettin' bumped." And if you didn't have seniority, a man from another job could bump you, because he'd been workin' longer and had more seniority with the company. I worked sixteen days, I think, on that job, and on quite a bit of bridge work: sawin' pilin'. One job that we did on a bridge, they had a steam pile driver out there that drove the piling in. After the piling was driven in, they had to be sawed off so that the caps and stringers could be put on. These pilings were saturated with creosote. That stuff can burn you. If it gets on your skin it'll really set you afire. And we had to saw the caps off with an old kind of a worn-out cross-cut saw, and that was pretty hard work. There was a lot of diggin' around to put in sills and mud sills, and such work as that. 



Where the joker was on the job, the boss was runnin' the cookhouse. I guess he hired the cook. I suppose he bought the provisions. And he charged the men $1.50 a day board, which was quite high at that time - take a $1.50 out of your wages, even if you was gettin' 54.25 cents an hour, it kept you from buildin' up pretty fast. Of course, after those boys come over from Allen's gang, we got bumped. I don't know how the job went… where it went, from there. At the time I worked for 'em, we was down on the Parker Cutoff. That's a road that takes off from - they used to call it the A and C Junction, about five miles this side of <Wickenburg>, on the old Bee Line Railroad. That's SFPandP, I think the Santa Fe called it - Santa Fe, <Phoenix>, and <Prescott> road - that run from <Ash Fork> down to <Phoenix>. 



If you went from to Flag, and at that time you had to go by rail, because that was before the days of any bus service. And it took nine, ten hours to go from Flag to - well, maybe it would take a little less, because more downhill - but it took about ten hours to come from <Phoenix> up to <Flagstaff>, coming from about a thousand feet above sea level, up here to a little less than 7,000, so it made it kind of slow goin' for an old steam train. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was this in the twenties when you were working at the railroad? 



FORD McELROY: Nineteen twenty-five [1925]. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Okay. 



FORD McELROY: And I worked before that, before I worked on the bridge gang, I worked for a fellah by the name of Ray Cowden. He had, I guess - I don't know whether it was a partnership of Babbitt and Cowden - these Babbitts here in <Flagstaff>. I don't know whether they owned or leased the old Cashion Place, that place that I spoke of awhile ago. Cowden was farmin' that at that time, and I worked out there awhile for him. That was the best-improved ranch in the valley at that time. They had concrete-lined irrigation ditches, and a good screened-in bunkhouse, a cookhouse that was very nice and comfortable, and they had an old gentleman and his wife that was doin' the cookin' for the ranch hands. I don't remember how much - probably at least a half-section in that, probably 320 [acres] in that place. Concrete corral fences and concrete water troughs for the stock wherever four 40s [four 40-acre parcels] cornered, they had a tank built, so that there was a corner of the tank in each corner of the 40. It was roofed-over, but open around the sides, and the water was piped to these stock tanks with a float arrangement, so that the tank always stayed full in there. 



And another place I worked, I guess that I went to Murphy's place out there. You probably never heard of Ingleside, but that was between <Phoenix> and <Scottsdale>. I suppose it's all built-up now, but at that time there was a half-section in there that Old Man Ralph Murphy had, and he had this Ingleside Inn - kind of a rich man's winter resort. He had half a section, 320 [acres], and a good bunk house and worked quite a crew of hands. Had a stable of saddle horses for the guests to ride, if they wanted to, and a man that did nothing but take care of the saddle horses. If some of the guests wanted to go for a moonlight ride on the desert, why, they'd call over. Cliff Frazier was - they called him the dude wrangler. They'd call over and how many wanted to go out, and he'd have that many saddle horses ready and take 'em over to the hotel. It was an American plan hotel. They served meals as well as room quarters. 



I remember there was one lady there that… part of my job was to harness up an old mule to a one-mule, low-flat wagon, flatbed, and take the day's supply of milk from the dairy. They had a whole herd of dairy cows there, and a man that did nothing but - the dairyman, they called him - and he milked and took care of the milk and the cows. Part of my work was to pick up the day's supply of milk and take it over to the hotel. (laughs) One woman had a little boy about two, three years old, and he was crazy about that rig that I drove (laughs), wanted to ride on there. So his mother would come out and I'd let 'em get on, they'd take a ride down between the hotel and over to where the dairy barn was. I guess they walked back, probably, but it was quite a treat for that little boy, especially, to ride on there. They said that her expenses - she took everything they had to offer, I guess, there - had her own private saddle horse - said she spent forty dollars a day for the privilege of stayin' there, which was quite a lot of money in 1925. Her old man must have had a pretty good source of income from someplace or other! (laughs) 



I worked there 'til I finally.... Well, I worked there two different times. 



[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1] 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So, let me see, the railroad job then was in '25? 



FORD McELROY: Yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So you moved on from there to what? 



FORD McELROY: Well, I went to, I guess, went to Murphy's from the railroad job, 'cause that was a short haul anyway, only sixteen days, that I worked for the Santa Fe. It was the month of February when I worked for the Santa Fe. And by the time I put in sixteen days for them, why, that month was pretty well gone. It was around the first of March, I guess, when I went to work for Old Man Murphy out there at Ingleside. I worked a few months for him, not very long, maybe a couple or three months, something like that. By that time it was gettin' warm enough so that I wanted to come back up to the… on the Mountain here, anyway, so I came back to <Flagstaff>. 



And I worked… see ’25, that was in 19.... Well, there was another job in there that I passed over I should have mentioned, I guess, because I worked for one of the prominent old-timers of <Flagstaff> in the spring of 1922. And before that - it's hard to keep these jobs tied together, because it was so long ago, you know - I worked awhile for Babbitt and Miller down there by <Palo Verde>. They had a cattle-feedin' operation down there. I worked for them a few months, helped put up hay and feed cattle and one thing and another. 



After that job run out, why, I came up to <Flagstaff>, and that was when I went to work for Colonel Weatherford. You've probably heard tell of John Weatherford, have you? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yes! 



FORD McELROY: At that time, he had started - I guess he started in '21. But he had started his San Francisco Mountain Scenic Boulevard, he called it. Took off out here, and you know where the old city reservoirs are out here? on the way toward the Snow Bowl. He had started that road, I think, in '21. I was lookin' for a job and I got in touch with John and he hired me - me and another boy by the name of Joe Deanie, that I got acquainted with when I worked for Babbitt and Miller down there. We came up here. In order to save money, we beat our way up that time, rode freight train. When we got to <Flagstaff>, that freight that we happened to be on didn't have any intention of stoppin' at <Flagstaff>, so we had to go clear down there to Angel, down there in The Cedars (laughs) and it was gettin' dark. That was a water stop down there for the engine. That was steam trains then. We got off and went off out in the cedars there and found some dry wood and made us a fire. He and I had only the clothes we was wearin'. I guess we had sent our suitcases and beds up by express. I think that's the way we'd arranged it. Of course our baggage was in <Flagstaff> and we was down there! (chuckles) And rather than to try to get back to <Flagstaff> and spend the night, why, we just made us a fire off out there in the toolies, and bedded down and stayed there all night. (laughs) Kind of a long night, just buildin' a fire every once in a while, and maybe catch a little sleep now and then. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It's pretty cold that time of year! 



FORD McELROY: Yes, that's the reason we had to keep the fire goin', to kind of keep the frost away. It was in the spring of the year when nights could still be frosty. We come back and we got in touch with John. He had kind of a greasy-sack outfit up there, in Schultz Pass. He didn't have no regular cook. He had some tents. Some boys that skinnin' mules, had a few teams of mules and scrapers, and an old plow. The boys would get up in the morning and get their own.... He furnished the grub, but the boys had to do their own cookin' - except for noon. Sometimes at noon he'd come out and bring something in the forenoon, and kind of get preparations underway for the noon meal, you know. Then he'd go out and help on the road. He was kind of doin' that on a shoestring, after I went to work for him. He had an old 918 Case tractor, and a Baker-Ford, some special grader that had no front wheels. The drawbar of the tractor carried the front end of the grader. And Joe and I, he put us to runnin' that thing. (chuckles) We'd work the best we could. Sometimes goin' up some of those hills, pitches was kind of steep, we'd have to deadhead goin' up and find a place where we could get turned around, and then work comin' down, 'cause pushin' a ridge of dirt, movin' dirt and goin' uphill at the same time, you know, it took more power than that old tractor had. (chuckles) We worked about a month, I guess, for John. I don't know where Joe went when we split up, but I got a job workin' for the County Highway Department. I'd worked for them before. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Can I ask a few more questions about the Weatherford highway? 



FORD McELROY: Sure. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What were Mr. Weatherford's intentions in building the road? 



FORD McELROY: Well, he had quite a comprehensive, I guess you'd call it, plan for that job. He sold some stock, but he never did sell enough to really raise enough capital, other than what capital he had of his own, you know. He never could come up with enough money to really tear into the thing and push it like it should have been. But he'd do the best he could. That's the reason he had these mules. He should have had power machinery up there. A lot of hand work. He didn't have an air compressor and no jackhammers. The drilling that he done… every once in awhile there'd be a big boulder that had to be drilled and blasted. And that had to be done by hand work, a double-jack and hand steel, you know. Punch a hole in the rock and put a stick of powder in there and crack it up into smaller pieces, maybe work for an hour or two, or maybe half a day, trying to get those big pieces pried out of the way, if it was a rock big enough so that you had to move it out of the way of the road, which was a common occurrence up there on that job. 



I guess he finally did push it clear on up into what they call Fremont Saddle up there. That's that saddle between - you know how The Peaks are, the names of 'em? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I think. Yeah, go ahead. 



FORD McELROY: The sharpest one on the right is Fremont Peak. That's the main peak. As you look at 'em from here, the main peak on the right is Fremont, and then there's kind of a hogback ridge runs off out there a ways, and then it drops down into a saddle, and then that big main peak on the left is Agassiz. Then if you go up to the Snow Bowl, why, you get a good view of the main peak, which is Humphrey. And that's the one around on the - there's three main peaks, you know. And he had planned to construct a summer resort hotel up in Fremont Saddle if he had of got the road up there, and the kind of a road that he would have needed to take passengers over, you know - guests that wanted to go up and stay; it'd been nice. But John didn't have the money on his own, and he evidently couldn't sell much stock. I never talked with him about that end of the work. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Did he go broke building his_____________? 



FORD McELROY: I don't know how much of his own money he spent, or how he was fixed when he finally abandoned the thing. But he had a son, Hugh. I never was aquainted with his son. I used to see him out here. John was a big man, and Hugh took after his father - he was a good-sized man, too. Whatever happened to him, I don't know - whether he's alive yet or not. He'd be gettin' kind of well-along in years if he was, 'cause John was a man when I worked for him. He was somewhere in his sixties, I guess, anyway. But he just didn't have enough finances to push it through to the completion that he had in mind. The road is still there, but through neglect it never has been maintained since - I guess maybe the Forest Service did do a little something to it, I don't know about that. I don't know how far you can drive up in. There's a house out there, where the custodian would have lived, or did live. He built a house there at the entrance. It was gonna be a toll road, you know - you pay so much to go up there - which would have been a good source of revenue, as far as bringin' in some money, 'cause you could see all over Northern <Arizona> from up there, way up there in that saddle, you know, where the road eventually ended. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Well, people used it for years, didn't they, were able to go up by horseback at least, or something? 



FORD McELROY: Oh yes, I guess so. I don't know, like I said a minute ago, about how much maintenance work the Forest Service did on it. I think they finally abandoned it. Well, not the Forest so much as the City. The City of Flagstaff has a road that takes off up there in Shultz's Pass [phonetic spelling], that was built for their pipeline, you know. That was another job that I worked on, when they built that last pipeline up the mountain. They built a reservoir out here in 1925, and an outfit from <Kansas City>, Cook and O’Brien had the contract for the pipeline. I don’t know, I don't know who had the contract for the reservoir. I don't think [Cook and McBrian?] did. I worked for Cook and McBrian for nineteen months on that pipeline. (passing train whistle obscures comment) and I worked many jobs in the early twneties. I worked awhile for Ed Raudebaugh. He was an early day cement contractor here. He’s dead and gone now. There’s___________ Raudebaugh's left, you know. There was another Raudebaugh, a brother of his, named - well, they called him Wid. I guess his name was William. Used to have a newsstand up there where McGaugh is now. Of course it was much smaller - McGaugh's enlarged that from what it was when Raudebaugh had it. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: So you still did construction with the other Raudebaugh, right? 



FORD McELROY: They were in partnership - Wid and Ed both. They were both good cement finishers. I remember they took a job in <Winslow> one time and went down there and did some curb and gutter, I think it was mostly for the City of <Winslow>. And they was gettin' ready to do some paving down there. That was in the fall of 1922. 



That summer, the summer of '22, I worked a few months for Bill Hicklin. Bill Hicklin was another old-time road boss and pioneer. Bill came here, I think, in 1890, I believe he said. I worked for Bill out along old Lake Mary. That other lake wasn't there then. It was only one lake, Upper Lake Mary. That is, that new lake, I guess you'd call it, wasn't there in 1922. I don't remember what year that was built. I worked out there for Ed on that road job, and then we moved to Spring Valley and did some work. The road to the Grand Canyon used to take off out here on Old 66. You know where Parks is? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, that's where the Old Canyon Road used to take off. We work out towards Spring Valley, and some in Spring Valley, straightenin' out curves and gettin' rid of stumps and trees that was close to the road, you know, so that the work could improve. Oh, it was.... (background noise of idling vehicle and passing train obscures comment) I guess it was in October, I got kicked by a mule out there. I was driving a team and wagon, haulin' gravel out from [a trap?] out onto the road. And a mule kicked me and I was incapacitated for awhile 'til I got over that. 



(passing train and vehicle obscure comment) After that, I went back down to <Phoenix>. Of course it was nine years after I came to <Arizona>, I didn’t have any permanent address. It wasn't 'til 1926 that my dad and I bought this place here. And that's the first permanent address that I've had since 1917. That's the reason that in the fall I'd go down around <Phoenix> or someplace where I could find work, you know, because the kind of work that I did would shut down when the weather got bad up here with the first storm, the first bad storm in the fall or gettin' towards winter. Road work, or such work as that, was through, you know. You couldn't do any more of it. Either if you stayed up here, you had to what they used to call "shack up." That was an expression the lumberjacks used to use. Take the men out to the woods, work would shut down, and shack up. Some of those old cabins right across there - most of 'em are gone now, but there used to be a whole string of 'em down through there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Just the other side of there? 



FORD McELROY: Yeah, the other side of West <Phoenix> here. And they'd come in, and if I was gonna stay up here over the winter - which I did once in a while, not very often - why, you'd have to get a cabin and get a supply of wood. There was a cook stove in there, and a few pots and pans to cook with. And a cot that you could put your bed - a cot and mattress. You was set then for the winter. You could just wait it out, you know, 'til work opened up again in the spring. That's the way it used to ______, you had to do if.... 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You had to stockpile food or something to last you through? 



FORD McELROY: Of course you could go to the little stores around. There used to be a store right across the railroad there: Frank Brooks, an old-timer. In the days before Prohibition, he was a saloon man. He was in partnership with a fellah named Tom Rickell [phonetic spelling]. They used to have a saloon uptown here, but after Prohibition put the saloon men out of business, why, Frank opened up a grocery store down here, and it was only just across the track there, oh, about a block or a little more. Of course this street here, Park, has always been cut in two by the railroad. This is South Park, and it's a little short street. It ends down there, right there by that E-Z Mills, just this side of that E-Z Mills deal. Then it runs on out. I don't know how far up north it goes. It goes on up there several blocks on the other side of the track. And there was Frank Brooks' store. He had quite a complete stock of groceries. I think he had a butcher shop in the back of the store where you could get fresh meat, too. Prit near every day you'd be uptown anyway, you know. You could go in Babbitts' there, their general store up there - department store, of course. You could get anything you wanted in there: fresh meat, groceries. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Would they sell to you on credit then, when you weren't working, and you'd pay 'em off? 



FORD McELROY: I guess probably they did some credit business, all right. I never asked 'em to, because I would try to make what they used to call a grubstake, a few hundred dollars, to see me through the winter, you know. By figuring pretty close, you can make it all right. Come out in the spring, maybe have a few dollars left, and be ready to go to work when the work opened up again. A lot of the boys used to do that. Some of 'em that weren't [cognent?] enough to keep a little money put away for a grubstake, of course they'd have to rustle around and work at anything they could find - maybe shovel a little snow or something like that, you know, to get by. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: When you got this place, was there much else around you? 



FORD McELROY: That was a vacant lot there on the west side, and that stone building - you probably didn't notice it as you come in. I guess you can see some of it through that window there. That's my garage, that metal roof. I had it built there. He was a stone mason by trade. He was a farmer, and then he was a skilled workman, too. Had the trade of a stone mason. And he built that after we bought this place. This house never was very much. It was built by an old-timer by the name of George Hoffman. It was a block of four lots here, and he bought this from the Sauers family. The Sauers used to own it. You've probably heard tell of Sauers, maybe. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: It's a familiar name. 



FORD McELROY: They had quite a lot of property. They also had property down here on South Sitgreaves, and some over here on <Tucson>. The lot west of me was vacant. There was a block of four lots there that Old Man Mirada finally bought. It was kind of in litigation for a long time. There was some minor heirs that fell heir to it, and it stayed kind of dormant until they got old enough to know what they wanted to do with it on their own, you know. 



On beyond, old man Power lived down there. Back in those days was when they still had millinery shops. If a woman wanted a hat, she had to go into a millinery shop and pick out a frame and pick out the material she wanted to have it trimmed with. You couldn't go into a store like you can in later years and buy a hat already made. You had to go buy it from a milliner. And Mrs. Power, that had the Power Hat Shop down there - you know where Jack Graces' law office is on East Aspen, down across there from where that Kilroy's Store is? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, that's where the law office is now in there, that was Mrs. Power's hat shop. Her father was this old gentleman that I think of that had the place down here at the West End. <Phoenix> runs to a dead end down there, and his place was the last one on that street down there. Old Man Jose Pete Chavez, his place was pretty much like it is. Oh, they've improved it since, but he lived there in that plastered house that's right directly across here. But that other pink stucco or plastered house next to it, that wasn't there then. That was built later. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Were there a lot of Mexican people living in this area? 



FORD McELROY: Not particularly. Those cabins across there… the reason the cabins had to be moved out, the railroad is forty-five feet closer than it was originally, when it was built, and they had to move it from about the underpass, I think it started. They started and moved the whole thing forty-five feet, center to center, south, in order to ease that curve. It was quite a pronounced curve right there. And when they did that, they had to take all those cabins. Pete Liff [phonetic spelling] was the landlord over there, and lived up at the end next to town. Those cabins run on down. They had about a dozen, I guess, had 'em all numbered, and they faced the railroad. Instead of facing toward the street side, he had 'em built so that - there was really two rows of 'em, they faced each other, and a walkway down between. When the railroad decided to move the track over, some of those cabins, I guess, was on railroad property, and they had to get rid of 'em, get 'em out of there. And that's the reason why there's only just a couple of 'em left over there anymore. 



The reason he built those cabins there was to accommodate the lumberjacks. When the woods would shut down, the lumberjacks would come in here, and like I mentioned awhile ago, they'd have to have a place to shack up for the winter, you know. And they'd move in there and get a load of wood and a stock of groceries and the water was supplied; there was a hydrant. There was no running water in the cabins, but there was a hydrant spaced outside, so that they could get water to cook with. They'd stay there 'til the woods work opened up again the following spring. 



But Pete's been dead a long time. He went from here to <Redlands California>, and I think he died over there. Old Man Alsip [phonetic spelling] lived up there where that house is where the fireplace is on the end. Lee Alsip and his wife lived there when we bought this place. Later, we bought the Liff’s (phonetic spelling) property, too, that I spoke of, where the cabins were. 



But the nearest man of Mexican descent was Old Uncle Jose Pete Chavez, lived right over there. This block of four lots south of me, across the alley - that was vacant. There was no house there, and nothing down there where Archie Baca lives. There was another block of about two lots, I think, over there where Frank Thompson later built, that was vacant. And then the next place beyond that was old Uncle Paul Rodriguez. He had a house, and it's still there, and a store building. And he had the nearest store to this place right here, was just a block down and a block over. Of course I don't think he carried any fresh meat. I guess he did have smoked meats, something like canned and smoked meats - something like that - but he just carried mostly staple groceries. 



The closest Mexicans was Old Uncle Jose Pete Chavez over here. Down on the other corner, where Park and Tucson intersect down there, on the east side - there was nothing on the west - a fellah by the name of Ed Freidberg [phonetic spelling] lived down there, and he was a loggin' engineer for the old.... Well, later it became the Saginaw. The Saginaw bought the mill. But at that time, it was the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company sawmill up there. And it was right up there close to where the Holiday Inn is. You know where the Holiday Inn is up there? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, there was a big sawmill there then. They had to haul logs from the loggin' camp into town on the railroads. They had their own loggin' roads, you know, and he was an engineer on one of the engines that hauled logs in. 



There was another old boy around here named John Bradford, if you could get in contact with him, John would be a good man.... 



[END TAPE 2, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 2] 



FORD McELROY: Have you ever heard of the Thompsons, the <Oak Creek> Thompsons? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. 



FORD McELROY: Well, most of 'em are dead and gone except Albert, and he still lives down there. I've never been to his place where he lives now. I've known Albert for fifty years, I guess. But if you want to contact him, you can find out where he lives by going to the store at <Indian Gardens>. You know where <Indian Gardens> is down there? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, go to the store there, and ask for directions to Albert Thompson's place. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, would probably be really great. 



FORD McELROY: He was born and raised down there. All of his life has been spent in this country. He's about a year - I guess a little less than a year - older than I am… how old that is. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do you know the Jordans that are from down there? 



FORD McELROY: The Jordans? George Jordan, I guess he's still down there, and there was one called Walter - two brothers, George and Walter Jordan. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Do they still have a fruit orchard or something? 



FORD McELROY: As far as I know. I get down there so seldom anymore, I don't know how the situation is. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: That's good, 'cause I didn't know what their first names were. 



FORD McELROY: George and Walter, yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Before I forget, Mr. Compton told me, and I believe this is right, that you were in the National Guard for awhile? 



FORD McELROY: Oh, yes. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Can you tell me about that? 



FORD McELROY: Yes. Well, I didn't get into the Guard until after I got a permanent address, because you were supposed to attend drills once a week for about, oh, an hour-and-a-half or maybe two hours, I guess it was, from about eight 'til ten, I think. (passing tractor? obscures comment) ____________ company commander of what night it was. I think our drill night used to be either Tuesday or Wednesday night. I've kind of forgotten. It was the full part of the week. I had joined the Guard in March in 1927. Captain John Matthews was company commander. I've still got the pictures of the company, but of course that wouldn't do you any good with your machine. (laughter) Have to have a photographer or something to make copies of them. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, we can do that in Special Collections, and I'm sure they'd be interested. 



FORD McELROY: Yes, I've got several. I'd want to be for sure that they wasn't gonna get lost in the shuffle somehow or other. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Right, for sure. Now, did you have to go down to <Florence> as part of the National Guard to ___________. 



FORD McELROY: I went down there one time in 1938. That was during the administration of John C. Eagar [phonetic spelling] - I think they called him Colonel - as warden down there. And his administration got a little bit slack. Some of the boys got to gettin' out of there, gettin' over the wall and gettin' away. So they took the civil guards out of the towers. There's a tower on each corner of the prison enclosure down there, the wall, you know. And then there's Tower 1 over the main gate where you go in and out of there. And they took his guards - and there was also a guard, as well as one in each tower, there was a guard in what they used to call the wheelroom. I suppose they still have it down there. That was where they controlled the operation of the main gate. Had to have a man in there. And they took these guards, the civil guards, out of there, and made up what they called a provisional company of National Guard. They detailed a few men from various companies all over the state. There's companies, oh, there's "A" Company. Maybe I can remember how they went. 



"A" Company was in <Nogales>. "B" Company used to be in <Phoenix>, but I think they later moved that to <Buckeye>, I believe it was. "C" Company was down at Douglas. "D" Company, well, every fourth company was a machine gun company, and "D" Company was at <Casa Grande>, I believe. "E" Company was a rifle company. That was at <Tucson>. And "F" was at the Indian School. You've heard of the Phoenix Indian School. Well, that was an all-Indian company. "F" was all Indians. "G" was white boys. That was at <Safford>. "H" was a machine gun company, and that was at <Tucson>. "I" was the local company, a rifle company, here at Flag. For a long time there was no "K" Company. No "K," no "L," nor no "N." That would be mostly the Third Battalion. They've later organized those companies, "K" Company I think was at <Phoenix>. "L" Company was at <Yuma>. And "M" Company, that was a machine gun. That would be a fourth company under a battalion. That was at <Prescott>. They finally got around. They built a big fine armory in <Prescott>, and after they got the armory they had a place to house the machine gun company there. 



They detailed a few men from each of these companies when they made up what they called the provisional company under the command of Captain Tweedie from <Phoenix>. Tweedie was the commanding officer of service company. Service company was in <Phoenix> too. That was comprised of most of the band section. We had a famous band. The director was a fellah by the name of Hoyer. He was a good one, too. But the service company was mostly the band section, and Tweedie was the company commander of that, and they put this provisional company under the command of Tweedie - fifty-five enlisted men and four officers. There was Tweedie in command, and then there was - next in command below him was First Lieutenant Portersly [phonetic spelling] from <Safford>, "G" Company. Then there was a first lieutenant named Diaz from "E" Company in <Tucson>; and a newly-made second lieutenant named Clayden from somewhere down in that lower country. I don't know where he called home. But that was the administrative end of the provisional company, was Captain Tweedie and these two first lieutenants and one second lieutenant. 



The way they come to send me, I guess, it came in August, and always - I don't know how it is now, they reorganized and I don't know what the schedule is anymore - but it happened that some of the boys that had been detailed for this provisional company were down at <Florence> on this prison detail job, and they wanted to go to <Fort Huachuca> to summer encampment down there. That was after they had left.... They used to have summer encampment out here at <Fort Tuthill>, you know. That's what Tuthill was built for in the first place, was to accommodate summer, two-week encampment periods of the National Guard. But I don't know how they.... I guess they decided that too much money was being spent up here away from <Phoenix>. That's where the seat of power was, was down around <Phoenix>, you know. That's where the Colonel, old Brigadier General - later Major General - A.M. Tuthill and all the big shots was down there. Somebody probably brought a little pressure to bear to have the camp down in the lower part of the state again. It was down there when I first got in. I went to three encampments to Huachuca. We was quartered over at the old rifle range camp, about three miles from the main post. Huachuca, for many years, was the home station of the Tenth Calvary. That was a colored outfit. They have a history that goes way back. I think they was quartered one time at Fort Stockton in <Texas>, way back in Civil War time. 



These boys that were down there, they wanted to go to camp, so they had to pick up some replacements from other companies. I would have preferred to go to camp, myself, but they detailed me and a fellah by the name of Lloyd Dyson, and another boy named Charlie Gordon, and one of the Turley boys - Frank, I believe his first name was - from down in the Mormon country around, oh, <Springerville> or that other town. What's that other town down there close to <Springerville>? <St. Johns>! Yeah. He lived there. Turley lived down there somewhere. Of course they were members of the company, and I guess they had been - Turley, anyway - up here goin' to school, the reason he was in here. They used to make it kind of easier for the boys that was out of town, that wanted to attend college up here. They would enlist in Company "I," and they could use their money that they made attending drill - they got so much a night for attending drill - they could let that go toward their tuition up there at the school, you know. That's the reason why some of those out-of-town boys was in the company. 



And we went down there. I stayed twenty-three days. I drove a cargo truck - I picked up a cargo truck out here at <Fort Tuthill>. The custodian out there had a truck or two that they wanted down there for summer camp use, I guess. Those with about a ton-and-a-half rating, with a special kind of a bed behind that had a big canvas and bows. You know, you've seen Army trucks like that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Uh-huh. 



FORD McELROY: Well, that's what it was. I took that down to <Phoenix>. I don't know where it went. Somebody else, I guess, picked it up from there. But Lloyd Dyson went with me, and we went down together. Gordon and Turley, I don't know whether they got bus transportation - they got down there somehow or other. But we landed down there the eighth of August in '38, and I stayed 'til.... Well, it was twenty-three days, very near the first of September, when I finally got turned loose. They got a man to take my place. I was a line sergeant at the time. Whenever I went up on the wall and took my relief.... My relief, I had to have a man for each tower, and then a man in the wheelroom. I remember I had Dyson detailed - that was kind of a responsible place, Dyson was a pretty good man, and I gave him the job in the wheelroom. Of course it was all work that you had to be on your toes all the time, you know, because we was up there to keep the boys that was behind the wall (chuckles) from gettin' out! (laughs) 



They said they had one man down there - I never saw him do his act - but they said that (laughs) he had a metal hook and a piece of rope, and if he had good luck and could throw that up and hook it on the wall in the right way.... Of course there was a catwalk on top of that wall, you know. You could walk from Tower 1 all the way around, and pass through all the towers as you went around. There was a kind of a coping on the inside that was about hip-high to a man, and about eight inches thick. Then on the outside there was an iron pipe railing around there. It was a couple of foot higher to the coping and the railing. Made a space you could walk, you know, 'cause that wall was probably twenty feet high, somethin' like that. And you had to, bein' up there at night, of course the place was well lit-up, but then you had to have a little protection to keep you on there, you know, that you didn't make a miscue and fall over. That's why this railing was along the outside. If he could throw his hook and hook it either on the coping or that iron railing on the outside, they said he could go over that wall in eight seconds, I think it was. Hand-over-hand, right up that rope, just like a monkey climbin' a coconut palm tree. (laughs) 



There was some kind of scary characters in there. The Powers boys were in there, still at that time. They hadn't been turned loose. That fellah that killed Marcus Lawrence was in there. I used to see him every day or so. What was his name? He had an Italian name. Sometimes I think of it, and sometimes.... If you don't think of these names, they get away from you. I did see one man in there that I didn't contact him, but I knew him years ago in <Phoenix>. His name was Charlie Gilmer. And when I was down there, I saw him, observed him. Of course I don't think he saw me. But he was on the outside as a trustee, and he had gone down there for, oh, forty or fifty years, something like that. He killed his wife, way down at the lower end of Seventh Street, close to the river down there, South Side of <Phoenix>. But when I knew him, I was stayin' at a roomin' house there in Five Points. That's down there in the vicinity, between Sixth and Seventh Avenues and Van Buren. Van Buren's one of the main east-west streets, you know, crossing <Phoenix>, if you know much about <Phoenix>. And his mother, I guess she was a widow at that time, Mrs.... Well, her name wasn't Gilmer. She was married after she'd been married to Charlie's father. I guess I've lost her name, too. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Maybe you'll think of it later. 



FORD McELROY: Yeah. But she was landlady there. And that bein' the set-up, Charlie used to come there to see her, you know. And I had a room there. That's the way I got acquainted with Charlie Gilmer. I don't know what the final disposition of his set-up was down there at the pen, because he'd gone for a long time, and he, bein' a trustee, he probably finally got out on good behavior. They get time off for good behavior, you know - those inmates down there. 



There was one fellah killed another while I was there. We didn't have anything to do with that part of it. It happened inside the wall, I guess in one of the cell blocks. The only thing we had anything to do with was the guarding of the top of the wall. There was work details went out every day that took details of convicts out to work on the prison farm. They've got a prison farm down there that there was a lot of farm work to be done, and they take men out there, and they were guarded by civil guards. We didn't have anything to do with the work details. And this killin' took place inside of the wall. (passing vehicle obscures comment) We didn't have any - that was civil guard, too. We had nothing to do with that. They said he had a knife that he had made out of the blade of a shovel. And the handle, he had wrapped leather… got a hold of some leather, maybe cut up some old shoes or somethin'. And he'd fashioned a leather handle on this knife. Of course there's shops down there where there's grinding stones and one thing and another that one of those boys could get to, and he ground it where he had it sharp as a razor. The way he described it, he caught this fellah somewhere around in the short ribs, and really opened him up way around there. 



Another kind of an interesting feature about stock house down there, was a building inside the wall they called "the snakes(?)." Did you ever hear tell about it? (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: No. 



FORD McELROY: Well, that was a building over in one corner. Of course the thing is square, not like this. But the thing faced, it was built so that it faced up in, right up in a corner. There was room enough for a walkway around there, but up on this corner here, up on top of the wall, there was a guardhouse up there, of course - tower, guard tower. And the guard could look right down at the entrance of this, and there was kind of an anteroom. The outside door to this building they called the snakes(?) was bars, but the inside door was solid, so that no light could get in there, and there was no windows to it a'tall. And it faces around like this. If this is the building they called the snakes(?), there was openings down at the foot of the wall, and then there was air ducts that came up through the wall and opened on the inside for ventilation, but there was no speck of light could get in there. When you was in there, you couldn't see a thing, because it was total dark, completely dark in there. And if a man got out of hand enough so that he was consigned to that, he spent whatever time they assigned him in there. They called it the snakes(?). (laughs) 



Yep. Oh, yes. I never looked in the place, but I saw it every day, when I'd be up on the wall. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Was your National Guard unit ever called out for any other activity? 



FORD McELROY: No, I didn't go to camp. That is, when the boys left here in '40, my dad was in a terminal case of sickness in '40. He died in July 1940, and that kind of disrupted my home life, and I had a lot of responsibility, because I was an only child, I never had any brothers or sisters. And my mother outlived Dad by twenty-odd years. And I had to bury my father and get squared away from the effects of his going. So I dropped out of the Guard. That's how I come to get out, and in that next.... Let's see, Dad died in July, and the following September, was when they went to Fort Sill. They was mustered into federal service - Company "I" was. And I didn't get a chance to go. I was drafted then. They got another draft goin', and I was in the age bracket that got in that second draft in World War II, you know. There was two drafts in that. As the way it worked out, I was better off goin' with a bunch of draftees than I would have been goin' with the National Guard, because I never was in any post or military installation that didn't have good barracks. And when these boys that was in the Guard from "I" Company down here went to Fort Sill, some officer took 'em out there and showed 'em a stake that was drove in the ground, and he said, "There's where Company 'I' goes." (laughs) So they had to draw off canvas, they had to draw their tents and their bunk, cots, and all of that stuff, and start right from scratch and build a camp down there. Yeah, someplace to live. (laughs) There was nothing there. Their kitchen, had to do the same. They had to set up and prepare meals for the company and field outfit ‘til they could get somethin' better. 



But we had, when I went from here and drafted, I went to Fort McArthur over at <San Pedro California>. I stayed over there about ten days and finally got sent to <Fort Leonard Wood Missouri>, with a bunch that had been selected for Army engineer training, 'cause of my previous, I guess, experiences running jackhammers and engineer equipment, you know. I had had some experience runnin' a grader and some tractor work. That's mostly engineer work, you know. So I went into the engineers and put in thirteen weeks of engineer basic training at <Fort Leonard Wood Missouri>. Then right from there down to Camp Gruber Oklahoma; landed down there. They started us out, we come in there on the troop train, and they sent me and a few of the other boys from Fort Leonard Wood over to the 335th Engineer General Service Regiment, Company "D." Stayed there, oh, I don't know, a week or so, I guess, somethin' like that. But anyhow, that wasn't to be my permanent home. One day the order come up to the barracks, "Get your barracks bags and report down to the orderly room." (chuckles) So there was an old boy by the name of Mathias, I believe his name was. Maybe [you know them too?]. That was sent over to the 461st Engineer Depot Company. That's the reason they sent us down to the orderly room - there was a cargo truck down there picked us up and took us way over across - that was a big post, Camp Gruber was, a big place. It was the station of the 88th Infantry Division. That was the Clover Leaf Outfit, they called it. There was a lot of artillery there, too. Went over to the 461st Engineer Depot Company and finally after.... Well, I'd been through thirteen weeks of basic up at Fort Leonard Wood, but this bunch of boys that made up this 461st Engineer Depot, they come out of New Cumberland, back east there somewhere - <Maryland> or Eastern <Pennsylvania>, I don't know which it was. Most of 'em was <Pennsylvania> boys, coal miners, out of that coal-mining district down there in Eastern <Pennsylvania>. No rifles had ever been issued to 'em, and they didn't know very much about close order drill. So I practically had to go through basic training twice (laughs) with them! But I stayed there 'til they got pretty well trained, and we'd go out once in a while. 



Among other things, we had to figure the dimensions of warehouses, because we was supposed to dispense engineer supplies. That's what the depot company does, you know. Not a combat outfit. They was supposed to be back of the lines somewhere, and if an engineer needs whatever we had in warehouses, we was to issue it to 'em. That was our job. We’d have to go out somewhere and measure a warehouse: so much floor space, and how much of this or that you could store in there, and all that stuff. It didn't suit me very good, because I didn't have really book-learnin' enough to qualify for that kind of a job. I'd always been operator or something like that, operating equipment. But they had a lot of trucks and Jeeps, but they didn't have any.... When I was up at Fort Leonard Wood, part of the time that I went through basic, that thirteen weeks, I went to, maybe prit near a month of it I went to heavy equipment school. They had a big heavy equipment park up there, where they had all kinds of machinery - big power shovels and cats and dozers and motor graders and air compressors and all that stuff. I finally - me and an old boy by the name of Ben Eyring, we ended up as compressor men. 



[END TAPE 2, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 3, SIDE 1] 



FORD McELROY: That was the first time I worked for <Coconino County>. I came up here from <Phoenix>. As usual, I needed a job, so I had a room down with Alf Dickinson at the Pine Hotel. I guess I mentioned yesterday that he operated a kind of an employment agency down there, for the benefit of his customers, you know, which were mostly working men. I never had heard much of anything about it, had been in the area and out of <Flagstaff> and <Arizona> since 1917, but I hadn't been out in the <Mormon Lake> area. He understood from our conversation that I was lookin' for work. He said, "Charlie Green has got a crew of men out at <Mormon Lake>. The lake come up from a big runoff in the latter part of the winter, and drowned out part of the road along the east side." The road ran under that. If you've been out there, you've noticed a rocky bluff along on your left, on the east side of the lake as you go around that lake. You can go around the lake on two sides, you know. You can turn off back, oh, close to a mile - maybe not quite a mile - before you get to where you can see the lake. And that road takes you around on the west side by Pilgrim Playground and the road that used to lead into.... Well, there's another resort around there. I haven't thought of it in a long time, and I guess I've forgot the name of it. Then it went on around by Tumbler's Lodge, as it was known. Of course Tumbler's wasn't there in 1920. Tumbler didn't move in and establish his place 'til about 1923, I guess it was. He built a store, and I guess he had some - I don't know whether he had much rent[al] cabins or not - but he had a store, and I think he built a dance hall around there. The road passed his place and came on around and tied-into the road that went on down towards <Long Valley>. 



But we wasn't concerned with that side of that, the job that I went out to work on. All of our work was on the east side where the lake had raised up from that big runoff and drowned out the low places. And Charlie Green, the boss, he was an old-timer that came in 1884, and he said the lake was six feet higher than he had ever seen it before. Which made it about, oh, around four miles wide and close to seven miles long. It was quite a body of water there. It backed up through that narrow place by what later came to be known as Bass Point, and flooded a ranch that a fellah named Jim Bogus had back up in a little valley there. 



Before anybody could go around on that side of the lake - of course this was kind of a rush job - that is, it meant that nobody could travel around there until there was a new road built above the high-water mark. We eventually, I guess we worked out there 'til, oh, sometime in, I guess it was sometime in August when we finally got the trail dug around among the rocks. We just followed the line of least resistance and made a road that in some places was wide enough for two cars to pass, and some places it wasn't, depending on the amount of rocks that we had to work through. And some places down toward the south end, there was patches of second-growth scrub oak down there that had to be chopped down and dug out of the way. 



After we finished that job… I'll have to think, I guess, to remember where we did go. The crew was cut down, I know. Some of the boys were drifters anyway, that worked out there, and all they wanted was enough work to make a road stake so they could move on. I remember there was a fellah named Tom Brown from - he used to talk about <Kerrville Texas>. And another young fellah named Thomas. He went by the name of Shorty. I don't remember what his given name was. He was from <Missouri>. We picked up Walsh Henry. Walsh was an old pioneer in the country, and Walsh was active powder man. I don't know whether it was the first time I went out - I guess it must have been the first time that I went out - and those boys that hired out at the time I did went with me. We rode out with Green. He had to come into town every, oh, at least every two weeks, which is the end of the pay period, and oftener if the grub supply ran out. There was a fellow named Shelby Singleton that was cookin' out there. And an old fellah they called Jacque. They called him Ferdinand Maynard. He was an old <Missouri> lead and zinc miner from around <Carthage> and <Joplin> and <Webb City>. Then there was a fellah named Taylor that was kind of an old prospector, and he had a little team of small mules - a pony and a mule, it seemed to me like that's the way it was, I guess. And then there was a couple of brothers of the cook named Byron Singleton and Hanry - Henry - Singleton. They were younger than Shelby. And another fellah that was an old ex-cavalryman. He had served in the 4th Cavalry over at Scofield Barracks in the Hawaiian Islands shortly after World War II. I think he put in a lot of hitches. His name was Harold Alvoy. He was from <Illinois>, the town was <Albany>. There probably was another one. It was a crew of maybe twelve or fifteen men, something like that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: What kind of equipment did you have and use? Was it mostly done by hand on the road? 



FORD McELROY: It was hand work, and we had four head of mules. The county didn't have much equipment at that time. They had a couple or three old pull-graders that had to be powered by mules. The county had several head of mules. I don't remember just - they had enough for about a six-up plow team, and about the same number to pull a grader. They was big working mules, of course. Then they had fresno scrapers, and I think they had one or two of the old-fashioned swift scrapers. We didn't have any - well, the County did later. A couple years later I worked with a couple of western wheel scrapers that they had. But they didn't have any wheelers out there on that.... I guess it wasn't practical anyway. They didn't have any very long distances to pull dirt. The dirt that they moved was either with the slip scraper or fresno or wagon with dump boards. They loaded the wagons by hand, shovel - men would shovel. I remember that pretty well because it always seemed my luck to get on the downwind side, and right in the middle somebody would throw a shovelful of dirt from the other side, the wind would bring a lot of the fine stuff over on me. (laughs) Yeah, we got pretty dirty on that job. 



There was no laundry facilities out there, and I wore summer-weight woven underwear. I'd do the best I could. I didn't have any soap powder or anything like that, just washin' 'em out in cold water, and about all that did was set the dirt in 'em, you know. They finally got almost as black as the ground; my underwear did. I remember tryin' to get rid of the dirt as much as we could. We used to take a swim in the lake after the weather warmed up enough. Of course that was <Mormon Lake>. At that time it never did get very warm. You could stand it if you was kind of young and tough like we were. We'd take off all our clothes, didn't have no bathing suits or anything like that, and go in [naked?]. 



There was very few boats of any kind around the lake, but somebody did have one - I believe it must have been an old inboard motorboat. It came down the lake one night after work - we was out in there taking our evening swim - and there was two men in this boat, and one of 'em seemed to be more local, I guess, and the other one I guess was a stranger. One of 'em, what we assumed was the local guy, said, "Seems to me as though this water is awful cold for swimmin'." And the fellah that was pilotin' the boat, he said, "Well, it's pretty cold all right, but these hillbillies, they don't pay any attention to that." (laughs) 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You knew someone who knew Lot Smith when he was… when he had his dairy? 



FORD McELROY: Charlie Green, the boss of this job that we were just talkin' about, knew Lot Smith, yes. He used to talk about Lot Smith's horse brand. He had a dairy out there, called it the Mormon Dairy. That's around on the west side. There's a spring around there. There is a springhouse there now. When we was out there at first, there was no house there. But of course when Lot Smith was out there, the lake was just a mud and tule flat. It was kind of a duck marsh. But it filled up that spring, and of course it drowned out some of the space where Lot had his dairy ranch, according to the way Charlie Green told it. He was out there and seen it when Lot was there. And he said there was some old dugout log water troughs that Lot had piped the water down from the spring so that his dairy cows could get water, you know, there. But back where his water troughs had been was underwater when we was out there. The lake had come up so high that it was all drowned out there. 



Charlie used to talk about ridin' - Lot had these Circle "S" horses and his dairy, but I guess he didn't have any range stock, as far as cows concerned. I don't believe that Charlie ever mentioned that. They used to tell about ridin' with Lot when Lot was wranglin' his horses out there. He'd let 'em run and graze on the open range, and once in a while he'd take a notion to wrangle 'em and get 'em together - I guess probably when he wanted to sell something, or something like that. I guess they was pretty good horses from the way Charlie described. But I don't know whether Lot had any farming - whether any of that lake bottom was farmed during his time or not. I don’t remember that Uncle Charlie Green ever made mention of anything about that. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Now, you mentioned before… like you and your father would play music for dances at a ranch? 



FORD McELROY: Well, yes. Sometimes we'd go out to some ranch. They used to be out east of town here. On the way to East <Flagstaff> there was a ranch out there they called - well, in 1920, there was a fellah by the name of Slim Johnson had some ground farmed out there, and he had a bunch of hogs. He used to come in town and gather up garbage that was suitable for hog feed from the restaurants around town and haul it out there. Some people called him Slim Johnson, and some called him Slop Johnson. (laughter) He was an Arkansawyer. He was quite a joker, Slim was. I remember some of his stories he used to tell about down there in <Arkansas>. He said one time he was goin' down a little old winding road among the hills there. This road seemed like it sort of followed a narrow valley, and the hills went up on each side, but they weren't so steep so that some of those Arkansawyers had been farmin' the hillsides on each side of the road. He said there was a band of trees along each side. Walkin' along he said all of a sudden there was a commotion up in the branches of the trees on one side of the road. He stopped to see what it was, and he said there was a man and about half a sack of potatoes fell out of the branches and landed in the road there. He said he picked himself up and brushed the dust off, looked around and seen Slim standin' there. He said, "You know, that's the third time I've fell out of that dadblasted potato patch this morning!" (chuckles) 



That was just one among many of Slim’s stories. Some weren't suitable as Sunday school stories. (laughs) Like the one about pullin' hogs. I'll just mention that he called it pullin' hogs. Another one, though, that we can recall, was he described what he called Stillyard hogs. Did you ever hear of a scale they called the Stillyard? Country folks used to use 'em way back years ago. There was a metal bar, oh, a foot-and-a-half or so long. It was notched on the upper side, on the upper edge. Then there were numbers stamped in the metal from one end to the other. They started at zero and went out as much as you could weigh with those things. It was a simple sort of a thing. There was a couple of hooks close to the end that you held in your hand. You had to hold the one end in your hand and then hang the weight that you wanted to weigh in another hook that engaged this bar that went out there. And that was moveable. You could move the thing out and wherever the thing struck a balance as you moved out, that was how much it weighed. Very simple sort of a thing. Slim said the reason - they called this thing a Stillyard weight or Stillyard scale, I guess. The way they got to callin' hogs Stillyard hogs, he said, was those thistle-digger hogs down there, they were thistle-diggers, and they had a different name, but they was all Stillyard hogs. He said they called 'em thistle-diggers because they had long slim noses. He said they could stick their nose through the rails of a rail fence and root up the third row of a crop over on the other side. And estimatin' the weight of a Stillyard hog, he said you'd pick him up by the ears, and if his nose balanced down and his hind quarters went up, he said he wasn't ready to kill yet, he wasn't fat enough. But if he balanced the other way, and his hindquarters went down and his nose came up, he said he was gettin' fat enough to kill. (laughter) Stillyard hogs. 



That fall after I got through workin' on the county road, I was back at the Pine Hotel as usual, and Alf was still in the business of locatin' work for his guests if they wanted it. And he found out that they wanted a man to fire loggin' engines, nights, out at the old Greenlaw Mill. Out in what is now East <Flagstaff>, there was a sawmill out there then they called Greenlaw's. It's been gone for, oh, God, I don't know, I think it was tore down back sometime in the twenties. But I don't remember what the capacity of it was. It wasn't as big a mill as the ALandT or the <Flagstaff> Lumber and Milling - or Flim Flam, as the old lumberjacks used to call it. That was the mill that's still there, you know. Flagstaff Lumber and Milling is still over there. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Southwest? 



FORD McELROY: Southwest, yeah. Didn't become the Southwest until after.... Well, Cady came in here. He was a sawmill man from <Louisiana>, and he came in here and bought that mill. And they also bought another mill down in Cooley. There used to be a down there south of Holbrook they called Cooley, that was a sawmill town. I believe that's the one that they later named <McNary>. You've probably heard tell of <McNary>. Those were the big mills in the county. Seems to me like the two mills here in town had a capacity of about - I'm just guessin' at this - near as I can recollect, I believe it was around 250,000 board feet a day of lumber - somethin' like that. The old Greenlaw Mill, it probably might have cut maybe half that much. It cut enough lumber so that it took the service of two Shay loggin' engines to bring logs into the mill from out in the woods. And they had what they called the big Shay and the little Shay. The little Shay was kind of an easy steamer. They'd spot and put these engines on what they called "the spot" out there. They'd spot 'em alongside a big pile of green pine slabs. My job was to keep water in the boiler and fire in the thing, and keep 'em hot so that when another work day rolled around, the crews could come down and get on the engines and take off with very little preparation, as far as needing any more steam was concerned. 



I worked out there, oh, I don't know, a month or so. My folks were back east at that time, my dad and mom. And they were going to come back out here, which they did, about the last of December, I guess it was, of that year, '20. I didn't want to be tied up workin' out there when they came, because we had other plans. I might have stayed longer, but the big Shay was hard to keep steam in, especially with those green pine slabs. It didn't have any natural draft to amount to anything. Of course when the engine was moving on the road, the exhaust steam from the three cylinders on the right side exhausted up the stack, and it burned oil then anyway, and that gave it a good forced draft, is what it did. But the little Shay had a big stack on it, and it had enough natural draft so that when you opened the fire door, the natural draft would pull the smoke back into the firebox. But the big Shay wouldn't do that. And I never could locate the blower valve on there. I don't know whether they had it blocked off, or what was the matter. If I could have turned the blower valve on, I could have overcome that, and it'd been easier to fire. But I had to keep it crammed full of wood to keep a big fire goin' all the time to burn those green pine slabs. If you didn't have a big volume of fire in there, it'd get down to coals, and then throw in green slabs, they'd have just laid there and smoked. But if you kept a good volume of fire goin', you could burn 'em. But the thing popped at 190 pounds of steam pressure. 



Then one night I'd been firin' and took a little break. I had the big Shay crammed full of slabs and the little Shay, I had spent any break time. I had in the cab of that… because the cab was more comfortable to sit down and rest in than the other one was. And I heard the big Shay poppin' off. Were you ever around a steam engine enough to know what the pop valve does? When the steam pressure builds up, that's a safety valve, is what it is. And you can set it to pop at wherever you want it to, but they carried about 190 pounds steam pressure, because that was about the workin' pressure of the thing. It needed about that much for the engine to work efficiently. When I heard the thing poppin' off, I didn't know it at the time, but that big Shay had a history of blowin' water glasses. And I went back over to it and got up in there, and I had a kerosene lantern, hung it up where I could see the water glass. I turned the injector on. The way they put water into the boiler, you have a steam injector and it's put in by steam pressure - got an automatic deal that forces the water into the boiler against the pressure that's already in the boiler, you see. 



[END TAPE 3, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 3, SIDE 2] 



FORD McELROY: ... the injector off and my lantern's still hung there close to where I could see the water glass, and also the steam gauge. I wasn’t as much concerned with that, because I knew what it read. It read 190 pounds. It'd just been poppin' off at that. And I turned around to get readjusted, and that water glass blowed out, 190 pounds of steam pressure against it. But I found out later that the packin' boxes, top and bottom, were slightly out of line, and you could put a new glass in there, and tighten up the packin' nuts. And the glass would only last about so long because it was in strain all the time, against these packing nuts, as well as the pressure from within. And it filled the cab full of a spray of hot water and steam, blowed my lantern out. My lantern, it blowed that out right now, of course, when it went off. Well, I fumbled around and got the valves at the top and bottom of the water glass shut off. That's what you had to do. You could shut the water glass off from the boiler, top and bottom, and use what they called level cocks over on the other side of the boiler. It was two small valves there that you could open up. The water level, in order to be at a safe level, it wanted to be between these two. And you could tell where it was by openin' the low, and if there was water, the water line was above the lower cock, it would spray out steam and hot water both. And they open the upper one and nothin' but dry steam would come out of there. So I used them the rest of the night, to tell where the water level was, 'til the day crew come down and went to work. 



I had to sleep days, of course, workin' that - twelve-hour shifts. Went to work at six o'clock in the evening and worked 'til six o'clock in the morning, twelve straight hours, right on through. They didn't come on as soon as my shift was finished, but they'd go to work in about an hour, so I had to leave the two boilers with enough fire in 'em, and water, so that they'd be about what they should be when they wanted to go to work. And I went up to the camp where the boardin' house was so I could have breakfast. 



Then they had some cabins, and I shared a cabin with - some of the old-timers around here will remember Ott Morrow. Ott was workin' out there at the time as a brakeman on the loggin' road. They run these two engines, and I don't remember what crew Ott worked with, but I remember one of the Tackitt boys - I think Claude - was out there at that time. And also Hazel Hopkins. A lot of old-timers will remember Hazel. Hazel has been dead for a good many years. And I suppose Claude Tackitt, too, because Claude wasn't a young man then. 



And I went up there and had breakfast and went over to the cabin. Of course Morrow was up and gone. He had his bed on one side of the cabin, and I had mine on the other. I undressed to go to bed, and (chuckles) when I took my socks off, there was little fragments of glass that had hit me in the back of the neck and went down my shirt collar and worked its way clear down 'til it was lodged around my ankles, in my socks, little fragments of that water glass. (laughs) That's just one of the things that you run into when you was a workin' stiff, workin' at first one job and then another, of course. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: You weren't injured, though? 



FORD McELROY: Oh, no. No, I guess it probably did kinda burn my neck a little bit, but not serious or anything like that. It couldn't help it, because I got hit in the neck with some of that hot water and steam. But as soon as hot water and steam is exposed to the air, it cools awful fast, you know. It wasn't boilin' hot when it hit me, but it was still pretty warm. 



Then I have to stop and think awhile, I guess, to remember. I believe that the folks and I went to <Phoenix> after they.... No, we didn't either. We rented an apartment, what they used to call a studio apartment. There used to be a hotel - probably it was gone before your time - over there where that savings and loan, I believe, it is now, east of the county jail, across the street. 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: The Ideal, was that? 



FORD McELROY: Yes, that's right, the Ideal Hotel. You remember that? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I've just heard its name. 



FORD McELROY: Well, it was there. And on the street side there, west side it would be, across from the jail, there was an extra building there that wasn't part of the hotel, but it had been built originally to accommodate a photographer and his studio. We rented that. Of course part of it was living quarters. There was a kitchen and a couple of bedrooms and a bath. Then there was a room that we had no use for. It was separate - it was partitioned off from our quarters anyway - that had a skylight in it. That's where he did his photographing, taking people's picture and one thing and another. There was nothing in there, it was empty when we was there. 



And we stayed there that winter until April, I guess it was, gettin' along towards time for county road work to get started again. Dad and I had our bid in for a job with the county. As soon as the weather got suitable, we figured on goin' out. But Mother had some friends, and she'd been to <Phoenix> before. She had some friends down there in <Phoenix>, and I think she went to <Phoenix>. We had no regular home, you know. Home was wherever we set a suitcase down and hung our hats. (chuckles) 



A little before work opened up it was, we gave up that studio apartment and moved in with another old pioneer family, or couple. I don't know whether they had any children or not, but they did have one foster son, a fellah by the name of Ernest Lange. And Ernest Lange, I believe he served as either city marshal or constable here at one time, before World War I. And when World War I come along, he took the flu and the flu took him. I've been to his grave. He's buried out there in Citizens Cemetery, not so far from where my parents are buried, close to the road. Have you been in the Citizens Cemetery? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: I've just seen it from a distance. 



FORD McELROY: Well, there's a main road that goes in there. You have to turn off on the street that runs east from near the college over there, runs east up there, until it gets opposite of point north of the cemetery, and then it turns south. And on the left is the custodian's living quarters up there. You pass by that and go on down, and my lot is on the right, only just a few steps below the road on down there. Ernest Lange is buried even closer. I believe there's a wrought iron fence around it. That used to be customary, years ago, if you had the means to spend that much money, to have a wrought iron fence around a lot where some of your people was buried. Lange has been layin' there all those years. He was a young man. Of course the flu was no respecter of persons. It took many a one. Yup. 



When we left the Ideal apartment, we moved in a cabin that Mrs. Heiser had out there. Charlie Heiser was her husband, and I don't remember what her - well, I guess I've heard her given name. She was a good ol' lady, but she was a rough talker. She flavored her conversation with quite a bit of profanity. (laughs) And we lived out there, we wasn't there a month before the work opened up. It was a two- or three-room cabin. I know that my folks had a room, and then there was a space there where I had a cot and put my camp bed on it. And there was a cookstove in there, and it was gettin' the time of year when you didn't need much heating stove anyway. I don't remember that it had a heatin' stove. Of course those old cookstoves used to put out quite a bit of heat anyway, you know. You could get by, if you had a small house, if you had a good cookstove. Of course they wouldn't hold fire overnight like a box wood heater. But you could shut the drafts up pretty tight and stoke 'em up with - especially if you had coal for night, you could put coal in there and hold fire so that the stove would still be warm in the morning when you wanted to get ready for breakfast. 



But we didn't stay there long. Dad and I - I guess Mother got on the train and went to <Phoenix>. She had worked for a lady that ran the California Inn down there. I suppose that's long since gone. The address was 650 North Sixth Avenue. It was out north of Five Points there, on North Sixth Avenue. And Mother had worked for her before as an assistant. It was an American plan hotel, and the guests had their meals right there where they stayed, of course. I don't know whether Mother went back to work for - her name was Ulman [phonetic spelling], Emma Ulman, and Fred was the old man. Her old man, Old Fred, he was somewhat older than Emma was. And they had a boy. They had two girls, I believe, that lived - their married daughters that lived over in <Santa Monica>, I believe. But they had a son that was of draft age, named Richard. I used to see him when I'd go there to visit Mother around there, and he was drafted into the Army - got overseas, I guess. I don't remember for sure just what Mother did after she went down there. I do remember one place she said she worked for another board and rooming house. She spoke quite well of that lady that ran that. She was very agreeable, and the hired help that she had liked to work for her pretty well. But that, at that time, when Mother worked for her, pressure cookers were in their infancy. They was a new thing, you know. You've had experience with pressure cookers. And one night when - most of Mother's work was as assistant around the kitchen, helpin' prepare the meals and get the dining table set and all that kind of work. They were gonna have chicken for this evening meal, and the understanding was that it didn't take very long to cook an old hen in one of those pressure cookers. (laughs) So they had enough chicken. It was a big cooker, a big cast aluminum outfit. Had a steam gauge on top, and the top was cinched down in place with a ring of wing nuts, sealed down there, sort of steam tight, you know. And they cooked enough of these old hens that was going to serve the guests for that particular meal. Got the steam a-goin' and miscalculated on the length of time that they should have left 'em in there. They wanted 'em to be whole when they took 'em out, you know. (laughs) But Mother said those old hens had just collapsed like an old dry leaf. The meat had all fell off of the bones. (laughs) And even that little kind of a gristle, you know, that's on the end of the bones, even that had come off from there. (laughs) All you could do with that chicken meat, Ma said, was to make hash out of it. (laughs) Well.... 



But when work finally opened up that spring and Dad and I went out, we started out, set up the first camp about the fifth of May. Set up the first camp just west across the draw from where the old Marshall Lake Road used to go up. In later years, that was changed - followed an old loggin' road switchback to get up on top of Anderson Mesa out there. But at that time, it turned off and went up a little side canyon, and wound around and got up on top and then went back across the mesa to a lake. I believe it was named for John Marshall. John was an old pioneer around here, too. You've heard tell of him, I guess? 



KRISTINE PRENNACE: Yeah, just heard his name. 



FORD McELROY: He had a son named Charlie that used to be a barber here, Charlie Marshall. I guess Charlie's dead and gone, too. They ran sheep up there on the mesa. We set up camp there, and I remember we hadn't had time to do much work yet, and it came one of those late spring or early - wasn't exactly early summer either, it was more spring - snowstorms. And we had two of the old sixteen-by-sixteen center pole Army [peramital?] tents - one to cook and eat in, and one to sleep in. It was a small crew. They would accommodate for sleeping quarters, one of those sixteen-by-sixteens, you could sleep about eight men in there. That's about the size of the crew we had. The weight of those spring snows are always full of water, wet and heavy, lots of weight. I remember it caused some concern about whether that frame - it was a metal frame that held the tent up, in conjunction with the center pole. It was a metal frame and four chains. A big washer on top where the spike in the end of the center pole fit through that, and the four corners was staked down with guy ropes and then the bottom of the walls staked and that’s what held the tent up. But if that metal frame and those chains gave way, the whole tent would fall right to the ground. So I remember we had to get out and knock that snow off of there. It wasn't over about a five or six-inch snowfall, but even that much on a tent can be pretty heavy. 



I don't remember how often we moved camp. That was our first camp there by the old Marshall Lake Road. We had a fellah by the name of - I don't know whether I've mentioned him or not - Louie Wilson, a <Pennsylvania> Dutchman. He was another old-timer around here. He was a cook, and a good one. He was a good camp cook. I never ate pinto or pink beans, either one, cooked by anyone that could do a better job than old Louie Wilson could. He really did cook 'em. He knew other tricks, too, out there in camp. We found out later that he was a pretty good drinkin' man when he could get something to drink. And if he couldn't find anything, he had ways of turnin' out his own brew. (laughs) 



I don't remember where the next camp was, but it wasn't very long 'til we set up camp up above the ranger station at <Mormon Lake>. I guess the ranger station is still there, as far as I know. At that time there was a fellah by the name of R.H. Rice. He was an old pioneer ranger around here, if you want his name, lived there. That spring before when the lake came up, put water way up in there, not so very far from the ranger house and barn. He had a barn, too, of course, because he had a saddle horse or two that he used to ride when he was out scoutin' around, doin' his ranger duties. 



I should have kept a diary, I guess - if for nothing else, just for my own benefit and satisfaction - as to how long we stayed in a camp, but we'd work a stretch of road with all we had. We didn't have any machinery. There was one old steel drag that the boss used to hook onto with a truck. We had an old three-quarter ton Reel Speedwagon that we used to move camp with. After we'd get camp set up and get ready to work a stretch of road, Charlie sometimes would hook onto that steel drag and drag it up the road a ways and dig out quite a few rocks. They was good for that, if a rock was in the road and was anyway loose, that old steel drag would grab ahold of it and pull it out. And that meant that it had to be throwed out to one side and got out of the road. And if it was a rock of any size, it left a hole there. Somebody had to put a few shovelfuls of dirt in there, to leave the road in passable condition, so you could get over it. 



Most of the rocks, though, were solid enough so that it took a man with a good pick and strong back and a strong pick handle to dig 'em out. I remember Dave Lovell; Dave was another old-timer. Dave came here in 1890. I remember that. He used to talk about the time he came here. The job fell to Dave and I to take our picks and work ahead of the shovel men, which was my dad and another old-timer named Roxie Doole. Roxie was an old sheep shearer. Some of the old-timers will remember him, too. And Walsh Henry. They followed up behind. They had shovels. Where we had picks, they had shovels, and would shovel the rocks out of the road. Then where there were holes where the rocks came out of, they filled them up. That's all the equipment we had as we worked on down through there. 



We kept a-goin' 'til we went way beyond <Long Valley>, clear on down. <Long Valley> is about thirty miles on down from <Mormon Lake>. The road forks there, and one road turns left and goes to <Winslow>. That's about the same distance from <Long Valley>, from the old road junction there. I don't know, they may have changed it, but at that time the distance was about the same from <Long Valley> to <Winslow> as it was to <Flagstaff> - about sixty miles. It was about thirty miles back to the south end of <Mormon Lake>, and about thirty miles from there on into town. I remember one camp we made down close to the old Bar D. Jones tank. Bar D. Jones was another old-timer. He had cattle, and "Bar D" was his brand. That's the reason they called him Bar D. Jones. He had a son I used to see around town here, an old cowboy. They called him Red. I don't remember what his given name was, but he was old Bar D.'s son, and he was an old cowboy too. He's been dead quite a good many years. 



He had a tank there I suppose he built or had built to catch runoff water for his stock, so they could get water. And one day we finished the morning half-shift and came into camp to have our noon meal. There was about three cowboys come ridin' along. One of 'em was old Charlie Bigham, one was Les Hart. The old-timers will remember Les Hart. You probably may have heard of the Harts, quite a well-known family. They were cattlemen - Les was anyhow. And I can't remember who the third man was, but I do remember that they were three of 'em. And as it was mealtime, they had something to eat with us. That's the first time I'd ever seen Les Hart. Of course Green bein' an old-timer in the country, he knew him, he was acquainted with him. 



I remember we passed on the way down into that country, we passed another old homesteader, I guess he was - Dave Broyer. He was an old-timer, and old settler down in that country. And there was another fellah that was quite a famous character among the old-timers. Some of the old boys thought that he had been kind of an outlaw in his time and was kind of on the dodge, and settled down in there to keep out of the way. He had kind of a homestead of his own down there. And I can't - if you don't think of those names, like I always say, they get away from you. I'd remember his name, come to me, if somebody would mention even part of it. 



There wasn't very many settlers down in that neck of the woods. We moved on from <Long Valley> and made one camp down at - oh, what's the name? There's a quite famous spring down there. Later the stockmen.... When I was down there that time, worked through there, there was some old dugout log stock troughs there, and that's all there was. But later, the stockmen built a tank and.... 



