FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Rollin Wheeler

Interview number NAU.OH.28.42

Rollin Wheeler, who was a former coach, teacher, and counselor at Flagstaff High School, and also Mayor of <Flagstaff> from 1960-68. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on December 19, 1975. Transcribed by Jardee Transcription, August 1999.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1, Side 1

    Born in 1903 

    Moves to <Flagstaff> in 1929 

    Different schools attended 

    Houses lived in 

    Teaches at Flagstaff High School 

    Courses taught 

    Coaching 

    Description of building 

    Different activities 

    Skiing club 

    Where students went after high school 

    Changes in schools 

    Counselor in school 

    Sports in school 

    School records 

    Textbooks

Tape 1, Side 2

    Deciding to run for mayor 

    Council system enacted in 1958 

    Population figures of <Flagstaff>, 1950, 1960, 1975 

    As mayor 

    How to finance growth 

    Annexation of areas to City of <Flagstaff> 

    Water systems, first wells, other proposed sources for water 

    Different accomplishments as mayor 

    Traffic, one way streets 

    Recreation, parks and recreation 

    Buffalo Park 

    McMillan Mesa, proposed development 

    East <Flagstaff> development 

    Sunnyside 

    Growth in <Flagstaff>, causes 

    Tourism 

    Different hotels 

    City street construction 

    Police and Fire departments, mentioned 

    Providing water to residents outside city limits 

    Building and housing codes

Tape 2, Side 1

    Building codes, continued 

    Charter government 

    Ceremonial duties 

    Breakfast with President Kennedy 

    Other state and federal government people met over years 

    Depression of 1930’s 

    World War II 

    Navajo Army Depot and impact on City of <Flagstaff> 

    1967 snow storm 

    Problems clearing roads and streets 

    Rio de Flag, flood control 

    Pow Wow 

    Indians moving into <Flagstaff>, many worked at Navajo Army Depot 

    South side development and building code problems 

    Clark Homes, Brannen Homes, mentioned 

    Marriage in 1924 

    Why moved west 

    After retirement still interested in further development of <Flagstaff>

This is an interview with Rollin Wheeler, who was a teacher and counselor at Flagstaff High School, and also a former mayor from 1960 to 1968. This interview is being conducted on December 19, 1975, at 527 West Havasupai Road, which is his home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City-Coconino County Public Library. [The narrator's wife is also present, and makes a few comments.] SR=Susan Rogers RW=Rollin Wheeler MW=Mrs. Wheeler

SUSAN ROGERS: When and where were you born?

ROLLIN WHEELER: I was born on a farm in Franklin(?) <Illinois>, March 28, 1903.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you want to tell me how you’ve ended up finally moving to <Flagstaff>? I guess you had some moves in between.

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes, several as a matter of fact. I graduated from Avinton High School in Avington <Ohio>, in 1920, attending college in Avington <Ohio>, for a couple of years. Then moved west to <Greeley Colorado>, and met an A.V. from <Colorado> - at that time it was called Colorado State Teachers College, and now is the University of Northern Colorado. That was in 1924. Then I got a job coaching and teaching at <Hillsdale Wyoming>, at that time, at that year. In 1925 to 1929, I was coach and teacher in <La Junta Colorado>, in the junior high and high school. In 1929 I had an offer of a job as coach and teacher at Flagstaff High School, and so I accepted the job and came here in August of 1929.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, tell me a little bit when you arrived, what was <Flagstaff> like at that time?

ROLLIN WHEELER: At that time, <Flagstaff>, as near as I recall, had a population of about 3,500 people. There were very few paved streets. I think Beaver was paved and the main street was paved, but again, I don't believe there were any others that were paved. Flagstaff High School was where - well, the one that was recently torn down - and later afterwards became the junior high school when the new high school was built. At that time there was Emerson School, a grade school, and I believe Dunbar School, another grade school. Those were all the schools in town. And of course....

MRS. WHEELER: (far from microphone, practically inaudible) ___________ Brannen.

ROLLIN WHEELER: Brannen. Yeah, there was another school, Brannen, a grade school. I'd forgotten that. I might add that of course living conditions were a lot different in those days. We usually heated with wood and coal. There was no gas at that time. Of course there was electricity and that sort of thing, but it was mostly wood and coal as far as heating was concerned - fireplaces and Heatolators and so forth.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where did you live when you first arrived?

ROLLIN WHEELER: We lived, let's see, on North Humphrey, wasn't it?

MRS. WHEELER: Yeah.

ROLLIN WHEELER: [At] 613 North Humphrey, an apartment that was owned by an older gentleman by the name of Mr. Hyde. It's right across from Nativity School at the present time. And then of course we moved two or three other places. Then we bought a home on North Beaver, and then built this one, or moved in, in 1953.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Let's just go right into some of your - about the schools. Tell me what kind of courses were being taught and what did you teach?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Oh, I taught.... There again, as near as I can recall, business law, I think business math, history, and physical education. As we used to jokingly say, I taught all day and coached all night, because afterwards, after school, of course was football and then basketball and then track in the spring. I taught a number of different subjects at different times. It was mostly history and government, and of course business law, as I said. I taught that for years, business math.

SUSAN ROGERS: About how many teachers were there then?

ROLLIN WHEELER: There again, as near as I can recall, there were about eleven in the high school at that time. I just scared up an old picture of the school which I found. It was a panorama of all the entire membership. And at that time there were 169 members in the high school, students. And the eighth grade at that time, the only one in town, was in the high school building. There were about thirty-five of THEM. So it wasn't a very large enrollment, but it was proportionate, I guess, to the population.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now you were in the building that was torn down, right (

ROLLIN WHEELER: Right.), at that time? Can you describe that building a little bit?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, a little difficult to describe. I don't remember how many rooms there were, because there were.... Well, there was a basement and two stories above it - a main floor and a second story. And there were rooms, of course, there. In 1935, as I recall, they put a new wing on to the north, with the same structure or construction - basement, two stories. Of course the school was growing, as well as the town. So it was, of course, a matter of running up and down stairs. I recall my coaching office was in the basement, and the showers and that sort of thing were down there. And of course we had a gymnasium which was a combination gymnasium and auditorium. The gym floor was one of the better ones at the time, although it was about fifty-five feet long, as I recall. Then back of that was the stage where they could stage drama productions, plays and so forth. It was a combination that many schools in the north were using. I know <Williams> had a similar one, and I think Prescott did, and <Winslow>, and so on. It was a matter of - as you probably recall, that was in the twenties and thirties. In the thirties, of course, was the Depression and money was tight. Of course they had to get the most for their dollar. That is about the best description I can give you of the building.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Was it rock?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Brick. In fact, I have a piece of one of the bricks which I got when they tore it down. It was, of course, stone construction in the basement, around the basement foundation - Malapai - but the rest of it was brick.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and what were some of the extracurricular activities that went on? What were some of the BIG things that happened?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Oh, the usual, I guess. Do you mean as far as.... There were various clubs, of course, and of course plays and musical productions. Of course there were picnics. I remember in the early days it was the custom to have a school picnic every year, and of course the whole school attended, and the faculty. Of course later on when the school became too big for that, why, they had to quit.

SUSAN ROGERS: Where was it held? At the school?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Oh, various places out in the woods here. At the school, yes. I can recall down in <Oak Creek Canyon> and maybe up north. There were places, <Little Springs>, and various other places around.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did they go on buses?

ROLLIN WHEELER: No, there were no buses at the time - they just went in cars.

SUSAN ROGERS: You said some clubs. What were some of the big clubs?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Gee, I don't remember. Of course I had the Lettermen's Club, which I sponsored. And I presume there was a music club, a drama club, and that sort of thing. I can't recall offhand any others.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there a ski club?

ROLLIN WHEELER: No, I started the first skiing in, I think it was about 1938 or '39, somewhere around in there. A bunch of youngsters who knew how to ski and learned to ski, came to me and asked me if I would sponsor the club and I said, "Sure. I don't know anything about coaching it, but I'll be glad to do it." So in order to sponsor the club I had to learn to ski, which I did.

SUSAN ROGERS: You learned to ski then? You didn't know before?

ROLLIN WHEELER: No, I didn't know. I'd never been on skis. There wasn't much skiing around here except, oh, people would do a little cross-country and that sort of thing. But it was along in there, just before World War II that - I believe it was the Kiwanis Club that started a little, had a little old rope tow, portable, which they set up in what is known as the [Silverbell?] area of the <San Francisco Peaks>. It's on the way to the present Snow Bowl. That's when I was first on a pair of skis. One of the boys asked me if I could get on a pair. Of course there were those who had - I remember a couple of fellows by the name of Bill Anderson and Harold Longfellow - Longfellow's currently justice of the peace in <Sedona> - they had some movie cameras and they were learning to take pictures. They wanted to see me fall, I guess. Fortunately, it wasn't very much of a slope, 'cause I didn't fall. But that was the start of skiing.

SUSAN ROGERS: And then did you used to ski up at the Snow Bowl?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes, later on, after I'd learned to ski, I flattered myself - I was called, at least - the coach, and had a ski team, the first ski team in the history of the school. We kept it up for a great number of years. We found it difficult to get competition from other schools, but we did manage to compete with <Prescott>, and then we used to take the boys to <Alta Utah>; skiing at La Madeira Ski Slope in <Albuquerque>; and places like that. So we had quite a bit of interest in skiing. When Mr. Grasmoen [phonetic spelling] started the present Snow Bowl up there, why, the boys - and girls too - we had a girls' ski team - competed. We had a lot of fun. Most of those kids could ski better than I could, but when I started out, I'd instruct the young ones out, and then they'd pass me up like that. Nothing flat.

SUSAN ROGERS: What was the Snow Bowl like then? Was it about the same as now, or has it changed quite a bit?

ROLLIN WHEELER: The Snow Bowl at that time when it was first started was down.... Well, the lodge was constructed during WPA [Works Progress Administration] days, and so forth, down there about where you come to the first turn, it goes up to the present Snow Bowl. It goes up, and the slope was out there in that open slope, which leads down into Hart Prairie. And they had a single-rope tow, and then later got a double one that extended farther up. That was it. And then finally, of course, they put one over on the present slope, what is known as the- that was known as- well we can it "the face." I don't know what they call it now. And they used to trek across there and go up that little rope tow. The Snow Bowl has come a long ways under Mr. Grasmoen and his wife's management, until the present time, of course, with the ski lift - they have one lift, and I understand they're going to have others. They are going to call one the rope tow for beginners and so forth. But that was the beginning of that. I think it's a great asset to <Flagstaff> and I'm pleased to see it being continued by this bunch of businessmen who are sponsoring it. It brings a lot of people to <Flagstaff>, and they in turn spend money, and it helps the economy during the slower winter months.

SUSAN ROGERS: That's true. Okay, where did most of the Flagstaff High students go after they finished high school? Did they go on to college? Did they move away or stay?

ROLLIN WHEELER: I haven't any figures on the number, of course, but a great many of them went to NAU over here, and of course some went to the other two colleges. Of course the University of Arizona was always the university. But ASU was at that time Arizona State Teachers College at Tempe, and this was Arizona State Teachers College at Flagstaff. And of course, in time, some kids went out of state, depending on their parents and their ability to pay the tuition; and also, of course, whether their interest, because there were people like - we had a scientific community, you know, people who had graduated from other universities and colleges. Of course a lot of those kids went to the alma mater of one or more of their parents. But quite a number of them did go on to college. Some scattered, of course - others stayed. There are many of them right here, kids I had in school, and their children and so on, right here at the present time.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know of any particular ones that really advanced, that became important positions or anything?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Oh, I'd hesitate to say because I might forget some of 'em, and I wouldn't want to do that, because it's just like in the old days, they used to ask me, "Who's the greatest player you ever had?" and so forth and so on, and I always hesitated, because they were ALL good boys and they were wonderful kids. I wouldn't.... Well, shall I say, I wouldn't want to hurt any of 'em. And, you know, memory plays tricks on you, and I might just inadvertently forget one or more, and I wouldn't want to do that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, fine. Do you think the schools have improved quite a bit since you taught there?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Oh, undoubtedly. Undoubtedly they have. Of course everything has, I think, progressed. Mere growth isn't progress, whether it's in a school system or a city. It has to be controlled growth, and therefore schools, yes, undoubtedly, because teachers are better educated and kids are getting an earlier start, and all in all it's true all the way through.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. What do you think are some of the important changes that you saw happen?

ROLLIN WHEELER: You mean in the school system?

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. Or just in education, too. Or particularly, <Flagstaff>.

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, I don't know, one of the things I saw happen that I DIDN'T like was the so-called permissiveness, I guess you'd call it. They called it progressive education, but it was permissiveness on the part of the teachers and the whole system, and I never could quite get used to that, because there's such a thing as - I think youngsters want a certain amount of control and discipline, and if they don't get it, why, they need that guidance, and therefore they run like an automobile without a governor, for example, and no brakes. Now, as far as changes are concerned, that's one of them, of course. And changes in the length of time, and changes in the hours taught - teachers have it much better than WE did in the old days, because it was, as we said, we taught because we wanted to, and I guess they still do, but the hours were much longer, and the pay was much less. And so there's been an improvement in that, no question. The salaries are now to the point where they're competitive with business and the other professions - which is as it should be, because you can't attract people unless they're completely dedicated and they can't live completely on dedication.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you said that you were also a counselor, right?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yeah, about the last ten years before my retirement I was boys' counselor.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about what you did exactly?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, yes. Of course one of the things was to help the students - basically one of the big things was to help the students solve their everyday problems in their relations with teachers and others. And I had charge of the scholarship program and the standardized tests which are required for college entrance, such as the SAT and the ACT and so forth and so on. Well, the awards program, of course I had charge of that, which was made in the spring, in various departments and parts of the school. That was basically it. Of course it's always very rewarding to help a youngster over the humps. I like to think that I may have done that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. And then you said you were sports coach. Can you tell me a little bit about what teams you played?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes. At that time I was THE coach, as the saying goes. There was only one, of course, and I had football, basketball, and track, tennis and golf, and skiing later.

SUSAN ROGERS: Did you have girls' [teams] too?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes and no - let's put it this way. We had a girls' ski team, but there were no girls' teams in any of the other sports.

SUSAN ROGERS: Was there a girls' PE teacher then?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes, there was a girls' PE teacher. I had the boys' PE and of course she had the girls' PE and that was it. Those classes were set up in the afternoon. As I said in the beginning, I had about, as I recall, three classes in the morning - academic classes - and three PE classes in the afternoon, and then coaching after that. So it was going to school at eight o'clock in the morning, and getting home at dark, seven o'clock. But I enjoyed it, and I didn't look at the clock. That wasn't the matter of it, I enjoyed it.

SUSAN ROGERS: What were some of the teams that you played?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, in the beginning we competed in the north with <Prescott> and <Kingman> and <Williams> and <Winslow> and <Holbrook> and <St. Johns>, <Snowflake>, and <Clarkdale>, and <Jerome>. I don't believe I left out any. Of course in those days you had to travel quite a bit, and you had to do it in - what we did was sometimes I used my own car, and maybe the superintendent would use his, or the principal. We traveled to <Kingman>, it was 170 miles, I remember, in that direction. And <St. Johns> was 250, as I recall. <Holbrook> was about close to a hundred miles. And of course <Clarkdale> and <Jerome>, 55. <Prescott> was 110 at that time. It was a matter of lots of travel, and of course most of our football games were played on Saturdays. And in basketball, well, quite often we played on both Friday AND Saturday nights. We didn't have a very large schedule. I can't recall in football, we'd usually play about seven or eight games. In basketball, probably fifteen and so on. Of course basketball always wound up with a tournament at the college, for the northern teams. And track also, the college put on a Northern Arizona track meet. That was the culmination of all of our practices and contests and so forth. Of course at that Northern Arizona track meet we did have - and I remember they laughed at me when I introduced that in the New Scholastic Association Meeting, tennis and golf. They _______ problem with that. But I always figured that those were the two big carry-over sports that kids can play all the rest of America. And I guess they've discontinued that now, but I still think it was a great thing.

SUSAN ROGERS: How did your teams do?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, I think we have in that trophy case even at the present time, twenty-one trophies. And they were divided into football, basketball, and track. In 1934 and 1935, my football team had the best record of any team in the state. And there was no state organization at that time, so it was just a matter of newspaper selection. But of course I'd be prejudiced, but we did have the best record of any team in the state. And in 1934 we were undefeated. Let's see, what's at '35? Aslo in ’35 we were undefeated and untied and unscored on! So we felt as though we were champions, even though there was nothing official about it. We won a tournament or two with the college, although we didn't do so well in those tournaments; those after-season tournaments. But I had some good teams, and of course a coach is as good as his team, but I'm real proud of those teams. They were all good boys and they later went on to various colleges and universities and did pretty well. We had some all-state boys in various sports - all three of 'em, as a matter of fact. Those were real fun days, I enjoyed it very much. Of course, it's always fun when you win!

SUSAN ROGERS: Yeah. Okay, before we go on to talk about when you were mayor, do you have anything else you want to add about the <Flagstaff> schools?

ROLLIN WHEELER: I can't recall anything right now, offhand, other than what I have already said. It was my pleasure to be in the Flag system for thirty-nine years. Of course I saw a lot of changes there - some of which I can't recall right offhand. But the enrollment increased and as I recall in '68, at that time we had divided the two high schools. I think at the present time, I believe there are over 900 students at Coconino High, and over 900, not quite as many, at Flag High. We have a total of 1,860 some odd students in both schools. But before the division, I can remember I was dean - they called it that - of the high school in 1957-58. That dean's job covered a multitude of things. I was attendance officer, athletic director, in charge of the bookstore, chief disciplinarian. I gave that up at the end of the year because it was - well, I didn't enjoy it too much. But there have been a great many changes. At that time, by the way, I think there were about 1,150 to 1,200 students in the high school, too.

I shall never forget that year, because that was the year we had the Asiatic flu, they called it. At one time there, we had over half our students out with illness. If you don't think the attendance part of it was difficult! And I had no secretary. Student health, it was a nightmare. And of course we had to keep accurate records, because of the state aid and so forth. But it was a headache. There have been a great deal of changes, much improvement, I'm sure.

SUSAN ROGERS: I thought of one question. Can you tell me about some of the early textbooks? Did the kids buy them, themselves, or....

ROLLIN WHEELER: In high school, yes, they always bought their own. It's the grade schools that have been supported by the state, but the high school textbooks, they had to purchase them themselves. And of course that high school bookstore, we bought the books from the publishing company and sold them at cost plus whatever expense there was involved, which was not very much. There was no profit part of it at all, merely a cost plus expense.

SUSAN ROGERS: What about any trouble with minorities? Did you have trouble between different groups?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, at that time I recall nothing. There were no difficulties. In fact, I don't think the word was ever coined until fairly recently. I've always felt that anybody was not a member of a minority group unless he THINKS he is. We're all Americans, and therefore we all SHOULD be thinking along that line, instead of different minority groups and so forth. But at that I don’t recall, oh, we might have had a few squabbles now and then, but nothing on a (

SUSAN ROGERS: Serious.)

ROLLIN WHEELER:scale.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. How did you decide to run for mayor?

ROLLIN WHEELER: I had been, as I told you previously, a member of the city council. Well, let's put it this way, in 1950....

[END TAPE I, SIDE 1; BEGIN TAPE 1, SIDE 2]

ROLLIN WHEELER: In 1950, I was appointed civil defense coordinator for <Flagstaff> by Mayor Hutchison at the time. And then later I was appointed director for <Coconino County>, and I combined the two. In 1952, somebody suggested that I run for the council, so I said, "Well, I've been teaching government and Arizona Constitution and United States Constitution for many years, and that was the theory part of it. So I was willing to get some practical experience." So I ran for the council and came in last, incidentally, seven among seven councilmen. Then in 1954 I ran again and this time I came in second. And I continued to do that for the rest of the other terms. And then in 1958 the people voted to have a charter form of government, which is virtually home rule. And so in 1960.... Previous to this time, under the mayor-council system, there were seven councilmen elected, and then whoever received the highest vote was automatically, almost, appointed mayor by his fellow councilmen. But in 1960, under the charter system, the mayor ran separate to that office. So I decided to give it a whirl. I had served as mayor for, oh, a part of a term back during those early years - '54, I guess, somewhere along in there, '55. And so I decided to give it a whirl, and I was successful. I ran four terms in all.

SUSAN ROGERS: Let's backtrack for a minute now. What did the council actually do, what were the duties?

ROLLIN WHEELER: The duty of the council is to determine the policies in city government. And the city manager, which is provided for in the charter, of course, his job is purely an administrative function, and he is to carry out the policies which the council sets up. That is the way that the charter system works. All policy-making is in the hands of the city council. And of course then they take the recommendation of the manager whenever they wished to do so. But that's the way the whole program is set up under the charter.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, now, when you were sitting on the council, what things were accomplished during that time?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, you mean both as councilman and mayor? That's pretty broad. Of course, as near as I can recall, in 1950, <Flagstaff> had a population of 7,500. In 1960, we had a population of 18,000 and over. So you see, that was the time when we were growing quite fast. From 1960 to 1970, we took a mid-decennial census in 1965, primarily in order to - well, shall we say, get a proportionate share of the state sales tax and the gasoline tax and so forth. And at that time the population figure was 25,000, around, I think. And let me see now, if I have those figures correct. Yes, I think that was it. In 1970 I noticed the population was given as 26,000. Of course I felt that that was wrong, because that was a little over a thousand people, and I knew very well that the city - that is, the university - had grown greater than that. And so I think the method of taking it was not very good. Anyway, recently they took another census in '75 and I think it's around 33,000 now, isn't it?

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh.

ROLLIN WHEELER: Something like that, and that's a little more realistic. But in that length of time when I was on the council and mayor, as you can see from the population figures, it was extremely great growth. One of the difficulties we had was financing this growth, because our finances did not keep pace with the growth, and we were struggling to make a dollar do the work of two, and it was extremely difficult. But during that time we annexed what is now East <Flagstaff> and remade their water system, because they, at that time, had a private water company serving them, and then - well, the entire system had to be improved. And we annexed a lot of other areas. As a matter of fact, I think probably at the time we did too much. But the purpose of it was to control growth. We have an area now, I think, in the city of sixty-two square miles. And of course it extends to Cosnino Overpass on the east, and over to, oh, Pine Springs on the west, and up north to the Fort Valley Road, roughly, past the east-west line on the reservoirs, and to the south past the airport, down in there, and on to <Walnut Canyon>. It's quite a big area, but the idea was sound, I think - still think it's good - even though we took in quite a bit of area. The idea wasn't just to be big, it was to control growth.

I've seen lots of changes, of course, in the city in that length of time. In addition to controlling growth, we've improved our water system by, oh, a great deal. At one time, the city reservoirs were the only source of water. And of course they get the water from the <San Francisco Peaks> inner basin. And I think it was about 1942 that the city and county - or maybe a little before that - worked out a deal together with the damming of Lake Mary, and they put in a second dam, I should say. So that was, for a long time, our chief water supply. And then in 1954, I, with pride, say that Jack Knowles, a retired druggist and I, were instrumental in promoting the first well. And I recall the first one was number one in the Woody Mountain field. It cost a total of somewhere around $75,000, and I think a lot of people thought we were a little bit off our rocker then. But since that time, we have, under the direction of Dr. John Harshbarger at the University of Arizona Hydrology Department - he was the one who helped locate those fields, in the well field out there. And since that time we've had about six. Another well, I believe, is in the process of construction. And about three or four, a fourth one, I believe, at Lake Mary. And so we have three sources of supply for water, and of course the growth of a city is controlled entirely by its water, and its service system. And if you don't have that, you don't grow. And of course as I said before, mere growth isn't - growth doesn't mean that it is progressive growth. But we have installed water treatment plants during that time, and sewer treatment plants. All those things are necessary to the growth of a town. Extended, of course, the water mains, the collective system, and everything. It's been a problem because the well now.... Well, did I not read just one of the wells cost a million dollars, something like that, out at Flowing Cliff? (andlt;

SUSAN ROGERS: Uh-huh.)

ROLLIN WHEELER:A far cry from what the first one was.

So I've always been interested in water development, and just recently a year or so ago, appointed to the Water Advisory Board, which is an advisory board for the council. Hydrologists told us there's two alternatives: we can go out and get more water somewhere else probably, or enlarge the well field. And it was my feeling that the hydrologists were right and that the Department of Streets(?) should develop the well field, and they have recently completed and doubled the capacity of Well #3, for example, and they intended to do the same thing with the other wells. And if they all work out, which they claim that they will, those wells will all be producing around a thousand gallons a minute. And that should be adequate to take care of our needs for some little time. But in the meantime, we mustn't sit back and say, "That's the ONLY source," because we may have to go out to <Leupp> or Meteor Crater, or even <Sedona>, where it's my understanding that it's not difficult to obtain water from wells in <Sedona>, and it could be piped up here.

And of course when I was mayor, we made application for 50,000 acre-feet of water from Colorado River - not that we intended to get it directly FROM that source, but that was along in 1961, when I first became mayor. We had the idea of an exchange program with the Salt River Project. Perhaps from the <Verde River> and some other source. And that's a long-range deal, but it's conceivable if this Central Arizona Project ever materializes, we may have to go directly TO the Colorado River - if we can get it - no matter what it costs. It may well be that we will come to that point, but we're going to have to have water, we know that. And we're going to have to pay whatever it costs, whether we like it or not.

As far as other projects, right offhand, I'm sure that I might have overlooked some, but the water is the basic need, and we have never had a surplus of water - never had. Of course we've tried to keep up with progress, too, in regard to paving the streets and.... Well, let me think for a minute, Susan if you will.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, I'll turn it off for a minute. (tape turned off and on)

ROLLIN WHEELER: It's a little difficult to grab these things out of the air, but I can recall a few now. Of course we've done our best to improve the traffic situation in <Flagstaff>. We established two one-way streets, which there was a lot of opposition at the time, but the purpose or the function of a street, in my opinion, is to move traffic. You can't satisfy everyone, but I think it's done just that. And it may well be that in the future as we grow, that there'll have to be more of that, north-south streets.

We have a little bit of a problem in East <Flagstaff>, and shall we say West <Flagstaff>, in that it's separated by McMillan Mesa. And there is nothing you can do about it, we're all one city, and we need, of course, to develop more routes between the two areas, let's put it that way. I don't want to say "two cities," because we're all one. But we have improved traffic through the installation of traffic lights. That's in cooperation with the state, of course, on [Highway] 66. And of course in the downtown area we've done that on our own, and in East Flag.

Another thing we did during the time I was there, of course, was we had the problem with the development of recreation facilities. At one time it was thought that we should have a recreation complex on McMillan Mesa with a swimming pool and so on and so forth, but at that time I didn't believe that we were ready for that, and we didn't put it in. The people voted down a bond issue for it. It finally came to a vote of the people, and I was kind of the lone wolf on that, because I opposed it. But since that time, I was happy to have a part in establishing a skating rink up here. We started that out during my last year or so as mayor, and I'm real proud of that development.

And of course the recreation system, we had a parks and recreation director, and I've forgotten the first one. And then we had a young man by the name of Hal Nelson. And then later, Ken Ingols, who at present is in charge of it, and he's done a fine job, I think, in developing the parks and recreation phase of our program. Of course, whenever you're in city government, you find opposition, and you can't please all the people all the time. You can please, as Abraham Lincoln said, [all] of 'em some of the time, some of 'em all the time, but not all of 'em all the time. It just can't be done. So you have to use your best judgement and let your conscience be your guide. That's what I always tried to do. I couldn't please everyone, I knew that.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Why isn't McMillan Mesa developed? Why is it just kind of a division?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, Buffalo Park was an idea that was conceived in the eyes of members of the Chamber of Commerce, and the city went along with 'em to a point. But it became a little bit, oh, should I say unmanageable and unfeasible, in that the expense got out of hand. And at one time we had a plan - in fact, the plans are still there - for commercial and residential development of the Mesa. But then the astral branch of the USGS up there - the astral people, as we call 'em - wanted to built a site here. We were talking about all the various projects, you know, orbiting the earth and going to the moon and so forth and so on. So that building, or those buildings, were constructed up there, and plans for residential development were just held in abeyance. And the same way with Buffalo Park. I don't know what the future of that is. The land is up there, roughly 750 odd acres, plus it's pretty rocky for development up there. Other areas of the town have been developed that were just as rocky. It's all city-owned land. We got that during my years on the council and as mayor. It required an act of Congress in order to make an exchange on it. So the city has that land up there, which I don't know what they'll use it for in the future. It has lots of potential.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Can you tell me a little bit about the development of East Flag?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes. East Flag began during World War II at the time Navajo Army Depot was constructed. And at that time it was not in the city, and development or construction, there was no county planning and zoning commission, no county housing code. And therefore, it grew up a little bit like topsy, without any direction and control. And the old part of East Flag is an example of what's there today, grew up without any planning and without any control.

SUSAN ROGERS: Trailers and houses and everything, huh?

ROLLIN WHEELER: It was just really uncontrolled. And then that was the reason we decided that we thought we should annex it. We had to wait for some time, because the set property valuation didn't justify it. And then later, after the Greenlaw Estates, various developments - I think there were seven projects within that - the Steves brothers started most all of them. Then as that area grew, there were other developers that came in and developed parts to the north up there. And East Flag has grown tremendously, both from the commercial standpoint and residential standpoint. And I don't know but what I think probably their population is bigger than the OLD part of town, the western part. But every time I go out there, I see new developments - shopping centers and so forth. And of course along the highway, that has to be restricted, or the first thing you know, we're gonna be halfway to <Winslow>! (chuckles)

SUSAN ROGERS: Right. Were you here when it used to be called Sunnyside?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes.

SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know why it was called that?

ROLLIN WHEELER: No, I don't know the reason for that. The old East Flag, as we called it, WAS Sunnyside, when it first started. Of course when my wife and I came here, out in that whole area, there was one ranch house, nothing else. Then later there was sort of a, what do you call it, dance hall developed out there, and kind of a road house, I guess they were called at that time. And then during the war, as I said, before the war, and during, right at the beginning, Sunnyside developed. As to how it got its name, I really don't know, unless it was on the east side of <Flagstaff> and the sun came up first over there. (laughter) That's just a guess.

SUSAN ROGERS: Why do you think <Flagstaff> grew so much in the fifties?

ROLLIN WHEELER: <Flagstaff> has everything going for it, Susan. First of all, we are located in a beautiful pine forest. We have a great number of scenic attractions, as you well know, around the city. We are located at the crossroads of 66 and I-40 and I-17, 89, north-south highway, and east-west. Then we have what I consider a fine climate. Some people may not like it in winter, but it's ideal in the summer. So we have everything for it - climate- wise, and transportation-wise and scenic-wise. We have the Santa Fe Railroad, which transportation-wise takes care of that. And various truck lines. That's why some of these industries are moving to <Flagstaff>, because they want to get away from big cities. And they're not too far. I might mention transportation-wise it offers an ideal opportunity for all these tourist motels, because we're about a day's drive from the coast, and about a day's drive from <Salt Lake>, and about a day's drive from the south, and about a day's drive from the east - <Albuquerque> and that area, and Santa Fe. So it makes an ideal stopping point for travel. And that's why we have so many nice motels.

SUSAN ROGERS: You know something about the development of the tourist trade? When do you think that got really started?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, <Flagstaff> has always.... Well, in the beginning we were, as the streets will indicate, we were a lumber and cow town. Then with the development of highways, and of course the automobile that went along with it, which we would play(?) first. But then tourism started. I can remember when there was only one tourist court in town. They called it a tourist court - it was out there where East <Flagstaff> is, Greenlaw. The Greenlaw family owned it, and it was a number of small cabins; wood heaters and so on. And then there was another one developed within town - Brooks Trailer Court it was called - or Tourist Court - downtown where, oh, in the vicinity of The Coconino Sun, the Arizona Daily Sun. And that's all there was. But gradually over the years, of course the Depression slowed things down, but World War II is really what started, we might say, the tourist industry, because these soldiers came through here on the trains and they liked the area and moved here. And then the valley to the south; "Valley of the Sun," it was called. And they liked what they saw, and they came back. And then, as we say, the development of highways, why, the tourist trade started to boom. Now, I don't know how many motels - I lost track a long time ago. But at one time we only had two hotels here, the Weatherford and the Monte Vista. Well, actually, I should say three - the old Commercial was recently burned. Well, we did have another little one at the time. I guess it's still in existence.

MRS. WHEELER: The Ideal.

ROLLIN WHEELER: And the Ideal, that was another one. But they were family-type hotels. But it's been since the war, of course - the big war - that tourism developed. At the present time, I think we're - I must mention this - I think we're fortunate, and during my term we did our best to promote it. We have, shall we say, the lumber industry, which has always been a big factor in the growth of <Flagstaff>, in the economy; and cattle and sheep; and then we have the scientific community, which is Lowell Observatory, and of course the Museum of Northern Arizona; and the educational phase of it, which is the university. So with all those three types of, shall we call them industries, which contribute to our economy, we've had, I think, a pretty stable economy and a healthy economy, and one in which we aren't troubled by, oh, strikes and things of that nature. So that, I think, as I've said before, we did our best when I was there, to promote that. And I think it's a good thing. It's one of the things that's made <Flagstaff> what it is today - the fact that we have that diversified economy. And I hope we'll continue.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, while you were in office, do you remember any disappointments - you didn't accomplish something that you thought should have been?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Oh, I suspect there were a number of things that we didn't accomplish that we set out to do. We couldn't build roads and streets fast enough - I know that - because of the money. And we did develop our police and fire departments. In fact, I think we have as fine a police department as there is in the state - real dedicated people, and that's what it takes, of course. Right offhand, I'll have to think a minute on that, Susan. (tape turned off and on)

Susan, you asked about disappointments. I was fortunate in that I think that we had a fine bunch of councilmen during the terms that I was mayor. We saw it, for the most part, although I won some and lost some. I can remember we used to have quite a battle at times in regard to providing water for out-of-city users. And while I sympathize with those people, and had we had a surplus, I would really have been happy to see them get it. But I didn't feel it. I felt that our first duty was to the people of <Flagstaff> who had paid for and developed the water system, and therefore they should have top priority. And because I knew that we did not have a surplus, and of course the provision was always made whenever we gave water to out-city users, or to big users, that we had the privilege of cutting them off, if there were any shortages. But in my experience, it's almost an impossibility to do that, because once they had established water connections and that sort of thing, it's just almost impossible to do. But when you take the initial steps - I'll get to that, for that reason. In some cases, I _____ [tape slipping] gain some concessions ________ provided a lot for themselves through wells or something.

Now, here's one thing that I neglected to mention when you asked about accomplishments. ______ was hired in ______ bragging or anything. _________ building code and housing code. ______ during the time that I was councilman in 1954 and started to develop it. _________ building inspector in '54. And without it, this very rapid growth, we would have, well, we would have had a terrible situation. Because without a housing and building code, people can build, as I mentioned before as an example, out there in Sunnyside, the people can build without ____________. Then other people come in there and buy a house or whatever, buy it more or less sight unseen, without knowing _________ inspections, and the building and construction of the house, and the foundation and then your __________. [tape slipping}

[END TAPE 1, SIDE 2; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE 1]

ROLLIN WHEELER: The purpose of a housing and building code, of course, is to ensure that there'll be certain standards set up which must be met, and which people, later purchasers, can rely on when they come to town and want to build a house and buy a house. And of course there was opposition, I remember, at the time, but now, anyone who comes into the city since we've had the building code, can be assured that they can check up on the standards and see what's required as to, say, your beams and your rough construction must be a certain - that is, the trusses a certain width apart, and two-by-fours within your wall construction, and your foundation construction. They can find out just exactly what it is and know that they meet those standards, and therefore they can see whether or not it's worth the asking price. Of course that isn't always the criteria, I know, because sometimes necessity demands they take whatever they had to. But I'm real proud of that. I'm glad that my wife here recalled that to my memory, because that would have slipped me. I think it's one of the great accomplishments, as a matter of fact. I'm real proud of it.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Now before I back-track and ask a few different questions, you just want to say anything more, anything else about being mayor?

ROLLIN WHEELER: I enjoyed my terms as mayor. During the latter - well, in 1961 I was appointed to the Executive Committee of the League of Arizona Cities and Towns. Then in 1966 I was named president of the League of Arizona Cities. And that's an organization comprising all of the incorporated cities within the state. And so as mayor of <Flagstaff>, of course, I was eligible for appointment to the committee, and also the committee itself elected me president. And I enjoyed my contacts with various city officials throughout the state. And then I'm very happy and pleased to say that at the end of my term, they made me a life member. And if I may say so, there aren't too many of those left in <Arizona>.

Being mayor of a city, and a mayor of a charter city, has its good points and its bad points, of course. The chief power that a mayor of a charter city wields is through his influence and logical reasoning with the members of the council, because previous to the change in the charter rules, the mayor had no vote, except in case of a tie. Of course there were many times when I DID break a tie. I didn't hesitate to do it, because once I made up my mind on a thing, why, I felt that's the way it was. Now, of course, the mayor has a vote, and it's majority vote. But the mayor, of course, is regarded by citizens who may not be too familiar with the setup, as the top man. Of course the mayor gets all the gripes and all the complaints and so forth, because they think he has complete power to change everything in a moment. And he doesn't have that power. And city government, like any other governmental organization, is sometimes a slow process. And it's good in that respect. It's better to take your time at it than to go off half-cocked and make decisions that sometimes you later regret. But I enjoyed it very much.

Of course the mayor has to be the official representative to all - well, every public program that goes on. Ceremonial duties are a part of the office. He cuts ribbons and makes speeches and welcomes different groups. That's part of it, is the ceremonial part of it - in addition to the real nuts and bolts of the thing where you deal with the city problems. Frankly, I enjoyed the handling the city problems and promoting the controlled growth, more than I did the ceremonial part of it. But one takes it all together - that's part of it.

And as I say, I was fortunate in that as mayor I got to meet a great many people whom I otherwise would not have met. That is, within the state and federal government. That's something that I cherish very much. President Kennedy was here in his early campaign, and it was my privilege to have breakfast with him, along with some others. And of course our state representatives in Congress, Senator Goldwater and Senator Fannin, Representative Rhodes, Steiger, Udall, and others before them. It was my privilege to know John R. Murdock, who was one of our representatives to Congress. Great gentleman, professor of government at <Tempe> {ASU}. It was a very rewarding job.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, to backtrack just a little - and these are just general questions. How did the Depression affect <Flagstaff>, do you think? - or in particular, the schools, since you were more familiar with that at the time.

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, Susan, I think that <Flagstaff> was less affected by the Depression than a great many other cities and towns within the state, as well as throughout the country. At no time did we ever have our school warrants registered - even though our salaries were cut, we could always cash those warrants. And as I say, there were others that had to hold them, and borrow money in order to live, and we never had to do that here. And so I think where as it slowed things down - I can remember when our bank at that time - we had the one - I can't remember the exact name of that - but anyway, it went broke in 1932. And a great many people, including my wife and I, lost everything we had. And it happened that I was in college, working on my master's degree at the time, and I'd written checks for tuition and books and things, and every one of 'em bounced. I had to borrow money in order to go to school and in order to live. I'm sure there were a lot of others. The ones I felt sorry for most were a lot of our older people who lost their entire life savings, and they were hurt, of course. Eventually, through the efforts of Dr. Earl Slipher and Mr. C.B. Wilson, and perhaps some others, the bank paid off, as I recall, about forty-eight percent. Of course when you lose all you've got, why, that's all. And whether it's five HUNDRED dollars or five THOUSAND dollars, or FIFTY thousand, why, you've lost it all, and I don't know who's the worse off, because you can't be anything more than broke, unless you're deeply in debt - and we were, but we managed to come through it in pretty good shape, and the town managed to survive, and everybody.... Well, there was no great furor about it, and everybody was broke, and most of the people were happy in spite of that fact. And they helped one another, and we managed to come out of it. At that time we were small enough that, as I told you, we were about 7,500 people, and most everyone knew everybody else, and we managed to cooperate and work together. Times were hard, but we were in pretty good shape, all in all. We didn't have too much to cry about.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, good. Now, what about World War II? Any special effect on <Flagstaff>?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes, with the construction of the Navajo Army Depot we had, of course, a great number of.... I don't know what the total figure was, in regard to the employees at the depot, but it had a great effect on our economy. It was a shot in the arm, so to speak. Even though it's only out here twelve miles, of course the officers and others lived on the depot, but most of the people lived in town. And of course that boosted construction for homes and businesses in order to take care of the growth. Those people -- I found them, during my terms - and it was, of course, most of the time I was there - they were extremely fine people and very cooperative, and we got along fine. We helped each other, and what was good for NAD was good for <Flagstaff>, and vice versa. And as I said, those fine people were the various commanders out there, and administrative officers were always cooperative. It was a great boost for <Flagstaff>.

SUSAN ROGERS: What did the depot actually do?

ROLLIN WHEELER: It was a storage depot for ammunition and other vital war materials. See, it was from the coast, we were in the Pacific war as well as the European side. Munitions, supplies, were shipped in here, and stored, and then shipped to the coast, and of course shipped as it was needed, to the various shipping points on the coast.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. Do you remember any big fires, floods, or blizzards? Maybe something that particularly affected the school. (tape turned off and on)

ROLLIN WHEELER: You asked me about blizzards or things of that nature. During my time on the council, we did have - of course we had had a couple of heavy snows before that - but in 1967 we had the heaviest snowfall we've ever had, I guess - seven feet on the level. And I can remember that came just before Christmas and during the Christmas holidays. And after spending an entire vacation from school down at city hall, because we had all that snow to remove, and we had to hire equipment, and rent it from every source that we possibly could. I can remember we got good cooperation; the mayor of <Phoenix> offered to send equipment, and the mayor of Prescott and others. But we had a problem then. There again, people were very cooperative. It was a problem not only of removing the snow, but where to put it! And most of it we were able to put a lot of it on the banks of Rio de Flag and IN the Rio de Flag. Then we had to take some of it out of town and get rid of all that stuff. It was quite a problem, I'll tell you. And that equipment was costing us about $6,000 a day, just to rent. And of course it continued to snow and snow. The poor equipment broke down, and at that time we didn't have the amount of equipment we have now. We had, I think, one Snow Go [i.e., brand name of snowmobile (Tr.)] which we had purchased second hand - maybe two - later we got another one. But we used those as they do now, on city streets. I know there are times when they gripe about snow removal, but those people, I think, do an excellent job. I've been around different cities where they've had snows, and at the time they've had the snows, and I think that our people did a magnificent job. It's no easy task to work around the clock and fight the cold and all the other conditions. And that equipment shop did a magnificent job keeping that.... A lot of that stuff was surplus Army and Air Force, and we bought it because, there again, it was cheap and it's all we could afford. It broke down, naturally.

Now, you asked about fires. We haven't had any major ones that I can recall right offhand - or didn't have at that time. And let's see, nor floods during the time I was there. Of course there have been in previous years - there were floods. Of course I'm always a little alarmed to think - and I fought it the best I could - the closing, the pinching in of the Rio de Flag, because that's our chief drainage from the north out here, and at one time, of course, this area, before it was built up, was under water. There was a lake right where we are now, as a matter of fact. We've tried flood control projects, of course, and whenever we do have an excessively great runoff, why, the south side suffers too, down in that area where the Rio runs. But as far as a great deal of damage during my time - let's put it that way - I don't recall the - that old river’s been high, and it's been lappin' the bridges at different times, but fortunately it hasn't overflowed. We haven’t suffered.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, let me ask you about some of the early Fourth of Julys. Did you used to attend the Pow Wows?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yes. Pow Wow, I can't recall the first time it was started, but it seems almost as long as I've been here we've had some kind of....

SUSAN ROGERS: I think just about when you came.

ROLLIN WHEELER: Yeah, Fourth of July celebration and Pow Wow, and it developed. Jack Fuss was one of the fellows who - he's an old-timer here - one of the fellows who first started that. In the very beginning, well, the Indians came to town and the Pow Wow committee fed them. They formed a rodeo for small purses. They had the Indian dances at night. It was a very colorful show - still is. But it was not any such grand scale as this, but it developed over the course of years, until they got dance teams from all over. But it was primarily Navajo and Hopi, and also New Mexican Indian groups. Of course there were others from there - the Hualapai and the Supai came, I remember. And the Apaches, I think, came - and others. I can remember two interesting ______. The Indians all came to town in wagons in those days. And they'd start a week in advance from the reservation. The horses weren't very good in those days. Incidentally, they've graded them up - very good since then.

Out at the edge of town, the Pow Wow committee would have wagonloads and truckloads of baled hay, and had watermelons. Every Indian wagon got a bale of hay and a watermelon. And then of course during the course of the Pow Wow days, they were given more. And of course, I say, they were fed at the time, too - big roast beef, beans, and that sort of thing. I can remember sometimes there was a shortage of plates and the Indian men would use their hats - literally, put that stew right in the hats. But sanitation regulations were not so strict in those days. And of course they'd have their mutton. You might not have seen that, I don't know, but I've seen - they'd always bring mutton to town. They'd hang it up - well, it became jerky, I guess, after a time. They'd hang it right out in the open there, and of course they were used to that sort of thing, and I guess germs weren’t feared in those days. But everybody had a great time, and it was a great show. Let me see, was there something else along that line?

SUSAN ROGERS: When did the Indians finally start moving into <Flagstaff> to live?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, I think probably during World War II, because a great number of them were employed.... In fact, there was an Indian settlement in the depot, proper. The Indian village out there, toward the western side of the depot, and the trading post established out there by S.I. Richardson and Bill Young. They had their trading post and their village out there. But a lot of them lived in <Flagstaff> and commuted, like the Anglos did. Since that time, they've been steadily moving down, and making a place in the white man's world. I have been interested in that for a long time, because I wrote my master's thesis on the history of the Indian reservations in <Arizona>. And at that time, which I completed in 1933, I visited the various reservations, and was in communication with all the different reservation people. I have been greatly interested in the progress they've made, and it's been a slow process, but I would hope they would never lose their culture, because it's a priceless heritage. But on the other hand, the fact that they have to compete in the white man's world, and many of them are realizing that now, it's a choice which they have to make. But they don't necessarily have to lose their culture as a result of it - and I hope they won't. They have many fine people, and I think they're making progress.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, and what can you tell me about the development of the south side?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, we have been interested in that for a long time. One of the first projects, of course, was the paving project that we undertook down there. And then with the housing and building codes, we have attempted to upgrade the housing and the development of it, and I think we've accomplished a great deal. I think we've got a lot more to accomplish. You mentioned, there was one fire down there, some time ago, almost an entire block burned. And that was due to the fact, I think, of course that the houses were poorly constructed, and they were too close together, and of course when one went, they were tinder dry, and boom! they all went. But now with the building code regulations and housing code regulations, I think there's been a great improvement down there, and people have begun to have pride in their homes, and they've built better homes. And I think overall- and as I say with the development - paving does a great deal to upgrade an area, 'cause you get rid of the dust and mud that goes with it. I think it's done a great deal. I think they've come a long way. Of course we had that city project down there in Pine Knoll, which was a city project, you know, Brannen Homes. And incidentally, I didn't mention that so far. Clark Homes was built during the war over here, and later Brannen Homes, and it was primarily for low income people - and particularly people working at the depot. That project, Clark Homes, was to be abandoned. It was a temporary construction project, and it was to be abandoned at the end of the war. But, we found that there were so many people who were in need of that type of housing, and there wasn't any other place they could go, so in the course of time, when the war was over, we acquired that as a city-owned project, and have continued it to this day. And I don't know how long it's going to last, but you'd be surprised at the number of prominent people today who have at one time or other, when they first came, lived in Clark Homes. I could name a number of them - I won't name them, though. It was the only place that they could find to live. And then later, of course, with construction, that was taken care of. I think we've done pretty well in that respect, as I say, with Clark Homes and Brannen Homes, and that Pine Knoll development area there. I've seen a lot of changes, and of course they don't come readily to mind, but I've rambled from one to the other.

SUSAN ROGERS: No, you've done fine. Let's just switch to a different subject. Why don't you tell me how you met your wife and when you got married and that?

ROLLIN WHEELER: Well, I met her in <Colorado>, in <Greeley>. She was a student at Colorado State Teachers College at the time, and I was too. She, with her parents, had moved to <Greeley Colorado>, from <Wisconsin>, because of her mother's health. I came because I'd read a lot of Zane Grey books, I guess, and wanted to come west. I had an uncle in <Greeley>, who'd been there for some time, and of course that was a help. I'd come with the intention of going to the University of Colorado at Boulder, but being a poor boy, I had to find work, and I couldn't find it in <Boulder>, and I went over to <Greeley>. So I met her there in 1922, when I first came. And then we were married in 1924, in August, and we celebrated our fiftieth anniversary in 1974. And '75 was the fifty-first, of course.

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of anything you want to add about anything?

ROLLIN WHEELER: I can't think of anything, Susan. I think I'm pretty well talked-out. Of course after this is over I'll probably remember a LOT of things. That's always the way. But as for the moment, I think I've mentioned everything I can think of. I might say this, I'm still interested, even though I'm not IN city government. And I serve on the museum or Pioneers Historical Society out here - a member of the board of directors - and I'm proud to see it improving and increasing in its development. I'm still on the water advisory board, and I'm glad to see that coming along. Water, as I say, is vital. And I've served on a number of state commissions and others, but I'm in favor of anything that's good for <Flagstaff>. That's the big thing. It's been good to me, and I hope that I've contributed a little bit.

SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, fine.



