LYNK AND ADDA SMITH INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-29



[BEGIN SIDE A]





Babbitt: You know, it's awfully nice to be with you fine folks. Like old times to get in here and have a little visit with you. 



Lynk: I say. We were talking about you last night. I wondered how (unclear) was gettin' along. 



Adda: (unclear) 



Lynk: We get a paper, you know, The Arizona Republican and the <Flagstaff> paper too. 



Babbitt: Mrs. Smith, you were talking a few minutes ago about the early days in <Arizona>. You said something about you came to <Oak Creek> really in the old times. 



Adda: I lived in <Oak Creek> in 1885. Old Mr. Wilson left me in my sister's house. She got [married?]. 



Babbitt: Is that Old Wilson who after Wilson Mountain's named? 



Adda: Yes, that's (unclear). 



Babbitt: What was your name before you married Lynk here? 



Adda: Adda Fenstermaker [phonetic], (unclear) 



Lynk: And I probably (unclear) some way. Never got justice, I guess. 



Adda: My sister raised me. 



Babbitt: And you, your daddy brought you in from where? 



Adda: <Pennsylvania>. 



Babbitt: In covered wagon days? 



Adda: Yes, (unclear). 



Babbitt: And then you came out in a covered wagon to <Arizona>, did you? 



Adda: We came from (unclear) <Albuquerque New Mexico>, on the train. The train was just there. And my sister's husband, (unclear), we went out on the (unclear) camp. I know you're taking all this down, (laughter) (unclear) 



Babbitt: That's all right, you forget about it. 



Adda: And, we went--he wasn't strong enough to work in the (unclear), and they sent him back to <Albuquerque>. He died in <Albuquerque>. My sister, she went out (unclear) train (unclear). And then she (unclear) Cook. 



Babbitt: And you lived there when you were a girl, at the springs that Cook ran? What did he call 'em, O'Neill Springs? 



Adda: No, we lived in Pumphouse. 



Babbitt: Oh, Pumphouse, that's right. 



Adda: He come (unclear) 1884, in May 1884. He come out there and took charge of the pumphouse. 



Babbitt: And your sister married Cook? 



Adda: Yes. 



Babbitt: And who used (unclear). 



Lynk: That's his mother. 



Babbitt: Who used the well, the mill company? 



Adda: No, Flagstaff, railroad company. 



Babbitt: Oh, the railroad company. 



Lynk: The railroad company, yes. They pumped it from our pumphouse to a tank in <Flagstaff>. That's where the trains took their water. 



Babbitt: And then the people of <Flagstaff> also used that water, didn't they? 



Adda: No, I think the people--I'm not sure. Now I don't remember. I think they used (unclear). 



Babbitt: Uh-huh. Well, I know that it was an old, old-time installation. I didn't realize the railroad had done it. I thought the old Arizona Lumber and Timber mill had done that. 



Adda: No, (unclear) had that put in there. 



Babbitt: Cook married your sister, and lived there for some years, is that right? 



Adda: Lived there five years. 



Babbitt: And did they run any cattle on there then? 



Lynk: No. No, all the cattle you ever seen around there was the Babbitts', and they come in there in '86, I believe. 



Babbitt: Well, did you have any snows up there like we had last year? 



Adda: Yes, it was more that year. (unclear) so hard that Jim used to leave in the morning with a horse and sleigh and go to <Flagstaff> and come back (unclear) snow the next morning. 



Babbitt: Would there be more snow than our famous big snow last year, when we had twelve feet altogether, in the year? 



Adda: Well, I guess it was. The only thing, when we had snow, we stayed in all winter. 



Babbitt: Well, it kept snowing time after time, didn't it? 



Adda: We had snow from the start of (unclear) 'til spring. 



Babbitt: Well, what did you do for grub if you were out there and the snow got so deep? 



Adda: (unclear) supplies. 



Babbitt: Deer were running around, I suppose. 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: And turkey. 



Adda: Now, we never got no turkey, but we got deer. 



Babbitt: Antelope? 



Adda: No antelope. 



Babbitt: Did you get a [calf?] once in a while? 



Adda: Yes, we got a calf once in a while. (unclear) come through, they didn't have (unclear). 



Lynk: You know, George (unclear) changin' now. 



Adda: (unclear) Dorothy (unclear) fifteen or twenty hogs every fall (unclear). 



Babbitt: Well, then you left the springs, and went on down into <Oak Creek>, is that right? 



Adda: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Where did you settle in <Oak Creek> then--didn't you say in '85, wasn't it, you went to <Oak Creek>? 



Adda: In '85 we went down and lived that summer on <Oak Creek>, and then moved back to the pumphouse again. 



Babbitt: Where were you in <Oak Creek>, around <Sedona> somewhere? 



Lynk: At the Cave, the Babbitt Ranch. 



Adda: No, it wasn't, (unclear). Bill Collier's place. 



Babbitt: I don't know where that is. 



Adda: Well, Bill Collier had the cave, he had the cavern right just north of the cave. 



Babbitt: Is that what they call the Santa Fe Flat? 



Adda: I couldn't tell you what they called (unclear). But you know the cave right below your place? 



Babbitt: Yeah, with the spring coming out of it. 



Adda: Yes. Well, we lived there. (unclear) the lower end, below that cave, was (unclear). 



Babbitt: Was Hart up at the (unclear) now? 



Adda: Yes, he lived across the creek. (unclear) across the creek. 



Lynk: (unclear) carried the mail from Beaverhead Station over there to Sunset Cross in '75. (unclear) saddle mule and a pack mule. 



Adda: That orchard up there. 



Lynk: Snow was this deep. 



Adda: (unclear) Hart, (unclear) in about '81. (unclear) <Mississippi>, said he (unclear). (laughter) In '85, those apple trees had their first apples. 



Babbitt: You know, I left some in there, just for the sake of sentiment. There's still some of those old trees growing there. 



Adda: And (unclear) about '80 or '81. 



Babbitt: You must have known the Hart kids, Les and (unclear). 



Adda: Yeah, all of 'em. 



Lynk: Went to school with all of 'em, didn't ya'? 



Adda: No, I went to school with someone. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Where would you go to school then? 



Adda: We didn't go to school. I went one year, I went to school a month. That was in '84, I went to <Flagstaff>, stayed with Mr. and Mrs. (unclear), and went to school a month, went home, (unclear). And then the next year, when I was twelve years old, I stayed a week with Uncle Davey and Aunt Nancy, and went to school a week. 



Babbitt: <Flagstaff> wasn't very large then. 



Adda: I guess it wasn't. (laughter) It was two stories. (unclear) 



Babbitt: (unclear) Kilpatrick. 



Lynk: Old Kilpatrick. 



Adda: Yeah. Old Kilpatrick (unclear). 



Babbitt: That was before the Babbitts came, too, wasn't it? 



Adda: Yeah. (unclear) 



Lynk: You didn't get (unclear) until.... 



Babbitt: Until '89, '88, somewhere.... 



Adda: I was here about '86 or '87 (unclear). I know Jim (unclear). 



Babbitt: Where did Kilpatrick have his store? Up near the Old Town Spring? 



Adda: No, I don't know what you call it now--Main Street, I guess. 



Babbitt: Railroad Avenue. That's what we call Railroad Avenue. 



Adda: Yeah, and just up (unclear). 



Babbitt: Well, Brannen's is right across from Blank's Bar now. That's where the old Brannen Store was. 



Adda: Yeah. Well, I don't know (unclear), don't know anything up there now. 



Babbitt: Were there any hotels or boarding houses or anything, a place to stay? 



Lynk: The Rutherford there. 



Adda: No. 



Babbitt: How many people would you say were in <Flagstaff> then? 



Adda: Oh, (unclear) <Flagstaff> (unclear). 



Babbitt: How many of the old people do you think you can name? The Switzers? 



Adda: Switzers, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Kilpatricks, of course, if they had the store. 



Adda: (unclear) Kilpatricks (unclear). 



Babbitt: They (unclear) then? 



Adda: They were (unclear), yes, when I was up there. 



Babbitt: And the Brannens--there were several of the Brannen's then, weren't there? 



Adda: Yes, the Kilpatricks and Brannens. 



Lynk: Blacks was there then. 



Adda: Yeah. Blacks was (unclear). In the 1800s, the Blacks were there, because--! know that because (unclear) come to <Flagstaff> to buy potatoes on the (unclear) camp. And Blacks would dig 'em for ten cents a pound. 



Lynk: Didn't Mr. Babbitt have a store there, right where the depot sets now? It belonged to Charlie Kaplan [phonetic]. The Babbitt brothers sent Charlie Kaplan down, and they kept a store on <Dry Beaver> for a long time. Charlie Kaplan was the man that owned it. 



Adda: (unclear) I don't know anything about that. We went there in December 1898, (unclear). 



Babbitt: When you first went to <Flagstaff> was in eighty.... 



Adda: In '84. 



Babbitt: In '84. Well, you know, they talk an awful lot about the site of the original flag staff after which the town is named. 



Adda: Yes. 



Babbitt: Do you remember where that was? 



Adda: No, I don't. You see, we didn't come until'84. <Flagstaff> was named then when we come there. 



Babbitt: Did you know Charlie Clark, the old Clark family? 



Lynk: Clark's Valley? 



Babbitt: Yes. 



Lynk: Yes. Charlie and Ace? 



Adda: I went to school with John Clark. I went to see John Clark (unclear). 



Babbitt: In <Flagstaff>? 



Adda: (unclear) before he died. 



Babbitt: Do you remember the name of the teacher? 



Adda: Marshall. 



Babbitt: Eva Marshall. And were the Ashursts there then too? 



Adda: Yes. (unclear) 



Lynk: (unclear) 



Adda: (unclear) 



Lynk: John Marshall. 



Adda: And John Marshall was there, (unclear) was there. 



Lynk: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Well, John Marshall ran the water line later on for the city. 



Both Smiths: Yeah. 



Adda: I knew Mrs. Marshall when Josie was just a little baby, about the cutest child I ever saw in my life. 



Babbitt: She was supposed to have been the first white girl born in <Flagstaff>, Josie (unclear). 



Lynk: Wagner. Is he up there yet? 



Babbitt: (unclear) 



Lynk: I ain't seen him for years. 



Adda: (unclear) Charlie's still (unclear) too, isn't he? 



Lynk: Charlie (unclear). 



Babbitt: Charlie Marshall is a barber. I heard the story about the Hawks boys, taking 'em out of school. Were you going to <Flagstaff> then? 



Adda: No, I think they had (unclear) went to school then in '84 and '85. Went just one week in '85 and a month in '84, but them Hawks, they were terrors. 



Babbitt: (laughs) They were pretty salty boys. (laughter) 



Adda: (unclear) Hawks (unclear) and so was John. 



Babbitt: You said they had two stores. Did they have any bars? 



Lynk: Yes, (unclear) had a bar. 



Babbitt: Of course you wouldn't know much about that. 



Adda: No, (unclear). (laughter) Even though my brother-in-law was a drunkard. 



Babbitt: Well, would they have cattle outfits running around <Flagstaff>? 



Adda: Not that I know of. Oh, yes! The Hashknives, they was out north of <Flagstaff> (unclear). 



Lynk: I used to work for the Hashknives. 



Adda: (unclear) to know much about all this, (unclear) had some cows south of us. (unclear) bought two cows from him. 



Lynk: George Foster [phonetic]. 



Adda: (unclear) No, he was in <Flagstaff>, I think. 



Lynk: Oh, (unclear). 



Babbitt: There weren't any sheepmen (unclear)? 



Adda: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Oh, the Daggs men were there, weren't they? 



Adda: Yes, the Daggs and Moffetts. 



Babbitt: Moffetts? 



Adda: (unclear) I don't think. 



Lynk: I just to buy sheep from Daggs when I owned the Montezuma Well Ranch--buy eighteen or twenty at a time. 



Adda: (unclear) come home one day. Of course I was livin' (unclear) didn't come home. Said, "Well, I guess the war has started. I seed Pete Daggs in town buyin' up all the (unclear) and candles you can get." 



Babbitt: The war started? Was that the Spanish-American War? What war was that? 



Lynk: (unclear) War. 



Babbitt: (unclear) I didn't understand your given name, maiden name. Let me get that. 



Adda: Adda Fenstermaker, A-D-D-A, Adda Fenstermaker. 



Babbitt: You moved down to <Oak Creek>, and then where did you go? 



Adda: Back to the pumphouse. 



Babbitt: And where did you meet this guy, Lynk Smith, and (unclear) get married? 



Adda: <Phoenix>. I met him in <Flagstaff>, comin' over the (unclear) pumphouse. I didn't know him, and I didn't (unclear). (laughter) 



Lynk: (unclear) old times. Way out there in [Bellemont?]. There's a little sawmill, and I went up there and asked her for something to eat there at the pumphouse. Then (unclear) Old Lady Newman kept a restaurant out there at that lumber yard. Had a little lumber mill, I don't know if you know where it's at or not. 



Babbitt: I really don't. 



Lynk: Old Lady Newman kept that big hotel out there-that is, a boardin' house. 



Babbitt: Was that run by the old Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, or another group--the sawmill? 



Lynk: Arizona Lumber Company (unclear). 



Babbitt: That was an old ALT camp? 



Lynk: Yes, that was it. 



Adda: (unclear) Burch. 



Babbitt: You're talking about people who were living in <Flagstaff>? 



Adda: Yes. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Yes, yes, (unclear). There must have been probably a hundred people or so, that was about it, wasn't it? 



Adda: I guess somethin' like that--maybe more. 



Lynk: Just about a hundred people in <Flagstaff> when I first come to town. Well, (unclear) was any town or any railroad. You see, the railroad never come through there 'til '82. 



Babbitt: You were in this country before '82, weren't you? 



Lynk: Seventy-six [i.e., 1876]. 



Babbitt: You were in <Arizona> in '76? 



Lynk: Started to <Missouri> in '76, and I went to <Iowa> in '74. And when I went to <Iowa>, I stayed one winter, and my mother died in '75. Then I started west in either '76 or '77. (unclear) beat me here. 



Babbitt: Were you alone when you came out, or did you come out with a caravan? 



Lynk: Just a man brought me and my twin brother out--a man by the name of Jim George. I give him forty dollars to take me across to Stillman's [phonetic] Lake. 



Babbitt: How old were you then? 



Lynk: Thirteen. 



Babbitt: And you came out with your cow ponies, probably, didn't you? 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: And probably a pack horse? 



Lynk: No, (unclear) pair of mules and a wagon. We crossed the plains with old (unclear). (recording turned off and on?) 



Babbitt: What was that, Lynk? (unclear) 



Lynk: That's it. (laughter) 



Babbitt: Let's see, Lynk, we were talkin' about when you came in. You came in on a couple of mules, in 75, was it? 



Lynk: Seventy-seven [1877]. 



Babbitt: And paid some fellah to take you to Stillman Lake. And then you were in <Flagstaff> before there was ever a town, is that right? 



Lynk: The railroad never got into Flag 'til '82. 



Babbitt: What were you doin' around Stillman Lake? What in the world made you want to come out to this country? 



Lynk: Comin' across the plains. My brother was there, he sent for us—a half-brother. 



Babbitt: He was the one that you mentioned as being a mail carrier? 



Lynk: Yeah. He was carryin' the mail, 'til I come here from Butte (unclear) over here to Sunset Crossin'. You know where that is, (unclear) Pass. 



Babbitt: Down near <Winslow>. 



Lynk: Yeah. He carried the mail to there, then come back. 



Babbitt: Didn't he have a little trouble with the Indians? 



Lynk: Never did. I never saw an Apache 'til.... We didn't have no trouble here after '77, although they was breakin' out once in a while, but not to amount to anything. 



Babbitt: Well, you had more trouble with rustlers, again, didn't you--cattle rustlers? 



Lynk: Yeah. Couldn't keep a saddle horse. (laughs) (unclear) keep him locked up. 



Babbitt: What would they do, steal your horses on you? 



Lynk: Oh yeah. That's what the Apaches--if they'd gotten horses or cattle, why, they wouldn't bother you, if you stayed out of the way. They just wanted the horses and (unclear). 



Babbitt: That was Apaches, that wasn't white men rustlers? 



Lynk: Apaches. You see, Al Seibers [phonetic] had 200 warriors at <Fort Verde> in '75. They'd break out, you know. That's the reason I got that book, the Apache Kid's history. I've got his book now. He run down in <Sonoita>, and all down in that country. 



Babbitt: The War Trail and the Apache Kid is the name of the book, yeah. 



Lynk: Yeah, Apache Kid. 



Babbitt: You say Seibers had these warriors here. Were they Indian warriors? 



Lynk: Yeah, Apache, 250 of 'em, Al Seibers. 



Babbitt: Would they get out of hand? 



Lynk: They had to mind him. (unclear) kill their own tribe. You see, there was another outfit, would come in here and they were just in small bunches. My brother went here to <New Mexico>, (unclear). He knew the Hutchinson boys. They went over here to <Tonto Basin> someplace and killed a bunch of'em. Old Keller [phonetic] was with 'em. You didn't know Keller, that was before your time. 



Babbitt: Not Kellum, was it? 



Lynk: No, Keller, Old Jim.... Let's see, what was his first name? Keller, and Morse Koltch [phonetic], and my brother, and (unclear) Hutchison, collared a bunch of'em over here in <Tonto Basin>, and killed all of'em. They were just a- breakin' out, you know. Al Seibers sent 'em out there. 



Babbitt: What was your brother's first name, the mail carrier. 



Lynk: Hornback. The half-brother be on my mother's side. See, my father and mother was married, both had children. So it would be a half-brother to both of 'em. 



Babbitt: Yeah. Were there any way stations between Sunset Crossing and the <Verde> down here? 



Lynk: No. 



Babbitt: Beaverhead, where he'd carry mail? 



Lynk: No. There wasn't no road, there was just a trail from Beaverhead Station. And old Charlie Dickerson, George Dickerson's father, carried the mail from Beaverhead to where <Dewey>> is now. And then there was a mail carrier from <Dewey> on into <Prescott> and back there. And then Charlie Dickerson would take it there and bring it to Beaverhead over here. And then my brother would take it on to Sunset Crossing-Rock Station, we called it then. 



Babbitt: How often would they make those trips? 



Lynk: I think it was daily. 



Babbitt: Go one way, one day, and back the next? 



Lynk: And back the next. He'd stay all night at Rock Station, and then he'd come back to Beaverhead. How far is that now, from here to up there at (unclear). 



Babbitt: About sixty miles, wouldn't it be? Something like that. 



Lynk: Forty, fifty miles. Fifty, wasn't it? 



Babbitt: Where did they get the mail to Sunset Crossing? That would come in from the east? 



Lynk: Come in from the east. There wasn't no railroads, you know. 



Babbitt: Wasn't even a railroad to <Albuquerque> then, was there? Probably not. 



Lynk: No, probably not. 



Babbitt: These fellahs carried [the mail (Tr.)] every fifty or sixty miles, then the next man would pick it up and take it? 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: And then the other fellah would take it from Beaverhead, and then he'd go on over, you say, to <Dewey>? 



Lynk: To <Dewey>. 



Babbitt: Then where would he go? 



Lynk: Next go to Prescott. A man by the name of [Stalin?] used to own the post office at <Dewey>, right above <Dewey> there, on the old road. 



Babbitt: What did you do when you were a kid around here? 



Lynk: Just monkeyed around. We didn't do much of anything, only break horses once in a while. 



Babbitt: Would you trap then? 



Lynk: No, I didn't know anything about trappin', not for twenty-five years. 



Babbitt: Well, did you work for cattle outfits, though? 



Lynk: Oh yeah, I worked for the Hashknives. I worked for John Marshall. And worked for Ashurst. I done more work, I worked more for John Marshall than anybody else. 



Babbitt: Do you remember the names of some of the old brands? 



Lynk: K Bars. 



Babbitt: Whose was that? 



Lynk: John Marshall. Ashurst used the mule shoe. And the Hashknives had the C-O Bar [CO]--that's the Babbitts. Bill [Soder?] had--I've got a thing to find out here, the old T-C Iron, Tom Garritt [phonetic]. I've got it hangin' up out in the shed now. 



Babbitt: Were there any real big outfits? The Hashknife was a big deal. 



Lynk: Hashknife was the biggest outfit here. See, John Marshall, we had about 1,400 head. He married the Widow Koontz [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: That's a big outfit nowadays, but they had 10,000-15,000 head before they thought it amounted to much in the old days. 



Lynk: I'd say! (laughs) 



Babbitt: Did they have trouble with rustlers, anybody stealing their cattle? 



Lynk: Yeah, all the time. All the time. 



Babbitt: Those were white men, those weren't Indians? 



Lynk: White men. See, the Hashknives, if they run into a calf belong to you, through a mistake, they wouldn't brand it. They'd either buy it from you or they'd kill it. It wasn't nothin' in that Hashknife iron but what belonged to the Hashknives. The boss told 'em not to get nothin'. (unclear) if they made a mistake on your calf, why, you'd better sell it to 'em. 



Babbitt: Some of the rest of the outfits weren't quite as careful as that, or cautious, really. (laughter) 



Babbitt: Weren't there a lot of cowboys at the Hashknife in those early days? 



Lynk: Yes, there was Tom Pickett and Frank Ramsay and George Smith, Barney Stiles [all phonetic spellings]. 



Babbitt: Walter Durham? 



Lynk: Walter Durham. That there, oh, Frank Ramsay, he's in <Phoenix> now. He owns a big farm in <Phoenix>. He was a young man, then. He worked for the Hashknives. 



Babbitt: That must have been, what, fifty years ago? 



Lynk: Oh, longer than that. That there is about sixty years ago, somethin' like that. 



Babbitt: When you worked with the Hashknives, was that when you were up in <Flagstaff> before there was any town there? 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: No people there a'tall? 



Lynk: No, very few people in <Flagstaff> then, in the early seventies [i.e., 1870s]. I don't supposed there was over a hundred people in <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: In the early seventies. [You] knew most of the people that Mrs. Smith mentioned a few minutes ago. 



Lynk: Oh, yeah, I knew all of 'em. 



Babbitt: The main reason for <Flagstaff> s being there was it was sort of a stock center, wasn't it, where the stockmen came in and got their supplies? 



Lynk: Yes. Charlie Brannen kept a store, and I thought the Babbitt brothers was in with him. Kilpatrick was, right down where the depot sets now was the only store in <Flagstaff>, as I remember. Right where the depot sets now. 



Babbitt: What'd they do up there for good times, besides drink a little? 



Lynk: Drunk all the time when they could get it. (laughter) 



Babbitt: There was a little gambling going on? 



Lynk: Yeah, I'd say. 



Babbitt: What sort of cards did they play? 



Lynk: Faro and roulette, monte. I don't know how many more games there was. 



Babbitt: Poker? 



Lynk: Yeah. Unidentified man: Crap games. 



Lynk: I'd say. 



Babbitt: I suppose you knew Sandy Donahue up there. 



Lynk: (laughs) Yes, I wish I had them times today. 



Babbitt: Did you know Sandy Donahue, Lynk? 



Lynk: I say I did. 



Babbitt: He was quite a character, wasn't he? 



Lynk: Yes, he was, Old Sandy Donahue. Unidentified man: Died in the poor house. 



Babbitt: Yeah, that's what I understand, poor Old Sandy passed out. 



Lynk: Sandy Donahue come back to me one time, he was sheriff of <Coconino County> then. It was all one big county then, Yavapai. He come [through Mesa Verde?], right down that store, right down that old (unclear). Somebody told him that I was a member of the [Rock Moze gatherin'?]. And he come down and I said, "I'll come back with you, but I don't want to go." I was workin' for him, and I didn't see him long, (unclear) 



Babbitt: Mose Casner's supposed to have had a lot of money hidden out. 



Lynk: I believe he has. I believe he's got lots of money hid yet. 



Babbitt: You don't think they ever found it all? 



Lynk: I don't think so. Unidentified man: Never found only $800, the way I heard it. 



Lynk: He told Dan Fain that he'd give him $50,000 for the [Glennydashun?] outfit. And he said, "I've got $50,000 to give you, Dan, for that outfit. I've got $55,000 is all I've got. And I want $5,000 for runnin' expenses for my two boys, (unclear), two boys." 



Babbitt: When was that, that he was robbed? 



Lynk: Well, they coulda come there one night when he was milkin'. He sent me twelve miles after a mule, and they kept [cases?] on me, watched me all the time. And they come there that night that I was gone, and asked if they couldn't get some supper, and he told them yes, they could have supper. He said, "I ain't had supper yet." And he started it off, and they took a gun down on him and told him to give up his money, and they only got $72 from him. And they held him up to a post and liked to (unclear) him to death, and burn him. He wouldn't tell a'tall. 



Babbitt: Did they kill him? 



Lynk: No, but they tortured him for two or three hours, he said. Tac Dagess [phonetic] come there the next morning, and they told him that they'd be back the next night. And the next night I come, and I come (unclear) gettin' it too. 



Babbitt: Mose was living alone up at his headquarters, is that it? 



Lynk: He was livin' right there eighteen miles from <Flagstaff>, right out this-a- way, right out due west of <Flagstaff>. I worked there two years for him, broke mules for him. 



Babbitt: Well, that's where it was. I thought he was down here in the <Verde> somewhere. 



Lynk: No, right there, eighteen miles from <Flagstaff>. 



Babbitt: That's out near <Parks> there. 



Lynk: Someplace right there. I ain't been to the old place since. 



Babbitt: What'd he have, a cow outfit? 



Lynk: No, he had mules--nothin' but mules. Oh, he had two milk cows. Mules. He paid a thousand dollars for a jack. He raised mules all the time. That's the reason (unclear). That's his winter quarters up here on (unclear), (unclear) goes up there today or tomorrow. 



Babbitt: Well, you had awful good range, didn't you? 



Lynk: I'd say we had range. Right here was just a roundup down there, [black grammar?] grass everyplace. 



Babbitt: You mean right here at Smelter City was the roundup ground? 



Lynk: Right here. 



Babbitt: Somebody said grass was belly-high. 



Lynk: I'd say it was. Just take a horse anyplace. You know, you've been here long enough to know that. Just take a horse anyplace. Don't see it anymore, though, George. 



Babbitt: What happened to it, they overgrazed it, huh? 



Lynk: Beat it out, stomped it out. Just beat it out, too many stock. Look at the Hashknives. I don't know how many thousand head they did have. Then there's 76s in Chiva Valley. They had about $75,000 worth of saddle horses-- (unclear) Jim Baker in (unclear) did. Owned all of Chiva, and plumb back to <Prescott>. 



Babbitt: Who was that, Baker and Campbell? 



Lynk: Baker and Campbell. 



Babbitt: Well, I heard that you could almost mow the grass here (unclear) hay. 



Lynk: Cut right down. My brother cut hay for two years, right down there between <Camp Verde>, with a hoe, for Old John Hance. You heard of him. 



Babbitt: Yes, I did. 



Lynk: He worked for John Hance, cut hay with a hoe down there. There wasn't no machines in the country. 



Babbitt: Well, John Hance was one of the early comers into the <Verde Valley>. 



Lynk: Yes, he drove six yoke of cattle. I can show you some boulders there at <Camp Verde>, hauled in there, put a ton of boulders on a hay frame, throw some hay on top of it. You had forty dollars a ton for that wild hay. (laughter) (unclear) He give a soldier a dollar (unclear). Give a soldier a dollar to unload the.... Said, "When you git down so fur in the hay wagon...." Say, "I can't get out of post tonight. I'm going to leave some hay on the wagon for my steers." He'd unload them boulders and go back and get up here to the hay field, about four miles down here. He'd load up a boulder (unclear) had a trailer, (unclear) boulder (unclear). (laughter) 



Babbitt: Who was he sellin' the hay to, the army? 



Lynk: Yes, (unclear) three or four companies here--four or five companies here, of soldiers, then. Two companies of niggers and four or five companies of white men (unclear). 



Babbitt: I wonder what he got for his hay. How much did he get a ton for his hay? 



Lynk: Forty dollars. 



Babbitt: (whistles "whew!") 



Lynk: Eighty dollars for boulders. He sold boulders more than.... That was straight goods. He punched down in the hay all over and get somebody who could reach the boulders. He said, "I'll have to leave enough hay on this wagon for my steers tonight." And he'd say, "Oh, sure." 



[END TAPE 57-29, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Lynk: (unclear) was the first man to settle there. That's right near [Site?], in that flat, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Why wouldn't they allow 'em to settle in there? 



Lynk: The government wouldn't allow you in there a'tall. Unidentified man: Buildin' a fort. 



Babbitt: Did they call it Camp Lincoln then, or was it <Camp Verde>? 



Lynk: <Fort Verde>. Jim Pike [phonetic] was a scout with (unclear), and he wanted a post down in Bell's Flat, you know, down below <Camp Verde> on that big flat. 



Babbitt: I know about where it is, yes. 



Lynk: And he said, "No, the Indians could surround us there. The Apaches would surround us." And (unclear) wanted it up on the hill where it's at now. But he finally told 'em that that was the place to build it. He wouldn't have it built down in there. Seemed like whatever they said went, with the government. So they wanted to put the post down in Bell's Flat, but (unclear) said, "No, if we get on this hill, they can't surround us." So that's where they built it, <Camp Verde>. 



Babbitt: Let's see, that was just before you came here, apparently, wasn't it? 



Lynk: Yes. We were gonna come down here in '74, I think, or 75. That's what it was, was '75. 



Babbitt: When was Al Seibers here with his 200 troops? 



Lynk: He stayed here about from '74 until long.... Al left here about seventy.... The last time I seen Al Seibers was in 77. 



Babbitt: You knew him pretty well? 



Lynk: Oh, yes, redheaded feller. (unclear) (recording turned off and on) 



Babbitt: Lynk, we were just talking about Seibers. 



Lynk: He came over here on the [ray?]. 



Babbitt: You say he was sort of a redheaded sort of a fellah? 



Lynk: Dark red. 



Babbitt: He could really handle the Indians (unclear). 



Lynk: (unclear, lots of talking and commotion in background, recording turned off and on) 



Lynk: ... the kids come in. 



Babbitt: No chance of you gettin' lonesome today, anyway, the way they're rollin' in on ya'. Well, we were talking about Seibers. What sort of fellah was he? He must have been quite a scout, wasn't he? 



Lynk: Yes, he was. Wasn't afraid of God nor man. That's a picture of him. I knew him from childhood. 



Babbitt: I see. Thank you. I'd like to look at this. 



Lynk: And he done that killin' in '92. That book got old and I went and had a new one made. The new one there, I had it made in '92. His picture's in there, ain't it? 



Lynk: No, she's got it put away. He had lots of nerve? 



Lynk: I say. I thought that picture was in there. 



Babbitt: They took it out, Lynk. 



Lynk: Oh, they did. 



Babbitt: He could handle these Indians pretty well, couldn't he? 



Lynk: Whenever he said anything, it was that way. He didn't think any more of killing an Indian than you would a snake. It didn't bother him. But he was workin' the railroad over here. I don't know what year it was he was killed. I can't remember, but a rock fell on him. He was buildin' a road, and he wouldn't let the Indians go back under there. He had all Indians workin' for him, and he wouldn't let 'em go into this cave. He went back in there, and the rock caved on him and mashed him. 



Babbitt: Well, when he was down here in <Camp Verde>, apparently the reason the Indians minded him was because they were afraid of him. 



Lynk: All the time. They listened to him. Whatever he said was law. 



Babbitt: Pretty salty old boy, wasn't he? 



Lynk: Yes, he was. 



Babbitt: Was he a big man? 



Lynk: Yes, he weighed about 180, heavy-built. He was a man all over, (unclear) said he was the bravest man livin', he wasn't afraid of nothin', no way. (unclear) I knew him there at <Camp Verde>. About the first night I got acquainted with (unclear). A fine man to talk to, but you wanted to let him alone. (chuckles) Yes, sir, Al Seibers was an awful fine man. 



Babbitt: Well, I'd heard a little about him, but I didn't know too much. He came out before you did? 



Lynk: He was here before I was. 



Babbitt: Was one of his first jobs up here in <Camp Verde>, or had he been an Indian scout before? 



Lynk: He at first was at Fort Apache. 



Babbitt: White Mountains? 



Lynk: Yeah, at the White Mountain, where he generally held out. You see, them days, if I understand it right, the way he explained it to me, he was deliverin', he was a man that paid all his soldiers off. 



Babbitt: Paymaster? 



Lynk: Paymaster, that's right. Like you'd go to.... And he told the Apache Kid that there'd be no killin' while he was gone. He put him in charge of the tribe. And just as soon as.... The Apache Kid never said "aye," "yes," or "no." But when Al Seibers was gone, he went across to another place and killed a man, murdered the man that killed his father. I heard Al tell it lots of times. And he come back, he asked him what he done it fur. And he was mad and he told him that he was gonna put him in the guard house. And he called him up in front of his tent, and he told them to disarm him. That book'll tell ya'. Disarm him, and he was gonna put him in the guard house. And when he set the last one down--he had a Winchester--why the place was settin' his gun down, the Kid, he up and shot him, shot him in this leg, right here. He's lame in this leg, never did get over it, he was crippled in this leg. And Al Seibers killed the one at the side of him, and then they scattered. He got his six-shooter, and he killed the one at the side of him, but he didn't get the Kid. And from that time, the Apache Kid was an outlaw. He stayed two years in the Superstitions when I was down there. I'd see him every two, three days. 



Babbitt: Who, the Apache Kid? 



Lynk: Uh-huh. He never offered to bother me, and he come here to <Oak Creek> one time. Oh, it's been--well, I'll tell you, the year I was [born?], and he come up there and he rode up in the corral. I had a ranch right out there, and he rode up in the corral and this here Old Man Murdock, Dave Murdock's father, was cleanin' the corral out. And he said, "Ain't that Lynk Smith down yonder?" And he said, "Yes. Go on down and talk to him." And he said, "I don't want to. There's $40,000 on my head, and he knows it," when he killed the Doughby [phonetic] boy there in Superstitious. Mrs. Doughby and Old Man Doughby was my neighbors for a good many years. And he killed that kid right there, four miles from where I worked in the Superstitious. 



Babbitt: You knew the Apache Kid personally? 



Lynk: I say I did! I went up in the corral, he rode right off. And he told Murdock.... I said, "Who was that?" I was down, oh, a hundred yards from there, irrigatin'. 



Babbitt: That was up in <Oak Creek> here? 



Lynk: Yeah, over here on the Mulikeyer [phonetic] place. That's the old Sammy Dickerson place. You know where it is. 



Babbitt: Yeah, (unclear). 



Lynk: And he said, "That there...." He started off, he said his name was Jimmy Stevens. And I said, "There's the Apache Kid, right there, take a look at him." He turned around and kind of laughed and rode right off. He was afraid of me. I wish I'd have got to talk to him, but he wouldn't talk to me a'tall. He told Murdock there was $40,000 on his head, and I knew it--when he done that killin' in the Superstitious. 



Babbitt: Could he talk good English? 



Lynk: Oh, he was educated in seven languages. He talked Latin and Spanish and English and Indian. Al Seibers made a trailer out of him. He knew six or seven languages. (unclear) 



Babbitt: Didn't look like Apache a'tall? 



Lynk: Oh, no, looked yaller, just like.... Well, he'd be just my age if he's livin' yet. We were there together. He's about eighty-some odd years old now, if he's livin'. Lots of 'em down there at Old Man Cole's, used to trap for Frank Dickerson--he knew him. Never did want to fool with him. I never did lay a straw in his way. We (unclear) him for two years in the Superstitious. He'd come in to grub. Sometimes there were forty cowpunchers there, a lot of cattle on the range. The MLs [phonetic] had 5,000 head, and he'd come in there, and we had our hay and grain hauled in there with mule teams. And he'd come there and take so much. He'd take maybe four or five pounds of bacon, some flour and everything. They could tell the Apache Kid had been there. We'd set a can a certain way, he'd come in and take some canned fruit. We (unclear) there for two years. Never offered to bother us. 



Babbitt: Was he treacherous sort of a fellah? 



Lynk: Yes, he was treacherous. You bet he was treacherous. 



Babbitt: In other words, when you saw him, you never did know whether he was gonna shoot you or not, is that it? (someone hands Babbitt something) Ah yes, thank you. 



Lynk: That's him. (chuckles) 



Babbitt: He was a good-lookin' sort of a fellah, wasn't he? 



Lynk: I'll say he was. As long as you let him alone--I wouldn't no more be afraid of that man than I would be of you. I never laid a straw in his way, in any way. He told Murdock, he said, "Smith's all right. He never laid a straw in my way, in no way. I (unclear) out there with him for two years, and I'm afraid of him." He was afraid to know that I'd give him away some way. But he never bothered me a'tall. I wasn't any more afraid of that man, and I met him several times on the range, and he'd go around me. He was afraid of me. I worked there in '90. I went there May of '90, and I worked '90 and '91. I worked there a year after I was married. I worked there about three years on the same ranch. Tex Barkley [phonetic] owns it now. 



Babbitt: Who were you working for then, Lynk? 



Lynk: ML outfit. There were about 5,000 head of ML cattle. Then there was SWs, Billy Whittle's [phonetic] right across on Preen [phonetic] Creek. They had about 4,000 head. Then there's Jack Treasure [phonetic] and John LaBarge [phonetic], the JL Iron and Diamond J Iron, and Old Hewitt. I don't know where Old Hewitt's brand was. I thought I'd keep it, but I didn't. John LaBarge used the JL. Charley boys--now, you knew the Charley boys--they used the Diamond J. And the ML outfit, I worked for 'em three years there, and never did see him. He died a short time after I commenced workin' for the foreman. 



Babbitt: Who owned the old ML outfit? 



Lynk: Morrow--George and Ed [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: That was in 1890? 



Lynk: In 1890. 



Babbitt: What part of the <Superstition Mountains> were they located in? 



Lynk: On the south. The old home place is there, rock house and everything there now. Right on the south, just a mile from the <Superstition Mountains>. 



Babbitt: Who'd you say owns that place now? 



Lynk: Tex Barkley. 



Babbitt: Was he the one who'd come out and take a shot at you? 



Lynk: No, he won't, but he's got men that will do it. Ernest told me he drove that big stage, the bus, for a long time. You knew Ernest Barkley. He drove to <Flagstaff> for years. (unclear) Ernest now. He's a cousin to Tex. That Old Man (unclear), his son-in-law (unclear) here two years ago from Tex. He's gettin' so old he said he turned everything over to his boy. 



Babbitt: Well, what was the Apache Kid doing in the mountains there for two years--just hiding out? 



Lynk: Hiding out. He'd make a raid and kill what he wanted. If you got in his way, he'd know you, too. But he just stayed there, it was a good place to stay. I can show you a place there now where he said he counted us boys every mornin'. Wanted to make up their mind to lay for him and kill him. But I seen him on the range and he told Joe Gibson, "I count you boys every mornin'. I know right where you're goin'." Then he'd come down, you know, we'd leave home, there were four of us (unclear), five of us. We'd leave home, ridin' on the range, then he'd go there and help himself to what he wanted. He killed that Doughby boy there. I don't know whatever caused him to kill that ten-year-old kid, but he did. 



Babbitt: Just a vicious streak in his temperament, I guess. 



Lynk: There were a lot of cattle in that range. When I went there in '90, there was [bulls?] everyplace. 



Babbitt: Didn't the kid take squaws, steal 'em from the camps of various reservations and so on, and he'd kill them, wouldn't he? 



Lynk: Yeah, took that squaw with him. Read right in that paper, it'll tell ya'. 



Babbitt: Well, he killed her, too, didn't he? 



Lynk: No, he left her. 



Babbitt: He killed a lot of 'em, though, didn't he? 



Lynk: Well, he killed those that were afraid of him. I don't know whether he killed her or not. But that paper said that he died of TB, but I don't think so. 



Babbitt: How many men do you suppose he killed? 



Lynk: Oh, mercy, God knows I don't know how many. 



Babbitt: Probably forty or fifty men, maybe more. 



Lynk: Forty or fifty men, yes, he killed that many. I was never afraid of him, never laid a straw in his way, but he was always afraid of me. And he knew me, I hadn't seen him for years. And he seen me out here at <Oak Creek>, and he told Murdock, "That's Lynk Smith, right down there. He's all right, too. But I ain't." (laughter) I wasn't no more afraid of that boy (unclear). Never laid a straw in his way. 



Babbitt: Were there any other bad men, tough guys? 



Lynk: Well, that there Billy the Kid. I never did see Billy the Kid but once. 



Babbitt: That wasn't in <Arizona> though? 



Lynk: No. I seen him (unclear), he come through here--Billy the Kid did. It's in that book there. He killed twenty-one men, you know, when he was twenty-one years old. 



Babbitt: This book you're referring to I see is written by William McCloud Rain [phonetic], this little booklet. I'm going to try to get a copy of that too. 



Lynk: You take care of it, and take that book along, and get a copy of it. 



Babbitt: All right, if I can borrow it, I will. 



Lynk: You bet. 



Babbitt: Then when you left the Superstitions, you came on up into <Oak Creek>? 



Lynk: No, I stayed in the valley, Butch Hurley [phonetic], for two years. 



Babbitt: Where'd you meet your wife and get married? Up in Flag, wasn't it? 



Lynk: No, I never seen her, to know her, 'til I got to <Phoenix>. Jim Cook went to <Phoenix> and rented 160 acres of land, the old.... Whose place was that, Mama, that Jim Cook rented? 



Adda: His name was Mr. Gray. 



Babbitt: That's where he came and bummed the meal from you, wasn't it? 



Adda: No, that was Pumphouse. 



Babbitt: Oh, that's Pumphouse where he bummed the meal. 



Adda: When he was only nineteen years old. 



Babbitt: Well, he didn't remember you then, did he? 



Adda: No. We got to talkin' about that one time, and he said he went over there and got a meal at Pumphouse one day, and (unclear). 



Babbitt: Lynk must have had quite a line of bull to make you remember that long! (laughter) 



Adda: I remember (unclear). I told (unclear), "Here comes a turnip, wantin' somethin' to eat." (unclear) to come over to the house, you know, (laughter) (unclear) 



Lynk: Long time ago. 



Adda: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Is that what they call a saddle bum now? 



Adda: That's what you call a saddle bum nowadays. 



Babbitt: What'd you call 'em, tramps? 



Adda: We called 'em tramps afoot. He didn't have no horse. He was (unclear) afoot. 



Babbitt: Oh, you were afoot? 



Lynk: I had forty head of horses at the T6 Ranch at the time. I thought I'd let 'em stay there, and I'd go over to work at this sawmill. Where is that sawmill? 



Adda: (unclear) (laughter) 



Lynk: There was a sawmill out from <Flagstaff>. (unclear) right at Roger Lake. (recording turned off and on) 



Babbitt: You say Mr. Rogers was another old-timer? 



Adda: An old-timer, (unclear). 



Babbitt: Did you know him too? 



Adda: Knew him (unclear) <Mexico> (unclear) butcher shop. About all I knew. (Lynk and Adda both talking at same time, both far from mic, neither discernable) 



Adda: (unclear) railroad (unclear). We boarded over a hundred men, and Mr. Rogers (unclear). 



Babbitt: What'd he do, have a cattle outfit? 



Adda: (unclear) hundred and eleven. 



Babbitt: He ran his cattle down there where the DKs run their outfit? 



Adda: Well, I don't know where DK is now, but it was Rogers Lake. He owned that contract. 



Babbitt: He came out pretty early, too, didn't he? 



Adda: Yeah, he came out here--did he come out to Pumphouse, or come out here with (unclear) in '84. He must have come out here about '82, '83. 



Babbitt: What kind of fellah was Rogers? 



Adda: Oh, it's been so many years now (unclear) I remember. He's an older man than me. He was kind of short, I think, heavy-built man. 



Babbitt: He had a pretty good-sized outfit, did he? 



Adda: Well, I don't know. Hundred eleven brand, that's interesting. 



Adda: Hundred eleven was his brand. 



Lynk: Hundred eleven. That was old.... 



Adda: (unclear) Old Man Rogers, 111. 



Babbitt: Well, Lynk, you said that you came up to <Oak Creek>. Where'd you come when you--the ranch that you sold here a few years ago, is that where you settled in <Oak Creek>? 



Lynk: Right below Page's. That's the first ranch I owned. 



Babbitt: On Page's Spring? 



Lynk: Right below there. 



Babbitt: And then did you own Montezuma Well at one time? 



Lynk: Along about eighty.... I sold it out to Bill Bach [phonetic] in '88. Traded it to him for two horses. 



Babbitt: Traded for two horses?! 



Lynk: I give one for it. A man by the name of Shell, Sam Shell [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: You get 160 acres there, that whole ranch there? (laughter) 



Lynk: The ranch is just like jack knives. 



Babbitt: You didn't own so much value on that, did you? 



Lynk: Unt-uh. I owned the Holland's Head [phonetic] place, and Montezuma and then I owned a ranch, the Horseshoe (unclear) and I bought the Horseshoe Ranch from.... You see, that Montezuma Well Ranch and the Horseshoe was two different ranches. The Hornbacks [phonetic] sold (unclear). It's been so long ago, in '79 or '80, somewhere along there. 



Babbitt: You didn't homestead it, you bought it, is that it? 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: How'd you get it originally, the Montezuma Well? 



Lynk: I didn't. You see, just a squatter's right. 



Babbitt: And you swapped a horse for this fellah's squatter's rights? 



Lynk: Yes. He had a little [tavern?] built there, pretty nice little house. He was killed at Pine Springs for his money, Sam Shell was. And he said, "I ain't gonna come back here. Won't you give me somethin' for this ranch?" I said, "Yes, I'll give you a saddle horse fur it." He said, "All right." I'll never forget, a blue roan. I traded it off to Bill Bach for two! (laughter) I'm going to show you an old stamp iron, George. 



Babbitt: All right, I'd sure like to see it Lynk, thanks. (recording turned off and on) 



Lynk: TC. I branded some [poultry?] about a half a mile from Fool's Lake, along about sixty years ago. (unclear) branded two or three years, TCs. I got a little horse, ridin' the half snake, and I laid it into a fork of a tree along a trail, and it laid there 'til that tree growed up and died. Stayed there in the fork of that tree about over fifty-five years. Kilibrew [phonetic] found it one day, and he said, "You ever remember puttin' an iron in the fork of a tree up there at (unclear)?" And I said, "Yes. TC, I laid it up in the fork of a tree." He brought it down to me. 



Babbitt: Well, what'd you fellahs do when you wanted to have a good time? Would you have dances? 



Lynk: Yes, dances. (unclear) (laughter) (several people talking from afar, none discernable) 



Babbitt: Two, three days at a time?! 



Lynk: Two or three days at a time, just as long (unclear) give out. Take a rest. 



Babbitt: What would you do, stay drunk two or three days? 



Lynk: Three or four days, and then take a half a bottle (unclear), (laughter) 



Babbitt: What could you buy a bottle of whiskey for then, Lynk? 



Lynk: You could get it for about three dollars a quart then. I've got a bottle in there now that I got for.... A dollar eight cents a pint now. 



Babbitt: Where would you have your parties--at the different ranch headquarters? 



Lynk: Well, we had one dance right down here at that time, about a hundred yards from here. They had a big shed, at the time that they tried to rob this man, Tom (unclear). He had to go to <Camp Verde> to get away from 'em. A fellah by the name of John Isaac. He was killed here at the Middle Verde, a man by the name of Baxter. 



Babbitt: Was gonna rob Tom Carroll [phonetic]? 



Lynk: Was gonna kill Tom Carroll. Tom Carroll had lots of horses and cattle then (unclear). Whenever he'd sell a horse, I'd put that on (unclear). Wasn't no such a thing as (unclear). And Kilibrew brought me this iron about two years ago. 



Babbitt: You mean they'd be branded on the hip, and then (unclear). 



Lynk: (unclear) on the shoulder (unclear). 



Babbitt: A good way to get in trouble, wasn't it, to try to brand on a (unclear) brand? 



Lynk: (unclear) I've got the old [Blue Silver?] iron too. It was two half-quarter circles with a bar in it. It's over on Beaver now. I aim to get it. I laid it at the side of the road here four or five years ago. 



Babbitt: You save those old irons, Lynk, they're interesting things to have. 



Lynk: They say (unclear) Bill Silver iron there at your place? Unidentified man: (unclear) a bunch of them old stamp irons, but I don't know what become of 'em. 



Lynk: Well, sir, I know I think I brought that Bill Silver iron to your place and left it. (unclear) <Phoenix> (unclear) iron (unclear) up here. 



Babbitt: Let's come back to these parties. How often would you have one, once or twice a year, or maybe oftener? 



Lynk: Oh, mercy, about every week. We used to have a week or ten days. If we went ten days we thought we'd get out away from dancin', forget how. 



Babbitt: Who played the music for you? 



Lynk: We had an old man by the name of Smith, Cherry Creek Smith they called him. Then they had a fellah by the name of (unclear) Raptison [phonetic]. And Sherm Session [phonetic]. And let's see, (unclear) Session, and Old Smith, Young Raptison. 



Babbitt: Those were the musicians? 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: What'd they play, fiddles? 



Lynk: Yeah. 



Babbitt: They were all fiddles, huh? 



Lynk: All fiddles. (unclear) twenty dollars a night. (unclear) he'd sit there and play a fiddle all night, never played the same tune twice, 'til morning. 



Babbitt: And then you had to call 'em. 



Lynk: (unclear) 



Babbitt: You say he did that too, had a good time? 



Lynk: Oh, mercy! (laughter) (unclear) 



Babbitt: Where'd you get the girls to dance with? 



Lynk: <Prescott>. (unclear) They'd come clear from <Prescott> over here for dances. See, it was a pretty wild country them days, you know. No cars or nothin', come in buggies. Had a big dance at <Camp Verde> at the Jerden [phonetic] place one night. Danced all night (unclear). 



Adda: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Is that what they'd do? 



Adda: (unclear) 



Lynk: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Sounds like the girls had an awful good time, too, didn't they? So many fellahs tryin' to dance with 'em. 



Adda: I guess. 



Lynk: (far from mic) (unclear) Sycamore one night, and old Mose (unclear) and Pat Ghadis [phonetic] and (unclear). (unclear) played the fiddle. He had a band on his arm, played the fiddle, and we'd change and I'd dance with that girl one time, then Pat Ghadis would dance with her. We just changed dances, danced 'til daylight the next morning. 



Babbitt: Just the four of you? 



Lynk: Just the four of us, four girls. 



Babbitt: Four men, was it? 



Lynk: Just four men, Pat Ghadis, and (unclear) remember that dance at Sycamore. Pat Ghadis. I believe (unclear) butcher from Jerome. I think his name was Goodman, Johnny Goodman. Unidentified man: Johnny used to play, too, didn't he? 



Babbitt: Did you get in on some of these dances he talks about? 



Adda: I should say I did. 



Babbitt: Would you dance all night too? 



Adda: (unclear) we had there in <Phoenix>. We had (unclear). (laughter) 



Babbitt: I guess the girls didn't drink much? 



Adda: (unclear) 



Babbitt: Didn't drink at all? 



Adda: No, they didn't drink, and they didn't smoke. 



Babbitt: What'd you think about these fellahs that did all this drinkin'? 



Adda: I didn't think very much of 'em. 



Babbitt: Married one. 



Adda: [He never drank then. Not around me, he didn't.] I'll put that on the books right now. 



Babbitt: That was part of the deal was it? 



Adda: You bet that was. He did get drunk one time and come home and liked to died. But he laid right there and he got over it. 



Babbitt: You just let him lay, did you? 



Adda: I did. 



Lynk: (unclear) 



Adda: "I wish I had a cup of hot coffee." He got drunk on wine. He can't drink wine. (unclear) sick. Wine just makes him as sick as can be. He laid right there.




