Call number: NAU.OH.74.2.4

Collection name: James Biglin

Narrators: Agnes Robbins, Lee Robbins, Fannie Yazzie, Paul Acotly, Irene Acotly, Pauline Cornfield, Mary Butler, Marie Yazzie, Cecila T’sinaginnie, Recita Johnson and Roselyn Kaibitony

Interviewed by Frank Jensen

Interviews conducted in Navajo and English

Date of interview: 1974

Place of interview: <Tuba City Arizona>

Translated and transcribed by Bahe Katenay


AGNES ROBBINS INTERVIEW

Interviewer: Here, I have arrived at John Lee Robbins’s home – Joe Lee Robbins. Having been asked to give him a visit, I am here now. They are both here which includes, Agnes. Now, the person shall speak directly to you and will also record on to it. You asked me to do as such by recording on to it and I’m here to do so. The person will speak as they wish and thereafter, it will be up to you listeners as to decide what you think about it. We shall see what will be said.

AGNES ROBBINS: ...In that area, where they were W11sh7]’d-]’s [U.S. government’s] the children’s learning was adequate and thus, they acquired better education..

[Brief noises]

AGNES ROBBINS: So in the current school, there seems to be some flaw or that there is something unlikely about it. And so I told them, ‘just deliver them back to me.’ I said that to the H1’0l7t’11’iigii’ [educator or principal] and he/she did not looked too pleased.1 It was that they did not speak to them, the girls that were students.

Rather, they should be re-learning about the framed loom [d11’iis7gl-‘h]. There are also the work skills that involve around the home and this I wish they would re-learn, too. [Inaudible, but referred to an individual who did not received education.] Even without this kind of education, it will still be fine, and this is how I feel. I do not know how (they) will think about this for me –those who are in charge. Or our leaders, too, they should think about this for me. This will be all.

LEE ROBBINS INTERVIEW

LEE ROBBINS: …For that purpose, he has come to visit us in our home, a home of the Dineh and the old-styled home which we still continue to dwell in. This home still provides us the goodness from where there is the origination of thinking and planning. It has remained this way from the past.

The educational system of this other place is good and also of W11sh7]’d-] is good. My children have attended those schools and have studied hard. That is my only reliance it seems, or that we both rely on and it has helped us. We had expected the same of this other school but that one posed much difficulty. So, that is how it is and it does seem to me it is unlikely. The way she had stated her feelings is the way I think, too. ‘First, let them be delivered back to us,’ and then after, it must be thought through again. It is not to do away with it completely but to re-think about it. Then there are my leaders, the council persons, administrator for the children, and the

1 H1’0l7t’11’iigii’ translates to: one for whom the counting is done. It can refer to a teacher or a school administrator. 3

newly elected chairman who stated ‘he’ll fix it all.’ All of it needs to be straightened-out for me and with much thoughtfulness. This is how it is and this will be it.

Interviewer: So that is how things are. It is Frank Jensen, here, making the ‘interview’ [in English] and it is I speaking. Despite their appreciation of (it), their child who has a habit of joining other girls that drink and are involved with that ‘tobacco,’ which they are accused of having and which we hear about. They wish it not be this way or as it has been told. It is very obvious that people exist so indifferently [d0’b44l7’t’44g0h’].2

It is the truth when I look ‘straight forth down their arms’ that they have nice homes and properties. They are of the men folk with much intellect and that of the women folk who are the same, too. Their ways of living are incomparable to none. I know these people and that is why I say this. Also, they are very aware of their ancestral men folk, their paternal clans and their grand fathers, all of them have been taught much like the same. Perhaps, it will turn out to be the same as then or it will be alright, but this school now interferes with or alters things for them and that according to their statements. That shall be. I complete this ‘interview,’ the gentleman has spoke to you and then, there, it will be up to you as to how you will ponder upon it. It was you who have directed this [project] toward this person and that allowed me to speak on his behalf. Okay, that is how it will be. This is Frank Jensen speaking and who has made this ‘interview.’

FANNIE YAZZIE INTERVIEW

Interviewer: Here now is Fannie Yazzie with whom I am making an ‘interview.’ So here, the lady is seated and will express her thoughts. I will not direct her as to what she should say and this [interview] will be done with her own thoughts. These were the main purposes of the ‘interview’ that you have assigned me to do, and I have made this visit here and she will place them onto it [add to the recordings]. We shall now hear her talk and after that, you will decide how you wish to think about it.

FANNIE YAZZIE: Good Greetings, my listening audience [Sh7’ Kw1’11h’ s7n77’]. I express my appreciation for you being directed here for this effort and that which has come to me. What I wish to express to you all are my conscience and thoughts. It is about the schools which is a good thing for all our children. It has been a while back since my children went into school and still today, they are consistence with their schooling. There is ‘no single area of it’ [academically and as pupil] where they have caused ill-affect. They do their studies well and two of the older ones have completed school. They finished without doing any ill-effect to the system.

2 D0’b44l7’t’44g0h’= not similarly reflective or not duplicate of. Dineh meaning that it is not “normal.”4

It is up to the responsibility of the mother and the father and that is what counts. It is yourself that has to teach them about things to avoid and letting them know what is unacceptable, and that helps them with their education. Then I hear from some of you that, you feel education is not a good thing but I appreciate education even though I never went to school –not even the first year. So I have it difficult, there is not a job for me, nothing I am capable of doing like speaking English, and when a white person comes, you wonder what they are saying to you. To prevent this, it is essential that our children study hard [y44’g0h’] and it will be very beneficial in the long run. This will allow them to go forth and hold down good employment.

There are (some) who have graduated and have become teachers. There is an appreciation for that, and two of my own children have graduated and now have a good life. One is in H00zd0’h [Place of constant heat meaning <Phoenix> area] and is employed at a repair place for ch77d7’ ]11’n2’eh’ [crawling automobile meaning heavy machinery]. I am very pleased with them. They do not bring me to a state of worries instead they ‘pleasantly secure my mindset without worrisome’ []7zh0]7g0’h sh’]8’yiid11’0s7n’]. Then there is the younger girl, and just up here at the ‘public school,’ [in English] where she recently graduated. Now she maintains employment there where she is a teacher’s aide. With this, I wish for her to become a real teacher perhaps. These are my hopes that futuristically ‘her mindful-path would gain more skills’ [11]77’ iin11h0l’11ld0’]. Thus those that are the upcoming generations will be taught by her and so, the learning of more skills is good.

The future outcome would be ‘to walk with goodness,’ as the saying goes. She has not yet acquire a spouse, but continues to rely on her job to provide security and to even provide for her younger sisters [b77’d44zh’k4’] and her younger brothers [b77’t’sel7’k4’]. In this way, she helps us, too, and has done that thus far. There is just that regretfulness for not being educated or having the ability to ‘hear’ [understanding English]. Both of us parents have never attended school, we do not know about the English language or the paper [printed material]. The way I see it is that it is way better for those who are educated. Ever since my children have attended the public school, I have been satisfied. I have been satisfied with the teachers and I do have gratitude towards them for instructing our children.

When they return back, it is I that take the responsibility to teach them about the life ways here. There are the standing-loom, carding wool, and any other work around the home. In this matter, you are assisting the teacher, too. Also to allow them [student or children] to lay around at home far into the sunset for no reason is a very bad thing. They need to maintain their education without missing class, and that is the best thing for them. Every day they need to stay focus in order for them to not get behind. However, I see certain children that seem to wonder around, and I do not allow this for them [her children]. It has to be an everyday effort and to complete those five days and then for my mindset, it is much better. 5

I do have hope that in the future they will expand the education system because our children have increased in numbers. There are many small children reaching that school age and I hope they can build larger facilities. Contrary, there are those against the school system, and I did grow up herding sheep but that has not provided me anything. That seemed to have only halted my progress and I am not employed anywhere and despite this, I only work at home for and on behalf of my children. I house-sit for them and I am here to provide stability so that they have a place to return back to. For your children, you need to be motivated for them and for their wishes, and you make sure that they are able to participate. You have the liberty to make the decisions for them in terms of a good education, my listening-audience. So this shall be the amount of time that I have spoken to you.

Interviewer: This is I, Frank Jensen, who has conducted the ‘interview.’ As I look at these people, it is amazingly unlike any other [11d0’h b44l7’t’44h g0h’] in the way they live out here despite not being educated [English learning]. They ‘truly and intensely’ [d0’h 11s0h0d0’h b44sh7’ g0h’] immersed their children in school. It is true that some do not accept education. As I observe, if those ‘utility, electricity, radio, refrigerator’ [stated in English] were installed, and as I see in their eyes, they speak without doubts toward those convenience. Then their intrapersonal wellness should be fitted with your considerations, and as I have fulfilled this project that you have assigned me. This will be the hope. How else can this be viewed? It is real that their intrapersonal wellness should be fitted in order for a community to exist without much indifference, and everything will be fine.3 It is I speaking, Frank Jensen, making this ‘interview’ here. Okay, this will be it.

PAUL ACOTLY INTERVIEW

Interview: This location is Paul ‘and’ Irene Acotly’s home. I am the one doing the ‘interview,’ Frank Jensen. It will again be recorded in the same manner. In the manner as they think, they will state it as such. I will not direct them as to how to make their statements and they will do as they feel. I have discussed this with them already. Also, note that there are chickens or what have you, making some noises. They may pose some interference but despite that it should be fine. So now they will speak to you. Think about their words and make considerations accordingly.

PAUL ACOTLY: It is nice that visits are being made among us for the purpose of our children’s education. It is perhaps true and important that this has to be done. We have much appreciation for the education that is being provided to our children. Having the ability to hear the white people’s language is so desirable, but for them that opportunity has been good. Some

3 References were made to the Dineh word, !1]77’ and Ii]44, in several ways and it has been translated to: one’s mindset and one’s intrapersonal wellness. The Dineh identify an individual’s psychological makeup a little differently than western concepts and it is quite difficult to translate, !1]77’ and Ii]44, accurately. 6

of us were never schooled and because of that, perhaps they [children] will remember us in later times to be willing to translate for us and able to help us throughout. For the boys and the girls, there are much hopeful things that the educated ones can be adored with. There are some young women now being employed and have nice settings where they work. Such jobs that involve paper processing [secretarial] are something that is desired for (one’s) children. As for the boys, it is the same with getting an intense education. How will it be, one wonders? Will they have a very good job, one will hope? This is the reason why and from here we push them to immerse them in education.

We get up early at twilight just for them and make meals for them. Then they run off. Usually you make the meals while they are busy getting dress. This way it is good and while you immerse them. They receive their education flawlessly. [Inaudible] …It will be the only thing that can make progress. This will be the size of my talk.

IRENE ACOTLY INTERVIEW

IRENE ACOTLY: I have the same position which is that I wish for my students to become educated. What I wish for them, my children, is that they should graduate.

This abuse [uncertain what type] that is inflicted upon my children is very unacceptable to me. You see, one has b11d11 hiidiil’d0h’ [an atmosphere left him/her meaning succumbed to] with a lack of interest in school. They [school personnel] need to stop these acts then it will be better. It is teaching, and it is a decision that is up to the teachers. That committee that oversees education is to properly talk to them and that is the reason why they are educators. For example, ‘Do not do this’ is what you are told in learning. This [issue at hand] I feel is not good. For me, this will be it.

Interview: I who is making the ‘interview’ will place more on top of it on their behalf. I have visited with Paul Acotly and with Irene Acotly. They live quite nicely out here. However, they state that, ‘our children are being abused.’ They refer to the oldest boy and for that reason, he misses a lot of school days, and this she wish to be stopped. Make this consideration for them. My true observation of these folks is that she is truthful, and the boy, whose mother I did the ‘interview’ with, is present here, too. So acknowledge their words and provide some consideration. There are some ‘comments’ [said in English] which were made and I have place that on here [assumed that it is hand written]. I will include those when I returned all of it back to you all, the school administrators. Again, it is I making the ‘interview,’ Frank Jensen, from ‘<Tuba City>.’

PAULINE CORNFIELD INTERVIEW 7

Interviewer: ‘This is Frank Jensen over here at Pauline Cornfield [in English].’ I am sitting at her home now. I am the one doing ‘interview’ and I have arrived here. She will place more on top of it and however much that may be. Here is Pauline Cornfield, and the audio will be listened to and considerations are to be expected. I think she will place them on here nicely. I doing the ‘interview’ will allow her to state everything in her own words. She will speak to you now in the way she feels and whatever way that might be. As listeners, you will do whatever possible to make it reasonable for her, and know that her home is situated beautifully.

PAULINE CORNFIELD: I am thankful for this gentleman’s visit so, thank you. His visit is a good opportunity for me since I had wished that someone ask me these questions. Pauline is my name and I work at the ‘hospital’ [in English]. My younger sister lives with me as she attends school from here. So the visitor’s questions are important because I went to school, so did my father as well as my late mother. Every child should attend school. That is how I feel. I think it is good for them. The one being called, ‘public school,’ the school in ‘<Tuba City>’ is the one I feel very appreciative of. My younger sister is in school there. Here, at every morning dawn and on ‘Monday through Friday’ [in English], the ‘bus’ comes and she gets on, and it is nice that she is returned also. To all the teachers and those charged for the school’s operation, I have a lot of appreciation for them including those that feed the children. For some, their ‘parents’ are unable to afford that and ‘free lunch ticket’ [uses English words] as they are referred to is provided, and so I am very pleased with all these, too.

So I am quite please with the way the schools are and I, too, have my own children and I will eventually decide to put them in school. One might say, ‘being uneducated is a struggle’ and I feel that that is a true statement. They may be asking you to translate for them as you see them looking directly at you. I pity them as I hear that. The way I feel is that, if a small child is schooled they eventually, in time, will graduate and they will continue on into whatever they are capable of doing. They may want to continue with more education and education does provide a livelihood, and this I have realized because it has been possible for me to support my younger sisters. It has been awhile since my mother passed-on and I work for my sisters. Let’s see how many --there is three… I buy things they need, feeding them, having a warm place, and the home I provide for them. All these I pay for and it is all for them. One of my sisters attends school from here and the other one is going to school in ‘<Many Farms>’ [in English]. So the ‘public school’ [English] system is a good thing and which I am grateful for. This is how much I want to say to you.

Interview: ‘Well, that’s pretty good’ [in English]. I am here at Pauline Cornfield’s home. I am Frank Jensen conducting the ‘interview.’ This person has a nice place. Now, about the sisters who she spoke of, she is the only one caring for them. She stated that her mom is deceased but she still has her father and that, as the oldest, she is raising them all like her own children. We 8

have a real individual with a real situation and you must take this under consideration. Acknowledge the truthfulness in her statements. As I visited her and been witness to, this b77’l11h’ 11shgl1’ii [the five-fingered meaning human being] is actually providing great efforts over others. She lives out here in a place known as, ‘Rare Metals’ [in English], which is near T0’hn1nes7d7z77 [<Tuba City>] at about six miles east. She works in T0’hn1nes7d7z77 and she is originally from a place known as, Corn Field, out near ‘Ganada’ [Ganado] somewhere. So she is a member of our community at T0’hn1nes7d7z77. I had been asked to do this ‘interview’ which was listed on the schedule, and that is the reason I’m here at her resident to place more on this [record]. In the same manner, her statements should be acted upon accordingly. It is I, Frank Jensen, speaking, from ‘<Tuba City>,’ making this ‘interview,’ and made this visit. Also her statements need to be kept in order as it meets consideration.

MARY BUTLER INTERVIEW

MARY BUTLER: This is I known as, Mary Butler, here. Education is great, and also that I am very much involved each morning to see my children off. ‘Go attend school now and that will provide you with livelihood into some distance time,’ I tell them while they are leaving for school.

Also it is that here at home, there is really no work for them, and that is why their education must be supported. I have much enthusiasm for their education. I do have a wish and if possible, I would very much like to meet each one of the school teachers since they are the ones giving instructions. I have a girl ‘ten’ [in English] years of age who has learned a lot and is able to write very well [used, 11n1’77l7 88’, which refers letter writing and copying]. I do have much appreciation for your assistance, all who are ‘teacher’ [in English and singular reference made].

I do wish for them to graduate and that is why I immerse them into the school system. In the mornings when the ‘bus’ [in English and singularly said] are leaving, I tell them also, ‘quickly get your selves ready.’ I do show my enthusiasm in this way. Myself, I have only attended three years of school and I feel regretful because I wish I would have studied more intensely. I went to ‘Sherman Institute’ [Sherman Institute at <Riverside CA>, circa. 1920 – 1964) My current job is mainly fur [wool and mohair], processing them. Occasionally, my daughter is interested and she tells me, ‘I wish to learn more about working with the fur.’

However I am more proactive for her education and someday, she may graduate and perhaps work with the writer-made-of-steel [b44sh’ b44b7’ k’eh0l7chiihe’ meaning type-writer]. Other areas like the hospital….

9

MARY BUTLER (CONT’D): I wish for her to do secretarial work. This is my hope and that will be her job. With proper settings, there will be that job position of type-writing will put them in an ‘office’ [stated in English] and this is my big wish for them. Thank you.

INTERVIEWER: This place that I have arrived at is ‘Mary Bulter’s’ home and I have interviewed her. It has been done beautifully and that she has recorded some on to it. This is a Dineh person that has truthfully stated her words in that she lives alone with her children. When some person is situated as such, how can they just be looked upon? We can assist such an individual by making ‘an asserted effort over them [give unconditional support].’ As she has stated, you all will respond to it as she wishes. Again, it is I who makes this ‘interview,’ Frank Jensen, from <Tuba City> and this is where I am doing this ‘interview’.

MARIE YAZZIE INTERVIEW

Interviewer: Here is the location of Marie Yazzie’s home where I have conducted the ‘interview,’ and she, herself, will place more onto the ‘tape recorder’ [used English words] and we shall hear that. You have instructed me to do it this way and I’m doing just that. It will be her personally speaking her thoughts as I am not directing her as to what she should say. Okay, Marie Yazzie.

MARIE YAZZIE: Y11’1t’44h, Kw11’1hs9]9’ [Good Greetings, Listening Audience]. Thank you for this visit and opportunity. I am glad to participate in this project which has to do with education and to state that education is very good thing. As some of you already know me as, Marie Yazzie, and that I never went to school. The education system is well and my children have been attending these schools for years now. Three have graduated from here –not sure the name for it but perhaps it is day school? That place is where they graduated at, and there is much joy in having your children in school. It takes ‘a mother’s own self-motivation’ [11hw0’h0, !1m1j77’liinii, 1’11 eh’j77t’44hg0’ t’44hy1’] for your own children and talking with them. Again, I say sometime that I was not schooled, and there are no jobs that are available to me in all directions. I have it hard. If I would have been educated, I probably be employed elsewhere and I also tell my children that perhaps, ‘I can assist you if I was educated.’

Despite all this, I try my very best to provide, even without the monies or with limited adequate foods, and I encourage my children to study in school, intensely. All this time while my children were in school none of them have gotten themselves into trouble. Some children in school become mischievous or that they consume certain elements [prohibited substance]. Some drink or do unimaginable activities and (my children) have never participated in none of these while in school. I am proud of them and now, I have only one more left in school and he is the boy. He hears me tell him, ‘it is not for me that you are in school, my children, but do your very 10

best.’ I do have to get up early each morning for them to cook and it is also because you have love for them. Being that single mother and keeping the siblings together as they look upon me, I continue to be present for them all the time.

It would be all worth it if they keep their studies and with that, they will be able to support themselves. In the past, it was told that schools were far away in an unknown place and now our children leave directly from our homes and with conveniences to attend classes. We are able to instruct them like telling them to not talk to their teachers in certain manners, ‘do not speak wrongfully, and do not be misbehaving.’ This is how we assist our children and that is the best way, my listening audience. There are some children among us who rejected school and now they wonder about pitifully. It is a pity when these children feel this way or when they do not enjoy school. And when they decide to lose interest in school, they need to be spoken to in a understanding manner: ‘you are not in school just for me, my child, but you should maintain the efforts in school and not to miss too many days of school.

Thus, your children need some compassion since they will be continuing the further extension of their lives which is still unknown to them. We mothers are in the same situation and as fathers, too. We are unable to think knowingly for them about what is up ahead. Certain men folk can think considerably for their children, and I am that way. I want my children to live with much wellness. That is why education can provide that good life as we all know, and as we have seen, many people live well from that. Some are holding jobs, some are educators, some are 11z4’h ]44k1h11’ [carrier of medicines on a platter meaning nurses], and 11z4’h ii[7’ ii]e’ [maker of medicines meaning doctors] and some of them are Dineh. We hold much hopes that our children can have these ways. There are the secretarial positions that can be learnt and sometime there may be job openings that seek young women with such skills.

I am very pleased with these potentials and that is why my children attend school a far. I have one daughter that is in school at a distance place. I speak to her, ‘it is your own willingness and self-motivation that will help you in school.’ I have had to work hard so that my children can attend school from here with the help from the educators. They also speak to my children and they instruct them on my behalf. My thoughts have no indifference towards the school systems and I like for you listeners to immerse your children in these school systems. Why have your child miss school or have them napping for no reason? I do not allow this at all. Presently, this is how I feel about all this. This will also be the size of it, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you.

Interviewer: Yes, thank you, Marie Yazzie, for speaking to us. I who is making ‘interview’ will place a few more on top it and on her behalf. This person lives neatly and she also lives near my residency also. Occasionally, there will be someone that may ‘look-along-one’s-arm-length’ and 11

observe another’s lifestyle.

4 It is truthful that her children are men and women now. One may envy her [b77’d1’11ni’ g0h’et’eeh] ways of lifestyle. This is what she expressed and it pertains to all of us who did not go to school. Certainly, some of us are educated but are still haphazardly [11yi[]8d1’0l]1d77’] living life. She views you as such and thus speaks to you accordingly. It is obvious that a few of you are educated and have become young men, men or women and instead you are involved more particularly in mischievous intentions [d0h11sh’k’1[77’]. That is how we make our observation and as this lady stated truthfully to you. It is I, Frank Jensen, speaking and who is making ‘interview’ for the Dineh. Okay, it shall be left at that.

CECILA T’SINAGINNIE INTERVIEW

Interviewer: ‘This is Frank Jensen over here at Cecila [? First name is inaudible.] Tsinaginnie’s house’ [in English]. Here then, she will tell you her words. She will express to you what her thoughts are. Well, let’s see what she has to say.

CECILIA (?) T’SINAGINNIE: [Spoke in English and is assumed Narrator read from a written statement] Thank you, Mr. Jensen, for coming and visiting me this morning. I would be more gladly to talk with you and give you my opinion on education. I have two children. They have not reached the age of school, yet. But I have my little sister staying with me and goes to the public school here in <Tuba>. I would want her to get all the education --she can get. I tell her to go everyday and it is important that she is in school in order to keep up with her work. I want her to take part in her school activities, but right along, I want her to know the Navajo ways of life.

I want my children to know and speak the Navajo language. I think this important for them to know. They are Navajos and they will always be. English is just a second language that we use to help us find a job and for a better living. Part of this Navajo culture I would like to be taught in school. Thank you, I think this is all.

Interviewer [A translation]: ‘Thank you, Miss T’sinaginnie’ [in English]. She has talk with you personally, she has inscribed them onto it [recorded], and in whatever manner, you will hear about it. Okay, ‘thank you.’ In the same way she expressed, you will act upon that, and that was what this woman said, too.

RECITA JOHNSON INTERVIEW

4The Interviewer used, yiigh33] k’eh dz7’d44z88’ g0’, and which is translated to: a sight along the whole length of one’s arm. It is unknown what expression the Interviewer is trying to make. Perhaps Interviewer is making reference to, with keen observation. 12

Interviewer: I am now at Recita Johnson’s home, and I am the one making the ‘interview’ it is Frank Jensen. From herself, we shall hear her and it is unknown how she will express that. Your considerations are expected for her voice. From <Tuba City>, she lives in the south direction. That is where I am at, and I did not tell her to say exactly this but it is in her own words. Okay.

RECITA JOHNSON: Certainly, Thank you, for giving me this opportunity. The main purpose for this visit is that the Dineh have been stating that ‘they appreciate education.’ Also here are some of the main direct questions which are written differently. The first direct question states ‘how the Dineh way of life and the B7l7g11n1’ [white people] way of life are different from each other,’ and that was asked of us. And also ‘how can the Dineh way of life be better for your children and what would you wish for in terms of that’ was asked of us first?

For that one, the language must be spoken in the future for when they have jobs and make their progress move forth, they can be translators as the progress continues. They will be translators for the B7l7g11n1’.

Secondly, ‘how the Dineh life and the B7l7g11n1’ life differ from one another’ it asks. All of it is different like: the language is different, the teachings that were given, our home environments such as they have k7] [rectangular-styled buildings] as homes, and our ceremonial ways are different.

Thirdly, ‘in the last ten years what is different about the school system’ it states. ‘Which one do you feel is good’ it asks? What I really like is that our boys and our girls, those who are N11b44hw-‘h [another term for Navajo], and many have attended the schools and even us [parents] have attended the schools. We have jobs and there have been opportunities made for us also. Many men and young men who are N11b44h-‘h are working in the schools or in the hospitals. We are very appreciative of that. Then it asks, ‘what is it that you do not really like?’

What I do not really like is that, in the public school, some of the youths are involved in drinking, their destinations are wrong, and are doing things wrong. ‘Education [environment] is the main cause for small children to begin thinking this way’ was stated by some and that, I feel is incorrect.

Fourth one, there is an image of a hogan that is displayed and ‘inside it what is taking place and what are people thinking’ it asks? From within this hogan, the children go out to attend school. They have to have some self-discipline in order to stay in school. They will graduate and eventually go forth into higher education where they earn more skills. There will be jobs that are appropriate for them and they will have a good way of living. Also we have the B7l7g11n1’ who are teaching, and that we feel good about and they teach our children. We will not say no to that. 13

The fifth thing is that there are two gentlemen standing. It is asked what the other feels or thinks. One probably feels, the first one standing [?], that he does not like the school system. Maybe from another point, the parents are saying that, ‘forget it, that place also facilitates access to disorderly conduct, or (you) will start drinking. That is what schools create and that radiates out from it.’ This is probably what he says or how he speaks to his children. So, the first one standing will return to his home, he will be limited in all direction, it would seemed like, because he does not hear [understand] the B7l7g11n1’ language. He will travel about trying to find employment and that becomes more difficult and eventually, he has children which will pose much more difficulty. This is how I see this first one standing and his thoughts are that way, too. Perhaps, it is also the parents’ doings in not excepting the school system and the future also will pose much difficulties.

The second part of this is the second individual standing. He wishes to go to school and he has much support from both his parents. ‘Good and yes, do attend school,’ his parents tell him. He will stay in school and will continue further education into what is called, ‘college’ [in English]. There is the B7l7g11n1’ way of life which he will seek to adapt and live that way as well. He will not have any obstacles and will start a new life in this way.

Now, what we are being asked is that, ‘how will (they) support or assist us and with what?’ Why are we being asked this of us, and about what? Is it just about today’s conditions? Everyone of us know about ‘that proceedings of life’ of today [diij7]’ b44 hog0[7’ iigii].5 And if it is dealt with, ‘how can it be resolved?’ From our perspective, we should want to know, ‘how can it be made nice for us and how can our children be able attend the schools, and how can that all be facilitated?’ These are the points that should be key for discussion.

Now, among the B7l7g11n1’ country [society] in the outside world, they have their schools based on their ways of life and are integrated with what is called, ‘Bible School’ [in English], and that is how classes are conducted in their public schools. It seems like that type of system would be so great for our children and (we) wish for that to be. There could be the Day School to integrate with a ‘Bible School,’ here. In this manner, this type of integration would instruct our children differently and this may help to avoid students from getting involved in drinking and other misconduct. Then we would not complain anymore.

Another way to fix the schools for our children would be for the summer time and with activities. Today, there are no more sheep herds and unlike the old days when there were plenty of sheep. Summer time provided them with herding sheep and with other occupation, and now there is nothing for them and that is because of a changed world. The summer schools

5 Narrator’s utilized this term, hog0[7’ [ritual-proceedings] while referring to the shift towards the American ways from the old ways. Diij7]’ b44 hog0[7’ iigii can be translated as, today’s / with it / proceedings / that one. Proceedings refer to well organized ritual proceedings, or a specific climate of society. 14

can provide a continuous activities of learning, and to think of it more in depth, we are far behind in comparison to where the B7l7g11n1’ are at. This is where we are at because we lack the education and lack of hearing [English learning]. So if there were that integration for the summer school, the ‘Bible school’ and the ‘public school,’ that would be perfect for our children. Maybe this would be a way for us to be assisted and that would help us greatly even with our home situations. Our children will be able to attend ‘church’ [in English] with us, and it is our own doings that has caused our children to have misconduct. It is true in the past that lives were not lived in this manner. It has been the parents’ own practice [of neglect or misconduct] that is allowing today’s ‘way of the proceedings in life.’

And now, thank you for giving me this opportunity. This will be the size of it.

Interviewer: Certainly, thank you, Recita Johnson. These people also live here unlike other places. There are those lines of electricity that illuminate inside and those are provided into the homes here. There is a ‘refrigerator’ [in English] in here, an air that talks [radio], an air that projects motion [television], and even a ‘radio’ [in English and mentioned twice]. There is a freezer and even water running within. There are people that do live this way. This way of (a road to) progress is only best. ‘This is how schools ought to be, and what thoughts others might have about this’ is what has been stated? ‘The $]iish0dii’ [Ones with Their Wardrobe Dragging meaning Christians] to have their ways be setup within the schools,’ this was suggested. Think about those suggestions and this is what you have asked of me to do like making the ‘interview’ with people. Again put your thoughts towards what has been stated. This is I making the ‘interview’ and who is speaking, Frank Jensen. ‘Thank you,’ Recita Johnson.

ROSELYN KAIBITONY INTERVIEW

Interviewer: Way out there. Here, I have arrived at Roselyn Kaibetony’s home. It is I who is doing the ‘interview.’ ‘Do a visit to her and make an ‘interview’’ was what you had asked me and now I am here. Now, she will speak to you with her own personal thoughts. Based on her words you will have your own thoughts towards that.

ROSELYN KAIBETONY: Indeed, good greetings. I am known as, Roselyn Kaibetony. I am from T0hn1n6s7d7z77 [<Tuba City>] and I grew up here, also. The issue at hand is valid. Are we all able to understand this about how our children can live well? What has to be emplaced in order for our children to have it convenient? These are what is discussed and what we inform each other about.

The Dineh way of life is better for us, as has been stated, is correct. Then also some of us speak the way of the B7l7g11n1’ [white people] already, but we wish not to leave behind the Dineh way of speaking and manners. That is so because we live that way of existence, and we understand this way by self-observations. Many of our children today do not understand or 15

realize the Dineh way of hog0[7’ iigii [procedural of orders]. But that is because we parents’ own way of not giving instructions. It is also because our men folk who were up there in age have been put away [used y07’d11ly11 which can also refer to that they passed on]. That is the reason why we the younger ones know very little of what we try to teach, but we do not know its entirety.

Then there is the white society’s way of life which we are still learning about also. You see that the methods of cooking have been compacted or not as heavy. It does not require such a great undertaking. So we are appreciative for this, the white society’s ways, like the automobiles, the telephones and ]7[7ch77 n11ld0 iigii’ [the radiant air, may refer to technologies in broadcasting]. These we are learning about as it exists within our proximity and where our children are learning about it, too.

The reality also is that some of us have it well but for some of us, we are struggling to cope. That struggle occurs because it is our own fault. We lack the interest in it, listening out for it, going out to seek it, and asking about it. These are reasons why we create our own difficulties. There should be efforts made to seek it, to find the need to learn about it, to learn it thoroughly and then there will be improvements in our communities, in our homes and of the goods we desire. This is what will entail our gained knowledge. With this, I lead my children as they get a better learning experience from us. With this also, our homes are nicer and as we are viewed by others. We must be very proactive in our children’s education. This is how it is for my children when they are attending: ‘how my child at school is, and who their teacher is or who gives them instructions?’ These are questions I ask when I make an effort to go there, and I believe this helps in my children’s education.

I explain to them ‘this is how you attend school but if you are just at home, you will never have interest in learning.’ I have done that and I did not go far into being educated, and that is why !1sh7’ 11d4’]11sh’k’11 [I retraced myself] and based on that, I wish that my children go through education completely. Further beyond that, I want for them to continue into higher education. I say this also because I do struggle and I feel that schools can help. There is one that will soon graduate and that will happen by this time next year. The other one is studying the Eighth [assumed the eighth grade]. Just staying at home is something I do not want but that they need to be in school which is far better for them. For them to work for me or feed me are things that I do not expect of them, but that they can become self-supportive and continue into a path that leads afar. This is because I have never traveled afar.

I do want to mention my appreciation for this person that is traveling around and making these kinds of visits and for the purposes of his visits. There are some among us that have fine perceptions and their thoughts are formed very well, and these individuals may never express that unless one can directly ask them. Also the D7ne’h b77 N11h11gh’1’ [the Peoples’ Ritual 16

Ways] and D7ne’h b77 Iin1’h [the Peoples’ Way of Life] which they are known as, and for those, we lack the complete knowledge about them because it is not in print form. We do not know how to write and that may be the reasons why we never learned about these. We only use oral transmissions like the telling of ‘Traveling in the Ways of the Coyote’ [so-called, coyote tales] and that was one way of teachings.

By somewhat of an analysis for all this, there are lessons for all of us from all these areas [‘areas’ is assumed meaning the period of transitions]. There were the struggles we went through. The reasons (certain) lessons were learnt cannot be blamed on the small children, but it had to do more with (the attitudes of) the mother and the father. That is the obstacle that is blocking us. When they are still very small, they need instructions [meaning engaging and nurturing them] and then they gain that interest. Wrongfully is when you do with them as it pleases you, or allow them to wonder off on their own as you care less about when they may return. Ultimately, when they reach 16 or 17, they will ‘towards you and hunch-over, they rise aggressively’ [11d44 h11ch9’ ]7diiyiish7’] and that becomes too powerful for you to handle. Some of the children are like this now. They do not listen to their mothers and instead the children are saying ‘it has to be my way,’ and this is not good for us.

We also do not check on them properly such as, ‘what area of their well-being have they caused ill to, and how or why did this occur?’ This is because we listen to them overall and that leaves us with no leadership role. We are the ones who gave birth to them and thus we should be leading. They [children] may cause problems to themselves or return from school with a piece of paper that states a situation, and that is when you will make the endeavor to understand. You will ask yourself: ‘Am I being told the truth? I should go there and find out. I hear he/she is playing ball at a certain place’ and so on? One needs to check on their status and to be self-motivated for their interest then in return, the small children will appreciate you. If you are not active in their lives and not involved in their activities, and they begin to say ‘my mother has no interest, my mother does not have love for me.’ They will then be involved in other activities, activities of their own choosing which makes them able to gain over us. Also for the fathers, it is no different in that the fathers should be listened to. He must look after or know where they are going, and he should know their whereabouts, and with this leadership you provide, your children will begin to follow.

If you just drink around or do disorderly conduct, your children will become the same as you. And if you want your child to live properly, you need to first track them and you need to reflect yourself in them, too. Your children will eventually follow that.

Again, I have much appreciation for the school system like the day school and the ‘public school’ [in English] and they [school buses] stop nearby, right here, at our front door. What a contrast because I (use to) walked from way near that market place and the canyon’s rim, I get 17

there at noon, eat my lunch, and by afternoon time I return. I am amazed that I did this back then, but now they have it near them. They can only make a few paces within about one hundred feet to get on the bus.

This [the past] is not realized at all, and it makes me believe that we are actually moving forward. It will depend on us individually, on our decisions, and on our full understanding about the plans. Someday our desires will be fulfilled rather than continuing the struggles (of living). That will not work if it is expected that someone else will ask for us. These are my thoughts about how it all might be possible for the communities as a whole. We should be the one speaking about the affairs and our voices shall be valued with greater acceptance. There should be some success in this way. This will be all.

Interviewer: ‘Thank you’ [in English]. Thank you, that is what I am here for. The exact ways you think about all this and how you wish to say it. I will take this back as a ‘report’ [said in English]. This person is truthful as I am witness to that and she lives neatly out here, too. Water is running inside, lines of those that illuminate [electricity] are installed, the air-that-shows-motion [television] is beautifully displaying, the ‘radio’ [in English] is sounding, and the freezer within [refrigerator] is situated neatly. How great she lives and is parenting children that can ‘hear’ [understand English], and one can only envy the way this person lives. One can only observe in awe, and these are the reasons why we are saying all this. This is the way we prefer to move forward. No more hauling firewood, but rather lines of flammable gas can be installed, and all there is to it is turning it on and boil coffee. Also this lady stays alone and lives with only her children. Her spouse, who sometime back --during the last war, was wounded and now spends much time at the hospital. With that kind of situation, you can think of them and greatly help them. Similarly to her talk you will make your decisions and meet her thoughts. This way you are a part of a community but you have to make it ‘fit,’ and you will coexist better among them. Okay, this is I speaking, Frank Jensen. ‘Thank you,’ Roselyn.


