CAROLYN BLAIR INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.7

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're at the home of Carolyn Blair, in <Farmington New Mexico>. It's Thursday, February 12, 1998. Others present in the room are Karen Underhill from Northern Arizona University, Elijah Blair, and Lew Steiger.

Cole: Carolyn, we'd like to start from the very beginning, and I'd like to ask you when and where you were born.

Blair: I was born in <New Britain Connecticut>, and the date was September 16, 1922.

Cole: And tell us a little bit about maybe your life there, who your parents were, what they did.

Blair: My maiden name was Carolyn Recknagel, R-E-C-K-N-A-G-E-L. Both my parents were of German extraction. [I] grew up in <New Britain>, went to all the public schools, and then graduated from Teachers College of Connecticut, 1943.

Cole: As you were growing up, did you or your parents ever imagine that you'd come to the Southwest?

Blair: I had an uncle that in 1907 went to the White River Apache Reservation as a Lutheran Minister. And of course the family heard all the stories, him having a horse and having to go horseback to the different camps. So that was an idea, you know.

Cole: What was his name?

Blair: His name was Emil Recknagel.

Cole: So this Southwestern bug kind of hit you at an early time.

Blair: Yeah.

Cole: When did you come to the Southwest, and tell us a little bit about that.

Blair: I applied through the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Washington, to teach on the reservation. I said I'd go to <Arizona> or <New Mexico>, and I was sent to <Teec Nos Pos> in 1945.

Cole: Did you imagine this as a short-term trip to the West, or did you think you might relocate?

Blair: Well, I thought I'd stay.

Cole: And in 1945, how did you travel to get here?

Blair: The school had a school bus, and then there was another teacher at the school, and she had a car. Didn't come out to <Shiprock> or <Farmington>, but once a month. The roads were pretty unimproved. The school at <Teec Nos Pos> was built by John Collier, and it was one of those rock buildings with the big vigas in the ceilings. It was comfortable. It was a two-teacher school.

Cole: I'm sort of curious, what were your initial thoughts when you first set foot at the place you were gonna teach at?

Blair: Well, I was very fortunate to be met in <Gallup> by Dr. George Boyce. I don't know whether you've ever heard of him or not. He was the superintendent of schools on the <Navajo Reservation>. And he was a very, very nice man, and had the Navajo education as his prime goal. He told me about the place and saw that I was settled out there. The first summer we had orientation school over at <Tuba City>, and we had some noted anthropologists and noted teachers. Let's see, Ruth Underhill was one of the teachers over there. It was a good summer to have the orientation and learn about it. We set up programs the way we were going to teach. That helped me a great deal. While we were at <Tuba City>, we visited <Grand Canyon>, we went to Navajo Mountain, <Betatakin>, <Flagstaff>, so it gave us a good background for teaching.

Cole: What did you teach?, and what grades?

Blair: I taught children who were from ten years to sixteen. And the other teacher at the school had the kids from six to ten. We had about seventy-five kids.

Cole: And was it a boarding school?

Blair: We had hogans for the kids to stay, yes.

Cole: Did you have any role in taking care of the kids after hours, or were you just specifically the teacher?

Blair: We were teachers, but before the kids came into the classroom, a lot of times we were the nurse, because they had a lot of sores, they had a lot of things that they needed taken care of, so we were nurses and teachers and social workers ... and mothers. (chuckles)

Cole: And one question that I kinda wonder about is what did your parents think of you traveling out here?

Blair: My mother could not pronounce <Teec Nos Pos>. (laughter) And they worried at first, but then I sent them home letters that were reassuring.

Cole: Did they ever visit?

Blair: My mother came out later, when my first son was born.

Cole: How did you go from being a schoolteacher to becoming involved in the trading post business?

Blair: My husband said I put out a bear trap (laughter) to catch him. The trader at <Teec Nos Pos> at that time introduced us. So that's how I met my husband. He was at the trading post about twenty miles away, <Red Mesa>.

Cole: And what was his name?

Blair: Bradley Blair. Should I say "Bradley Booze"? Laughter. He always said he didn't have a middle name, and then we got his birth certificate, and his middle name was Boaz, B-O-A-Z, Bradley Boaz Blair.

Cole: And how long had you been at <Teec Nos Pos> before you met Bradley?

Blair: I'd been there about six months.

Cole: Tell us a little bit about how that relationship all evolved, if you don't mind.

Blair: Well, he brought me the mail several times, and I went over to <Red Mesa> and visited him, and he came over to <Teec Nos Pos> and visited.

Cole: How did you travel to <Red Mesa>, and maybe tell us a little bit about what it was like, what the post looked like.

Blair: Well, I didn't have a car, but like I said, the teacher with me had a car, and then Brad came over in a pickup. I asked the kids.... Teec Nos Pos School covered a large area, and some of the kids did come from <Red Mesa>. So I asked the kids one day to draw me pictures of the store. And they drew it in pretty detail. The roof at that time was held down with cables, and they even put the cables in the picture. The whole yard was fenced, and they showed where the pickup was parked, and the way the windows were. They really picked up the details. I have the picture somewhere, and I'll have to get it out sometime. It gave me a pretty good idea what it was like, and I had visited there a couple of times.

Cole: How long would it take you to drive from the school out there?

Blair: Oh, I imagine almost an hour.

Cole: Did the schoolchildren have any interesting stories about the trading post?, did they know Bradley at that time?

Blair: I don't think they recognized Brad as the trader there then, because they were in school most of the time. If they went home, they might have gone home on a weekend. After I moved to <Red Mesa>, a lot of the kids would come into the store, that lived in that area.

Cole: So when you moved to <Red Mesa>, were you and your husband the owners of the store?

Blair: No, we just worked there. Brad went there December 1, 1945. He'd just gotten out of the Marine Corps, and he worked for a hundred dollars a month. We got married in 1946, and we earned a hundred and fifty dollars.

Cole: And who did he work for?

Blair: He worked for Roscoe McGee.

Cole: Did Roscoe live out there, too?

Blair: He would come out with the truck with supplies, and he would come out when the busy seasons were: the wool season when we were buying wool, and in the fall when we were buying lambs.

Underhill: What was he like?

Blair: Roscoe was a congenial fellow to work with. He had been in the trading post business way back in the thirties, I guess, when he graduated from high school. But he and his wife, Ruthie, were real congenial.

Cole: Tell us maybe a little bit about what life was like at the trading post. We're sort of interested in maybe what your water situation was, any electricity or light or anything like that?

Blair: Well, the trading post had two bedrooms and it was real comfortable. I had a wood stove for cooking, and a wood stove in the living room for heat. We didn't have electricity right at the beginning. We had a wind charger and a battery. There was one light in the living room and one light in the store. And then otherwise we used kerosene or some other light. Our water, we had a windmill and it was piped, oh, I don't know how far away. But we depended on the wind, you know, in order to have water. [We] had a kerosene refrigerator, and a gasoline motor for the washing machine. We had an outhouse (chuckles), but we were comfortable. And the store and the house were built of red sandstone--thick, thick walls.

Cole: And how was the actual interior of the store set up? And then maybe you could talk about how trading actually took place at <Red Mesa>.

Blair: Well, the store was a typical old-time trading post with the high counters, and things hanging from the roof, like saddles or, you know, the reins for the bridles and what not, pots and pans. We had a place for the potatoes and the onions. And then under the counter was a place for the oats and the corn for the feed for the horses that the Navajos rode in. We had dry goods, we had the satin, we had the velvet, we had the calico. We had the old-fashioned shoes down there. (laughs) They called them Diné bikee’, the high-topped shoes.

Steiger: Who wore those shoes?

Blair: The women usually wore those. Then we had the work shoes for the men. But Roscoe and some of his partners got a shoe manufacturer to make the shoes, and the label on them was Diné bikee’, "Navajo shoes."

And we would have fresh mutton that was butchered out in the corral. We had a counter that had medicines, oh, like aspirin and Ben-Gay. We weren't allowed to carry alcohol because that was in the traders' regulations. We did sell cigarettes and Skoal and things like that. I haven't thought about that in a long time.

Cole: That's really good. What was your role in the trading post? Did you actually work in the store and carry trade on?

Blair: Oh, yes, I worked in the store, and I guess the extra fifty that Brad got when he got married was supposed to be for me, but I never received a check or anything like that. And it wasn't until we were at <Kayenta>, and we had a new accountant, and he couldn't understand why the women, if they worked, didn't receive a wage--or even our kids. Our kids always worked, and we always called it slave labor. (laughter) But it wasn't until the sixties or seventies that we were paid. But I did work in the store and cooked meals for the hired help, or anybody visiting, like the salesmen or anyone that came out.

During the first years there--and this was after 1945--we just had busy times during the wool season or the lamb season. And then about 1949, the oil exploration started out there, the Aneth oil field, and we had surveyors, geologists, seismograph crews. And that went on until the sixties, and we really were busy. We had all these outside people coming in, besides the Navajos.

Underhill: How about tourists?

Blair: Like my son will say, if there was a tourist, they were lost. We did have, occasionally, a tourist. We had rug buyers come out. We dealt with the Rocky Mountain National Park people. They came out and bought rugs and jewelry. We had rug buyers, like Maxwell. He and his wife started the museum down at the University of <New Mexico>. But like I say, after 1949, we had the surveyors. We had the uranium, the vanadium people, come out exploring. So we got busy after the first four years.

Cole: Did you and Bradley speak Navajo?

Blair: I speak substandard Navajo. He spoke very well. He would sit in the store with some customers and try to get the right pronunciations and the right idioms for the different things. I can speak, I can name everything in the store, but grammatically, I'm not very good at Navajo that way. I get along with the old folks, I get along with the children.

Cole: Did either of you have nicknames?

Blair: Brad was called "black hair," Bitsii’»izhinii. And usually a trader's wife was always called "the angry woman," ´Asdzání hashké. (laughter)

Underhill: Why was that?

Blair: Well, she'd have a meal ready, and something would come up in the store, and it couldn't be closed, you know, at noon, so she'd come in and say, "Why aren't you eating?" Or, "Why don't you come in and eat? The food's warm." Or somebody would be at the back door on a Sunday, and they'd need something. So the woman was always sort of prickly. (laughs) Her schedule was interrupted.

Cole: I'm sort of curious to see if you could maybe--you're in the store and Navajo customers come. Maybe kind of walk us through how that would work: what kind of transportation they had, how the trading would take place with them, would they stay overnight?, and some things like that.

Blair: Outside, near our corral, we always had a hogan--we called it "the hotel." And a lot of our customers came, you know, twenty miles in the wagons. And so there was a place for them to stay. And we always had a box in the store, and it had a coffee pot, a frying pan, and probably a big pot, and they could borrow those and use them. And they came by horseback. Like I said, we had oats and corn under the counter, and we'd fill nosebags. They'd go out and feed their horses while they traded.

Then another item we had in the store were these seamless bags. They were large, looked like a pillowcase, but it was heavy material. And the Navajos would fill those up and put them on the back of their saddles and get the weights right, and that's how they would carry their stuff home, if they weren't in the wagon.

We always had a pencil or a pen, and we always had accounts--everything was on credit. In fact, when we took inventory January first, that's about the only time we counted our money, because there wasn't much cash, it was mostly credit. That was in the early days.

Cole: Did both men and women come to trade? (

Blair: Oh, yes.)

Cole: Or was it more one than the other?

Blair: No, it would be the men and the women, and sometimes they had separate accounts. Sometimes they felt better that the woman would have her own account, and she would pay for it with her livestock or her rug. And then the men would have their own accounts. Sometimes they were joint accounts. And those accounts would go from wool season on to--we'd credit from the spring to the fall, and then the fall to the next spring. And they would pay that way, or they would pay with some of their arts and crafts. But it was a credit. One time I explained this to a relative of mine from <California>, and he said, "Well, you're in the commodity business." So I'd never thought of that.

Cole: You talked about the wool season. Could you maybe talk about the components of that? What time of the year?

Blair: It was usually in the spring. It would be when the cold weather had gone, and then they could shear the sheep. In the early days, we stored the wool in our wareroom, and then eventually we built a barn. Then a lot of times we'd have to resack the wool because it would be so dirty and full of red sand. And so we hired people to resack the wool. And it had to be weighed, and we had to check the prices, because a lot of times the wool market would go down. One year it went from seventy-five cents down to a quarter. So we had to watch that.

Cole: Did they bring wool in? Did they do the shearing?

Blair: They did the shearing, yes. And it was all by hand, with the hand shears. There weren't any electric shears.

Cole: Would that be done at the post?

Blair: No, they would do it at home, and a lot of times they'd bring it in damp (chuckles) to add more weight--or rocks and stones. We've even found dead dogs. (laughter)

Cole: Was there any way that you'd try to _____? If the wool was damp, would you....

Blair: Oh, yes. We'd unsack it right there and resack it, with them watching. And then a lot of times we'd have to dry it out, and explain to them it was damp.

Cole: And what about the sale of livestock? Was that part of the wool season, too?

Blair: The livestock was usually in the summer or in the fall when the lambs--we'd buy the lambs in the fall. And then the cattle we'd buy in the summer. And then a horse buyer would come out and maybe buy some of the horses.

Cole: Do you remember amounts of animals, or approximately? Was it a lot, a little, or....

Blair: I can remember buying a thousand head of sheep. And then, in the early days, we would herd them from <Red Mesa> into <Farmington> to the narrow gauge railroad in here. It'd take a week or so. We'd have herders. Then some people along the way got angry that we were using up their feed along the way, so they started whipping the sheep--come through the sheep, whipping them, and scattering them. And then after that we got large trucks to come out to haul the sheep into town.

Cole: Did you have any involvement in herding? Did you ride with the herders?

Blair: We would go out and check on our herders, yeah. And then when we got closer to town, our partner, Roscoe, he would check on them. He pretty well knew the route that they were going.

Cole: Something you said interested me. You mentioned your partner, Roscoe.

Blair: Well, after the forties, he wanted to keep us in the trading business, and so he offered us 10 percent of the trading post. And then we paid that up and then he offered us another 10 percent. And finally we got 50 percent, and that was by 1965.

Cole: So during this period that you were at <Red Mesa>, the Navajos working on the railroad and things like that occurred? (

Blair: yes.) Were you involved in that at all?

Blair: Brad was a railroad retirement agent, and during the winter he would sign 'em up for their compensation. We also sent them off to work in the potatoes in the fall. Certain families up in <Colorado> would come to the store and pick them up. There were certain families that always went at the same time, same families. And they made money that way. That was <Red Mesa>. Of course <Kayenta> was different, because of the coal mines.

Cole: It sounds like, from talking to different people--especially once the railroad work and the migrant work started--the Navajos would leave at times of the year, and their children, of course, were in boarding school. Did you have any role in helping families communicate to each other?

Blair: Oh, yes. Since we were out there in 1945, and that was when the war ended, things changed then, because a lot of the men were in the service. And then in 1952, <Brigham City> was opened up as a boarding school, and Dr. Boyce was in charge of that. So a lot of the kids who were older--say, sixteen to twenty-one-- they went off to school then. That was another change for them. And then another change was when the whole highway went through about 1962. That opened the whole place up. And that's when the new trading post was built on the highway.

Cole: What highway was it, and how far _______.

Blair: It's Navajo #1, isn't it, Lige?

Elijah Blair: Sixty.

Blair: Yes, but I mean the Navajos always said it was #1. It finally went through from <Shiprock> to <Tuba City>.

Cole: So then you lived on the highway.

Blair: Yes, in 1962. It was three miles from the old store. The old <Red Mesa> was almost on the <Utah> border, state border.

Cole: And what happened to that post?

Blair: We left it for the tribe, and then people went in and desecrated it and tore it down. That was very, very sad. Very sad. It could have been used, you know, as a chapter house or senior citizen place or something like that.

Cole: During this period, did the Red Mesa Post have a lease at all for....

Blair: We had had a twenty-five-year lease, yes.

Underhill: When did that take effect?

Blair: I can't remember. (laughs) The date on that, I probably have it written down, but I cannot remember that.

Underhill: You mentioned regulations, like not selling alcohol at the post. (

Blair: yes.) Who had got out the regulations, and what were some of the other restrictions?

Blair: The Bureau of Indian Affairs started many, many years ago, with all those regulations. We always had a copy at the store. Another regulation was that we did not participate in any of the native ceremonies. And a lot of the traders ignored that and would give flour, coffee, and things for it. But there were a lot of regulations. I can't remember all of them.

Steiger: Why would that be a regulation?, that you couldn't participate?

Blair: Well, at that time, they were trying to anglicize the Navajos, and they didn't think that there was anything to their ceremonies. The attitude has changed now. But there were these people that came out. At <Teec Nos Pos> there was someone we called "the supervisor." And he was a supervisor for that district, and he would come out and visit at the [trading post]. He was real nice, his name was Jack South at that time. And then there was a supervisor in <Shiprock> that was over the whole area.

Cole: And by "supervisor," is that....

Blair: It was supervising the range, supervising the trading posts, the schools.

Cole: So at that time were there Navajos involved in supervision?, or was it all....

Blair: It was mostly Anglos. Now, the range riders at that time, some of them were Navajos.

Cole: And what is a range rider?

Blair: He would ride out and check. If there were fences, he'd check the fences. Or he would check for the overgrazing. The overgrazing was the big topic in the thirties.

Cole: You mentioned that. I know you weren't there then, but what do you know about the whole stock reduction, John Collier....

Blair: Well, there was a lot of anger among the Navajos, and John Collier was a bad name. And then six months before I got to <Teec Nos Pos>, a group of people at <Teec Nos Pos> kidnapped the supervisor and took him off to a hogan. His wife wouldn't let him go alone, so they took the wife, too, and they kept them for several days. And they cut the telephone wires, and the trader at <Teec Nos Pos> knew something was going on, and he slipped a note to a salesman going through. And so <Shiprock> was notified that something was going on. And then they caught the people that'd done it, and they were taken to Federal Court down in Prescott and they were given jail terms. So in 1945 there was still a lot of anger. And I think to this day.

Cole: What was the condition of the range in 1945? Had it improved because they had done that, or not?

Blair: I don't think it had improved. They always talked about the grass being up to the bellies of the horses and what not. I hadn't seen that for many years. I saw it once or twice, after a hard winter. In about 1949 we had a blizzard. Is that the right date, 1949?

Elijah Blair: Yes, in 1949. __________ went to <Mexican Water>, in 1949.

Blair: And then they had hay lifts to help with feeding the livestock. Then there was a lot of sickness, a lot of Navajos died. The kids contracted measles and pneumonia. One family at <Red Mesa>, four of them died. Just kids.

Underhill: Was Brad involved in any burials at all?

Blair: No, they usually took care of their own.

Cole: Did you folks ever participate or go to ceremonies?

Blair: Yes, if we were invited, we did.

Cole: What types of ones would you be invited to?

Blair: The squaw dances and the fire dances, the yei-be-chai. But we only went when we were invited, and we were usually invited. Like I said, a trader usually would help contribute with flour, coffee, the necessary things, you know.

Cole: Did Brad do that, then?, contribute?

Blair: Yes. We wouldn't say very much about it, but we would, yes.

Cole: Did that happen upon arrival?, or beforehand?

Blair: Oh, beforehand, when the family asked.

Cole: Do you have any special memories of those ceremonies?

Blair: Well, they never started until midnight or after, and then we'd have to go to work the next day! (laughter) But they were different from any of the Christian things that we had gone to. And our kids enjoyed going to them.

Cole: Were there missionaries at <Red Mesa>?

Blair: <Red Mesa> was isolated. The trading post was the only thing there. At one time, one year we had a trailer school. Then, oh, about ten miles from us, at Boundary Butte, there was a man and his wife living there, and they were in charge of the pumping station. Like I said, we had all that exploration out there. But <Red Mesa> didn't have a school, didn't have missionaries, didn't have a phone.

Cole: Was it a post office?

Blair: We received our mail here in <Farmington>. If we came to town, we picked up the mail, and if Roscoe, our partner, was coming up, he picked up the mail. But we did not have a post office.

Cole: Now, when the Navajos started getting the railroad retirement checks and things like that, how did they get those?

Blair: It came through our post office, and we distributed them.

Cole: Did you then act like the banker?

Blair: We were the bank, yes, if they wanted to cash their check. And of course a lot of them wanted to do it right on the spot, so yes.

Cole: I was sort of wondering from before, when you moved to <Red Mesa>, did you quit teaching then?

Blair: I taught my own kids, there was no school at <Red Mesa>. And let's see, you met Hank. (Cole: Right.) I taught him from about kindergarten to sixth grade, and his sister to about fourth grade. Then when I got three, it was gettin' harder and harder. (laughter) And then we bought a house in <Farmington>. But they enjoyed it, being schooled out there. They watched us buying rugs, the arts and crafts, dealing with the jewelry. And with all the oil exploration out there, they got to see all the equipment. They even got to ride in some of the airplanes that came in. So they didn't get just the three "R's," they got a trading post education.

Underhill: Did they speak Navajo, growing up?

Blair: Well, no. (laughter) Now, Hank does pretty well, I think. And three of the kids took Navajo over at NAU. I took Navajo over at NAU.

Underhill: How did a language class differ from what you heard in the trading post?

Blair: The pronunciation, I think, was a little different. Irvy Goosen [phonetic spelling] was the instructor. (slightly miffed) He gave me a "B." (laughter) And he gave my daughter an "A"! (laughter), because she was doing it phonetically right, and I was doing what I heard at <Red Mesa>. And then we also took Navajo Culture over there.

Cole: Was <Red Mesa> known for any particular style of jewelry or rugs?

Blair: Oh, not necessarily. You know, like "Two Gray Hills" or "Ganado" or something. We had some good rugs there. The rugs in the other room came from a very good weaver. Her name was Martha Warren. She bought a steel frame from us, instead of old wooden frames that the ladies used. We were selling metal frames, and the rugs came out straighter, and she was a good weaver.

Cole: Now, when you mentioned selling the metal frames, is that something the Navajos wanted? Or was that....

Blair: Someone out of <Gallup> was manufacturing them, and we bought about three different sizes, and then we sold them--on credit. They would bring a rug in and pay for it.

Cole: When you were first at <Red Mesa>, were people still carding their own wool?

Blair: Oh, yes, definitely. And we would sell the tow cards, the cards that took out all the bugs and weeds and things. Those tow cards came from <New Hampshire>, and they're still manufactured back there. That's the only place that makes them.

Cole: Were you or Brad involved in trying to help influence the weavers at all in what they were doing?, or change their style?

Blair: No, not necessarily, because there would be good weavers and bad weavers, and we would tell them that this wasn't straight, and it still had a lot of ... oh, I'm tryin' to think of the word, the weeds in them. And there were needles in them--made them rough. We weren't like the Bloomfields, that had a lot of influence.

Cole: You're at <Red Mesa> now. How long did you stay there?

Blair: Brad was there from December 1, 1945, until November 30, 1965, which is exactly twenty years.

Cole: And where did he go after that?

Blair: Well, for six months he was unemployed. (laughter) He went all around the reservation at that time, looking for a place. He went everywhere, went to Crownpoint, went over towards Page. <Kayenta> was offered, but you had to buy the Wetherill Inn [phonetic spelling] Motel, if you bought the trading post, and we didn't know a thing about motels and such things, you know. And so after six months, he and Lije decided to try it, and we moved to <Kayenta>. One reason he sold out at <Red Mesa>, he was still pumping his own water. He was generating his own electricity with a diesel plant. We had no telephone, and two of our kids were in high school here in <Farmington>. He was away from us. He decided he'd look for a more convenient spot, and <Kayenta> was a community.

Cole: What kind of trading post was <Kayenta>, compared to <Red Mesa>?

Blair: It was in downtown <Kayenta>. (laughter) It was small at that time. And one reason, there were public schools that our kids could go to. The community was the deciding factor, I think.

Cole: And was it an over-the-counter trading post?

Blair: It was, yes, at that time. Some of it was open. And there were still accounts.

Cole: And between Wetherill Inn and <Kayenta> to begin with, did you have to hire more employees than you had in the past?

Blair: Yes. We kept the same people who were managing Wetherill Inn, and that helped, because they knew what they were doing, and then eventually we caught on to how to run a motel. But the store, we had more clerks than at <Red Mesa>.

Cole: Sort of backing up a little bit, I'd like to have you talk a little bit about pawn, say, maybe at <Red Mesa>, and then at some point we can contrast that to maybe how things were at the Kayenta Post--if they were larger, or whatever.

Blair: In the forties we didn't have a pawn vault, and the pawn was up on that roof that had all the things. And eventually we built a pawn vault, and I think that's the only thing that's still standing at <Red Mesa>, because there were those rebars in the cement. But in those days, the jewelry was beautiful. It was the real turquoise, the real silver, the real coral. We would keep it for years and years because we'd know the situation of the family, whether the man was able to work or we're having a drought and they didn't have many lambs, or, you know, if there's sickness in the family or not. And we were allowed to keep it for six months, but we usually kept it for years and years.

Cole: How much money would you give out, percentage- wise, on a piece of pawn?

Blair: Oh, it depended on whether the jewelry was worth anything. I don't think we ever went over $500.

Cole: So you would actually maybe loan the full value of the pawn?

Blair: Yes. The red coral, if you had at least twelve strands, a lot of times each strand would be worth $100, and there were quite a few of the ladies that had that, and the men. But it depended on the family, it depended on the piece of pawn.

Cole: Once you were in <Kayenta>, how did that store evolve? Did it always stay as an over-the-counter store?

Blair: No, we enlarged the <Kayenta> store at least four times. Let's see, it was in 1967 that the next blizzard hit the reservation. Just before the blizzard hit, we bought six tons of piñon nuts, and that six tons of piñon nuts paid for the enlargement of the store, the largest enlargement that we made at that time. But I remember 1967, because our daughter was over at NAU, she couldn't get home, because the snow in the pass. Took us a week to get her home. The snow covered those Volkswagens over there. (laughter)

Steiger: I remember that year.

Blair: You remember that year?

Steiger: I sure do. We got out of school for a month.

Blair: Where were you at school?

Steiger: In Prescott. Sorry to interrupt. Go on.

Cole: So when the store was enlarged, it sounds like the trading post ______________.

Blair: We were the biggest trading post in that area.

Cole: Did you carry the same kinds of goods __________.

Blair: We had a big butcher shop, carried all kinds of meat. We had a freezer compartment along one side of the wall. We had a very good dry goods department and grocery department. And so with all those departments, we had more people working--twenty-five or more.

Cole: That's just in the store?

Blair: In the store. And I was out there recently at Thanksgiving, and I came across a man who had worked for us at the beginning as a handyman at Wetherill Inn. And he told me he'd been working for thirty years. A very dependable fellow.

Underhill: Were your employees mostly Navajo?

Blair: Yes. The only white people were the managers, probably at the motel. But we gradually trained the girls to work at the motel, in the office.

Cole: Did you see a big change?, did you receive more cash business? (

Blair: Oh, definitely.), or was it still on credit?

Blair: Let's see, we went to <Kayenta> July 1, 1966, and just about that time, Peabody Coal Company was coming in. In fact, they rented Room #1 as their office. From that time on, it was a big cash business.

Underhill: How much cash would it take for Peabody payday? Were you still functioning as a kind of bank?

Blair: We were the bank before the bank came in, yes, I hate to tell you. (laughter) Somebody's gonna-- I won't say a number, but it was thousands and thousands of dollars, and that's why we got an airplane. My husband would make two or three trips on a payday to the bank in here, in order to fill the payroll in the morning and the four o'clock payroll.

Cole: Did you continue a credit business also?

Blair: We still had the credit business, yes.

Underhill: And how did all that growth change the nature of the company itself? Did you move to having benefits, or some kind of profit sharing, or....

Blair: We had profit sharing, yes. Lije was the instigator of that. And we were incorporated, too. But at <Red Mesa> we started out real calm, cool, and collected, just two busy seasons. And then all the oil exploration came in, the vanadium, uranium. And that made it a busy place. Brad had probably two store clerks, and somebody to take care of the corral and stuff like that. <Red Mesa> did not have very many educated Navajos. When we moved to <Kayenta>, it was a different story. There were a lot of people that we could call on to work.

Underhill: What were your hours of operation like?

Blair: At <Red Mesa>? Twenty-four hours! (laughter) And Sunday, too! Yes, somebody knocking on the door, needing something--oats for their horse. But <Kayenta> was a community and it was probably eight 'til six. There would be times people would be knocking on your door.

Cole: Once the store had really boomed with the coal mine, et cetera, did you still continue to take pawn?

Blair: We took pawn until, what was it, 1973, 1974?

Elijah Blair: [It was 1974.]

Blair: And then the Federal Trade Commission put down regulations.

Cole: Were you involved in that dispute at all, you and Brad?

Blair: Brad was called as a witness and he came out smelling like a rose. The Navajos really said he was a decent trader, and they didn't have any complaints against him. I think I can find a newspaper clipping. And he's mentioned in the books as being a decent trader.

Cole: But apparently his ideas on pawn didn't sway the federal government?

Blair: No. And you're paying on your credit cards (laughter) what they were complaining of.

Cole: How did the Navajo customers that dealt in pawn feel about the issue?

Blair: Well, they came in for a year afterwards, still wanting to pawn. And they'd say, "You know me, you can do it."

Cole: Did they understand what had taken place?

Blair: A lot of the old-time ones did not, no.

Cole: In <Kayenta> did you do a big rug and jewelry business there, too?

Blair: We did. We had contacts with--I don't know whether you've ever heard of George Putnam Publishers. (Cole: Uh-huh.) His son came out and ordered special rugs for his home. We had National Park people come and buy for their concessions. We had furniture people from <California>. Someone had a modern Swedish furniture store, and they thought that the rugs and the baskets and all of that went with it. And so we had many contacts like that.

Cole: When somebody like Putnam's son would come and order a special rug, did you have the weaver in mind?

Blair: There were just certain weavers that would do it, and this certain lady over at Shonto made it. It was a huge rug.

Cole: Do you remember what her name was?

Blair: I cannot remember right now. I may have it written down. (pause for drink of water)

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B]

Cole: Were you and Brad involved with the United Indian Traders Association?

Blair: We were just members, and attended meetings.

Cole: Was Brad on the board of directors?

Blair: No, he wasn't.

Cole: Do you know how early his involvement was?

Blair: Probably in the fifties or forties when we finally got into a partnership in the store. I don't remember the date.

Cole: We've been told that the earliest members started it because they wanted to be able to stamp jewelry with a number. Did you ever run across that? Did Brad have a number?

Blair: No, we didn't have a number. My brother-in- law may have, because he would sell silver to Navajos to make buttons.

Cole: And who was your brother-in-law?

Blair: Raymond Blair. I'm not sure whether he had one or not.

Cole: Do you remember any of the big issues that the Association was involved in?

Blair: Well, it was getting the licenses for the leases, and they cooperated on buying the different products- buying the piñons, buying the cattle, buying the lambs. And then be sure there was a market for it.

Cole: So when you say "cooperative," what do you mean by that?

Blair: Well, they'd get together and find a buyer. Like I said, six tons of piñons from one place, in one certain year, there had to be a market for it. And so they helped on things like that.

Cole: So the Association would....

Blair: Find a buyer, yes.

Cole: And would they then take all the piñon nuts from everybody?

Blair: There would be buyers that would come out and buy them, yes.

Cole: And the Association did the same thing with livestock?

Blair: Yes, at times. Different areas on the reservation would do it different ways, or they'd have different buyers.

Cole: How would you describe the workings of the Association? This would be social or business.

Blair: Well, for the women, it was mostly social. We never were included in the business meetings that I can remember. They'd be held in <Gallup> or <Flagstaff> or even <Farmington>, here. And it'd be a social gathering.

Underhill: Now, why do you think that is? You're working in the store!

Blair: (chuckles) It's just those men who were ego tripped, I guess.

Cole: Did that change after you started drawing a paycheck?

Blair: No, (laughter) because just about that time, the Association was having trouble getting the leases, and individual traders had to do their own leases.

Cole: It seems like in the fifties you had a twenty- five-year lease. (

Blair: Uh-huh.)

Cole: And after that ran out, you would have been at <Kayenta>. (

Blair: Uh-huh.)

Cole: Did you get another lease for that?

Blair: It was usually a five to ten-year lease. Of course that didn't give you time for making improvements and things like that.

Cole: Now, when you say it wouldn't give you time for making improvements, what do you mean by that?

Blair: Well, major improvements like getting more equipment into the store. For tax purposes, too, your depreciation.

Cole: So when you made a major improvement.... (a few seconds of blank tape) This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. This is Tape 2, we're with Carolyn Blair in <Farmington New Mexico>, on February 12, 1998.

We were just discussing when you were in <Kayenta>, your long-term lease ran out. You're negotiating five to ten-year leases, you were mentioning it made it difficult to make capital improvements. I'm a little bit.... When you make a capital improvement, usually then when you sell, you get your money out of it then. How would that work on the reservation?

Blair: Well, we had to leave everything there. About that time, we wanted to improve Wetherill Inn, and its lease was coming up. It took nine years to get that lease--in fact, it came after my husband died. We wanted to add more rooms. Started out with about thirty-eight, and eventually got to fifty. And down at the trading post it was newer equipment and new cash registers and things like that. You hesitate to put the money in it if you're not gonna have a lease.

Cole: When did you finally leave <Kayenta>, then?

Blair: I left April 15, 1987.

Cole: All those years of working in trading posts, do you remember any, can you tell us about the Navajo culture, and maybe how it changed over all that period?

Blair: Well, I can tell more about watching the kids at school. I taught school at <Kayenta> for six years. And when I first was teaching out there, we had kids that really didn't speak any English at all, and those were the ones from <Oljato> [phonetic spelling] and <Dennehotso> and way out away from <Kayenta>. And that's when we really needed a program, and the program is called English as a Second Language. And I went back to college, NAU, to get my degree in that. And later on, there were kids that were speaking English, but it was substandard English, it wasn't correct English. And so nowadays, they're speaking slang, because they see it on TV and what not. But in those early days.... And I had students who wouldn't write their names, because they were told if you wrote it, an evil spirit or something would take it away. And now, they're writing graffiti all over the place. But I noticed the change in the schools. And then at the trading post we had, I can remember the first Easter we were out there. We bought a few items with the Easter theme, and we hardly even sold them. And now, Easter's a big holiday, Mother's Day is a big holiday, and a lot of, you know, the anglicized holidays are important to them. But you don't see as many of the older women with their native dress. They're changing that. There's lots of pickups, lots of new model cars out there. When we went to Navajo Culture classes with Irvy Goosen, he said that the Navajos really adapted. And he said you would think that they had invented the pickup truck. (laughter) And that came out of the college!

Cole: In your memory, do you remember first seeing the proliferation of pickup trucks?

Blair: I have a picture on the wall, and it's painted by Peter Hurd, and there is one pickup going towards a ranch house. And at <Red Mesa>, in the forties, we had one Navajo that had a red pickup, and that's why I like that painting. And then after World War II, there was someone in <Farmington> that was selling all kinds of vehicles, used vehicles, to the Navajos. And I can remember seeing some of the army surplus Jeeps, and dump trucks and things like that. And of course they broke down soon (chuckles) on those roads. Some of those people that worked for Peabody Mine, they'd have one or two pickups and a car.

Cole: Did the fellow that had the pickup at <Red Mesa> have an elevated station in life?

Blair: Well, he hauled other people around, and they would buy gas. And I forgot to mention, our old gas pump was the kind that you pumped ten gallons. And there was always a discrepancy, because the Navajos felt that it didn't fill the whole tank, and there was always a little space up there. And they'd say, "No, you didn't give me ten gallons." You remember that, Lij?

Elijah Blair: Yeah. There was one of those at <Oljato>, Carolyn, ____ out in front of the trading post. And Reuben's got all the pictures of it. Whole story inside __________________. I think it's gonna be wonderful.

Cole: You mentioned that with the gallons of gas: did you ever run across similar kinds of situations when, say, you were exchanging cash money or anything?

Blair: Oh, yes. There's always someone that would say that you didn't count out the money and what not. That was especially true during the big payroll days. But I had very good clerks, and they would count the money twice. Sometimes when you're buying wool or the lambs, they'd say the scales weren't right, and so you'd have to show them with the weights how it would be balanced.

Underhill: How would you describe the Navajo economic system in the early years when you were first trading?

Blair: Well, it wasn't cash. (laughter) It wasn't a cash system. It was just, like I said, commodities. And then when more work came and they were paid with cash, then we had more of the cash settlement.

Underhill: Was there a great deal of misunderstanding about making a profit, as opposed to just taking something and keeping __________?

Blair: There was always someone. And there were certain families that would be just as congenial as they could be. And there was others that you knew that would question whether you were doing the right thing. And we always tried to explain to them, show them how things were. And being uneducated, it just took time and patience to explain it to them.

Cole: How many children did you and Brad have?

Blair: We had five children.

Cole: And were some of them born at <Red Mesa>?

Blair: No (laughter) thank goodness! (laughter) No, I came into <Farmington>, and they were all born here in <Farmington>. We couldn't use the Public Health facilities out there, so we always used a doctor in town. Or, when we were at <Kayenta>, we used Monument Valley Hospital for small colds, and used the dentist.

Do you want to know who my kids are? There's five. You've met Bradley Henry, who is Hank, and he's still in the trading business out of Lukachukai. He's married to a Navajo lady, and they have four children. Nancy is married King Mike, Jr. [phonetic spelling], and they teach at Dine´ [phonetic spelling] College at <Tsaile> [phonetic spelling]. She teaches physical education and he is the financial vice-president of the college. Lucinda is married to Robert Nash and she teaches at Monument Valley High. She's taught there for twenty-five years. She's been married for twenty- five years, and Hank's been married for twenty-five years to the same person. Then there's Roxanne, and she's married and lives up in <Washington> State. And then there is Fred, and he's out at <Kayenta> and he's the Ferrell Gas man, propane. The ones that live on the reservation are married to Navajos.

Cole: How did they like growing up on the reservation?

Blair: They enjoyed it. The two oldest graduated from Farmington High, but the other three graduated from Monument Valley High School. And they're still out there, and that's their life, they enjoy it.

Underhill: What do you think an Anglo person should understand about Navajo culture?

Blair: Well, they should be taught that there are different ways of thinking of things: their religion, their customs ... and their relatives, because relatives can be begging a lot of times, because they feel that, you know, you have more. But we've got good relatives. Can they see the wall hanging behind me?

Steiger: Just a little bit.

Blair: Okay, that wall hanging was a gift from one of my in-laws. It's all handmade, and the name of it is "The Storyteller." It was a gift.

Underhill: What do you think you've learned from the Navajo over time?

Blair: Well, I think I've learned patience, because, you know, I could be impatient. I think that they have their own religion and should be honored. I don't think it should be blotted out like some of the missionaries wish it could be, 'cause they think it's pagan. And just that I had good neighbors out there. (pause) And all my grandchildren have dark hair! (laughter)

Cole: What do you think they learned from you and Brad?

Blair: The kids?

Cole: The Navajo.

Blair: Oh, the Navajos. Well, that the white man could be friendly and could be understanding.

Cole: You would have probably taught--when you started teaching, did they allow any Navajo to be spoken at the school?

Blair: Yes. Dr. Boyce, who was in charge of the whole reservation at that time, I think he turned it around, where in the early days the kids' mouths were washed out with soap and things like that. But he was a very, very caring person, and very tolerant. He was from back East also. And there's a book that I like especially well of his, and it's called When the Navajos Had Too Many Sheep. And he shows how Congress has played political football in giving money for Indian education. He kept records during the forties, and he shows how much money did come on the reservation, and how much they really needed. He also mentions medical care. But it was changed then.

Cole: If you were to describe Brad as a trader, how would you describe him?

Blair: Oh, Brad and his brothers were <Kentucky> hillbillies, but they came out and adjusted. They were independent, but they came from a poor background, and they knew that the Navajos were poor, and they took that into consideration in trading with them, and helping to educate them, helping them get jobs.

Cole: Did Brad ever have any political aspirations?

Blair: Oh, yes. He was a Libertarian. (chuckles) Brad's commanding officer in the Marine Corps was George P. Schultz, and he was secretary of state for the Reagan administration. He also was secretary of labor for Eisenhower, and he had a lot of writings about free enterprise. And then Brad got to reading Ayn Rand and he joined the Libertarian Party, and he also ran for mining inspector for the State of Arizona. He didn't win, but he got 33,000 votes.

Cole: Was that while he lived in <Kayenta>?

Blair: Yes, while he was in <Kayenta>.

Elijah Blair: Carolyn, aren't you gonna tell 'em what his platform was?

Blair: Oh, yes. His platform was that he would eliminate the office of mining inspector. (laughter)

Underhill: And what year was that?

Blair: Oh, let's see, that was in the seventies. I can't remember the exact date. But he also worked to get the free enterprise system in the high schools, and that is a required course in the high schools in <Arizona>.

Cole: And how did he work on that, do you remember?

Blair: Well, he wrote to the state legislature, and there were other Libertarians down in <Phoenix> that helped him on that.

Cole: Is that also a requirement in the Navajo schools?

Blair: It would be in the public schools. There aren't too many Navajo high schools. I think Gray Hills is under the Bureau of Indian Affairs. But most of the high schools on the reservation now are public schools. The boarding schools just go to the eighth grade.

Cole: Why do you think you two stayed in the business of trading?

Blair: Well, we made a good living and we enjoyed it.

Cole: What are some of your favorite memories in the trading business?, or some of the humorous stories?, or maybe some of Brad's stories?

Blair: Oh, we have some humorous stories with the motel out at <Kayenta>, Wetherill Inn Motel. Our kids would work in the office, and none of my kids are real black-haired like their dad, and tourists would come in and they'd just be frustrated because they'd traveled so far, and they'd look at the kids and say, "Do you speak English?" (laughter) Because all they saw was Navajos outside, and they came into the office, they just assumed that....

There's a lot of tourist stories. We always had a horse for the kids, and there was a space between the store and the motel, so our horse just grazed there. One day we found out that the horse had stuck its head in one of the first-floor showers. (laughter) We thought that the tourists would be just horrified, but they thought that was the best thing that had happened to them (laughter) on their trip. Buck was lookin' for water, and there was water in the shower.

I've told you about the blizzards, and that was devastating.

We would have Christmas dinners for the whole group of people--especially <Red Mesa>. And we'd cook outside, and everybody was real congenial, and thanked us for having a Christmas dinner. [We gave] out candy to the kids.

Let's see, in 1995 or 1996, my kids arranged for a reunion out at <Red Mesa> at the Senior Citizen [Center]. It's right next to the Chapter House at <Red Mesa>. And we went out there and met several of the people who were our customers, and then two of the fellows who had worked for us. And that was a real happy time for the kids and for me. It was like a fifty-year reunion. They were all interested in where the kids were living, what we were doing. I can go out to Wal-Mart on the first of the month and have a reunion. Everybody comes to town to shop. (laughter)

Cole: You mentioned Christmas dinner, and you invited everybody. Do you mean just the employees? (

Blair: No.) Or would you have....

Blair: No, the people who traded with us. A lot of people, if they heard about it, they'd come in, too. It was usually mutton stew and fried bread and coffee, outside. Served huge bunches. At <Kayenta> I would cook Thanksgiving dinner for the help in the store and Wetherill Inn. And one year I didn't do it, and one of the maids wanted to know why, so we had it at Christmas. (laughter) But they did things for us and we did things for them. It was quite a congenial community.

Underhill: What are you most proud of over the last fifty years?

Blair: My kids. (chuckles) Grandkids. Eighteen grandchildren and seven greats. So something must have been working. (laughter)

Cole: Did customers in <Kayenta>, did any of 'em remember Wetherills’, or was there any connection [now?]?

Blair: Yes. There were some of the people that were real young that would work for Mrs. Wetherill in her café. And then some who would help with the tourists that they would take. And then I met a lady here in <Farmington> who is a quilter, and her husband had been the maintenance man for the roads out there, and she was there in the forties. And she knew them quite well. But we didn't know them. I knew the people out at <Monument Valley>, Harry.... What was his name? Goulding [phonetic spelling]. I'm getting old! (laughter)

Elijah Blair: (inaudible)

Blair: Yeah. And then his wife had moved away and then came to retire at <Monument Valley>. The people there provided her a place and she would work in their museum.

Cole: Let me backtrack a little bit here, 'cause I just thought of a question that I was sort of curious about. Did <Red Mesa> or <Kayenta>, did you have regular suppliers? Did you buy your goods from one place, or was it all sorts of salesmen?

Blair: There was a mercantile here in <Farmington>, it was called The Farmington Merc. And they would deliver. And then out of <Gallup> was Gross-Kelly. And Gross-Kelly was--oh, they had a history of being on the Santa Fe Trail: <Las Vegas New Mexico>, and <Santa Fe>, and <Albuquerque>, and <Gallup>. There's a book written about them called The Buffalo Head. And that's a good story about freighting out in the Southwest.

Cole: Did they bring, at <Red Mesa>, perishable stuff in? Or did you have ________.

Blair: We had perishable stuff after we got a diesel light plant and had a place to put the produce and the meats.

Cole: Was it kind of an event at all when the....

Blair: Oh yes. Each improvement, it seemed like it came with every kid that I had. (laughter) I told you we had an outdoor john. Okay. After the first one, we got a bathroom, an inside bathroom. And then we got a propane stove for cooking. And then propane for heating. And then we got the generator. We had an old Kohler generator, and that we just used at night. And then we got the diesel, and we had electricity all the time--when it didn't break down. But like I said, <Red Mesa> never had a telephone, even when a new store was built.

Cole: When the fellow from--was it Gross-Kelly? (

Blair: Gross-Kelly.)

Cole: How often would he come?

Blair: Maybe once a month. They would carry some things that the mercantile, here--or their prices would be different.

Cole: And when a salesman or a delivery person like that came, did they stay for any length of time?

Blair: They might stay for a dinner, or they might stay overnight. We had many people stay over. There would be a man come out of <Albuquerque>, and he would buy up the hides. He would stay, because he had to load all the hides into his big truck. Do you remember him?

Elijah Blair: Cox. _________. He's still living in <Albuquerque>. I talked to him about six, eight months ago. He's [still over there?].

Blair: Then sometimes we had people that broke down, and their cars needed a part. Elijah has a good story of someone broke down in the sand pile and almost died of heat exhaustion. Did you tell them that story?

Elijah Blair: (chuckling) No.

Cole: Well, a lot of people, you know, tried to cross the reservation, and right at <Dennehotso> there was sand traps and solid rock.

Elijah Blair: I guess I did tell 'em that story. Who that was--and they knew that--see, that was David Brenniger [phonetic spelling], who and his wife Loretta, which I dictated, broke down, and I went and pulled them back, and they stayed there. And they were sittin' there in a sand dune forever, and then we brought 'em back to the store. I probably didn't say about the heat. That is right, I remember that now, they were really....

Blair: They were really dehydrated.

Elijah Blair: Yeah, they had been there forever when I finally.... Well, a Navajo actually came in and told me about it, and I went over there and got them. That was that David Brenniger. You remember who he was, Carolyn. And his wife Loretta, they were together. That's the one that took the picture of Claudia and I up on the wall at <Mexican Water>.

Cole: Is the <Red Mesa> period, or the <Kayenta> period--is one more favorable than the other? Or do you have fonder memories of [one or the other]?

Blair: Well, no. We were comfortable at both places, but like <Red Mesa>, it was so isolated we didn't have anything. And <Kayenta> was a community. And even Brad mentioned, he said, "They don't call me "black hair," or Bitsii’»izhinii like they did at <Red Mesa>. They called him "Mr. Blair," or "Mr. Blairy," because of the "R" sound. A lot of them heard something besides the "R." I'm still Mrs. Blairy. (laughter)

Cole: If you could change anything about your life, would you do it?

Blair: No, I've been satisfied here. The last year I taught in <Connecticut>, we had forty days and forty nights of rain. And you cannot beat the Southwest. Now, the sandstorms were pretty awful at <Red Mesa>, but it wasn't forty days and forty nights (laughter) of rain.

Cole: Do you still have any kind of <Connecticut> connection?

Blair: I still have cousins back there, and I go back every once in a while, and to reunions and things like that. And I've taken different families of my kids, and I said, "You choose--<Kentucky> or <Connecticut>-- and we'll show you where your roots are." We've done that.

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add?

Blair: No, I've enjoyed it. I haven't remembered an awful lot. And I do have files, I'll go through the files and find things to add to the collection.

Cole: On behalf of NAU and the United Indian Traders [Association] Project, we thank you very much [for your time?].

Blair: I'm glad to be able to do it.

Steiger: I have one question.

Underhill: _________________.

Steiger: When you made the switch from <Red Mesa> to <Kayenta>, it sounds like that was kind of a big decision for you. (

Blair: It was a big decision.) Did you have any idea that things were gonna go large, like how that was gonna end up?

Blair: No, we had no idea. Even at <Red Mesa>, it was a quiet.... Well, we could have called it a honeymoon period for four or five years, until all the exploration started out there. I did meet a Navajo out at K-Mart, and he took my hand and he said, "Thank you, thank you for _______. I am retired from thirty years of working for an oil company, the Mobile Oil Company." His name is Tom Toney [phonetic spelling]. So we helped people there get jobs in the oil field. You know, they didn't know anything technical, but they were trained.

And then at <Kayenta>, I was in a restaurant Sunday with my youngest son. A man came up to me and he said, "Where are you living now?" I hardly recognized him, but he was really interested in what I was doing. So, like I said, the first of the month, I can have a big reunion out at Wal-Mart or K-Mart! (chuckles)

Cole: When that boom hit <Red Mesa>, did you still stay a behind-the-counter store?

Blair: Oh, yes.

Cole: That was always the case there?

Blair: Like I said, we built a barn for the wool. And then when the wool wasn't in there, it would be the hay. And then we put big windows. It was just small windows in the beginning, but we remodeled there.


