JAY SPRINGER INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.32

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's December 17, 1998. We're here visiting with Jay Springer as part of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project. Also present in the room are Karen Underhill from NAU and Lew Steiger. 

Cole: Jay, we always like to begin at the very beginning. When and where were you born? 

Springer: I was born in 1935 at Ganado Presbyterian Hospital out there on the reservation. So it's been a while! (laughter) I've enjoyed it. In fact, looking back on it, it's the best part of my life, probably.

I spent the early part of my life living on the reservation, until school age, and then we moved to <Gallup>, and I went to the Gallup schools, and on to school from there. 

Cole: What were your parents doing that you were at <Ganado> when you were born? 

Springer: They were operating a trading post, the Sunrise Trading Post. We eventually ended up with-- well, progressively we ended up with a total of five, after a period of time--but initially they were operating the Sunrise Trading Post, just west of <Ganado>. 

Cole: What were your parents' names? 

Springer: Harold Springer and Ruth Springer. 

Cole: Were they the owners of Sunrise? 

Springer: They were partners with Clarence Wheeler that was out there at this period of time. 

Cole: How did your parents end up in the Southwest? 

Springer: Well, Dad, when he graduated from school-- he graduated during the Depression--and that was one of the few jobs that he could find. So he didn't plan it that way, it was one of those deals where it just worked that way. He worked summers down here, and then as the Depression got worse, he was offered a job down here as a bookkeeper, as an accountant, and took that, because there wasn't much else available at that point in time. So that's how he came to this area. 

Cole: Came to <Gallup>? 

Springer: Came to <Gallup>. He was originally from the <Durango> area. 

Cole: And your mother was also from.... 

Springer: She was from <Johnstown>, a little town north of <Denver>, about sixty miles north of <Denver>. 

Cole: And how did they meet, do you know? 

Springer: (laughs) I don't know about that one. They met in school, but beyond that, I don't know. They both attended University of Colorado. 

Cole: And you mentioned that your parents eventually owned five trading posts, or were involved with five trading posts. Was that all at the same time, or different? 

Springer: No, at one point in time, it was all at the same time, yeah. 

Cole: And was that from <Gallup> that he.... 

Springer: Eventually. We set up an accounting office in <Gallup> and operated out of <Gallup>, primarily because we did our banking in <Gallup>, and originally our food wholesalers were here, and so this was a good area to operate out of, and we'd commute to the individual trading posts then. 

Cole: Do you remember the names of all of them? 

Springer: Yeah, there was, as I mentioned before, the Sunrise Trading Post beyond <Ganado>, the Lower Greasewood Trading Post, the White Cone Trading Post, and we had the Dilkon [phonetic spelling] Trading Post, and then another Sunrise Trading Post located at <Leupp>. 

Cole: Do you have any early memories of <Ganado>, the Sunrise Trading Post? 

Springer: That's mainly where I grew up, until I was of school age. We stayed there and lived there. Yeah, it was a good time in my life. We enjoyed it. Of course I guess maybe we didn't know any better, but things were simple. Of course we didn't have any electricity, so we worked with kerosene lamps and eventually got around to the point where we had the old wind-charger that generated electricity. Didn't get to town very often, the roads weren't that good, and so we didn't get to town too often. It was a good time, a good time in my life. 

Cole: With this time of the year, do you remember what the Christmas holiday was like for a real small boy at <Ganado>? 

Springer: The memory that--of course, here again, you've got to take it with the time--when I was small, in preschool, I can remember thinking that Santa Claus must have come, because I could see these sleigh tracks. Well, the reason I saw the sleigh tracks was because the Navajos at that point in time in the wintertime, the snow got deep enough, they put the runners on their wagons. So in fact I could go out there and I could see these sleigh tracks, and I knew (laughter) that he'd been there. But as I say, this was preschool. 

Cole: Did you have any brothers and sisters? 

Springer: I have a sister. She was with us, and lived out there until school age, too. About our only-- we would visit with other traders' families. Early-on, that was about our only socializing, was we would visit with other traders' families and their children. So that was how we got together socially. 

Cole: Once you moved into <Gallup>, what are memories from your childhood in <Gallup>? 

Springer: Well, even after we moved to <Gallup>, we continued to go out there during summers, and spent our summers out there at the post. And that continued until I was in high school, I think, so we continued even after that time, we continued to go back there. We had horses and could ride, and we enjoyed it. 

Cole: At some point in time, did you get put to work in those early years? 

Springer: Oh, yeah! we helped. The chore that I liked the least was sorting the potatoes--particularly after they started to go. That was kind of a smelly job, after they got goin', but that was one of the jobs that I got assigned to, was sorting the potatoes and takin' the bad ones out, and that sort of stuff. I wasn't real crazy about that chore, but yeah, we had chores. 

Cole: What about Navajo friends? 

Springer: Both my sister and I had Navajo friends, kids about our age. We had friends that we used to-- the expression is, "hang out with." But there were quite a few of those. And they would ride our horses and we'd ride theirs. We got along fine, we got along good. 

Cole: Any particular childhood adventures that you remember in those summers? 

Springer: I don't know where anything comes to mind immediately. I guess the thing that stands out, of course we grew up learning to ride bareback, like most of the Navajo children did. We grew up riding bareback. And of course it's fun to go fast, but of course the horse would occasionally spook, and he would go one direction and of course we ended up goin' the other direction. And we had quite a few of those. Of course we were young and it didn't make any difference at that point in time. I couldn't do it today, but at that point in time it was a lot of fun, and we enjoyed it.

Nothing else specifically comes to mind--right at the moment, at least, it doesn't. In the spring when they were buyin' the wool, my sister and I would enjoy playin' on--they used to stack 'em and they'd get 'em up pretty high, and that was a lot of fun, playin' on those wool bags. That was somethin' that was extra fun. But it was interesting, I enjoyed it. 

Cole: How did your parents like the trading life? 

Springer: They did. They did that. In fact, that was the only job that Dad ever had, was the trading post, and he spoke excellent Navajo and he continued to commute, even after we had started school in <Gallup>. He continued to commute back and forth--not on a daily-- but a weekly basis he'd go out and stay and come to town on the weekends after we'd started to school. 

Cole: You mentioned that he had gone to college. Did he graduate? 

Springer: Yes, he was a graduate of a university. 

Cole: And what was his area of interest? 

Springer: He got a degree in business administration, so he was with an accounting major, similar to what I had, or what I did. That was where he first got started, was the fact that he could keep some records, was the reason that he first got started with the original owners of those posts--he could keep the records for 'em. 

Cole: You mentioned Clarence Wheeler was one of his partners. 

Springer: Yes. 

Cole: Do you remember him at all yourself? 

Springer: Yes. 

Cole: What was he like? 

Springer: Oh, he was quite an individual. He went more into the history of some of these things. He was always interested in the clan relationships among the Navajos, as to who belonged to whom, and why, and this sort of thing. He was interested in that portion of it. And he and his family early-on lived at the post, too. But after a few years, he moved to <Phoenix>, and he spent most of his time in <Phoenix>. 

Cole: And were there other partners in your dad's business? Or was it just Clarence? 

Springer: Yeah, there were some other partners. Clarence was involved with the Sunrise, Greasewood, and White Cone posts. And then Francis Powell was involved. He was involved with the Dilcon and the other Sunrise post at <Leupp>. 

Cole: And I'm sort of interested, with your dad coming from a business background, how did he view the barter, trade, and stuff? 

Springer: Well, of course that was new to him, too. Initially, way back, it was all barter, there was just no money exchanged hands. It was all barter. Of course financing that kind of an operation, or that method, got kind of extensive. Hopefully, you were only clear of debt twice a year--once in the spring when you sold your wool, and once in the fall when you sold your sheep and your cattle--and the rest of the time you were operating on credit. 

Cole: Did that credit extend both ways? Did he operate.... 

Springer: Yes. In other words, the customer was trading on credit, and then we, in addition, were trading on credit. We only paid our food wholesalers twice a year, too. So everybody was working on that kind of a method. 

Cole: And who were some of the wholesalers that your dad dealt with? 

Springer: The Gallup Mercantile Company, and the Gross Kelly Company. And they supplied most of everything that we had to have: the dry goods, the groceries, hardware. They supplied it all. Initially they were our big suppliers. 

Cole: What was a typical day like for your parents in the trading post, while you were out jumping off the wool sacks? (laughter) 

Springer: Oh, it started fairly early. I don't know whether I have a clear recollection of a typical day. I don't know, it was during the seasons, during the wool seasons and the [lamb] seasons, when we were buying, they were long. You started early and you stayed as long as the customer wanted to stay. And if it was six o'clock or seven o'clock or whenever he wanted to finish up, you just stayed there until he was finished, and that's the way it was. The other times, of course, weren't like that. They were somewhat normal. In those days, it was eight to six, instead of nine to five. It just depended what the activity was, and what season we were in, as to what kind of hours they were puttin' in. 

Cole: When you went back out to the post in the summer, did you go to the same one every year? 

Springer: Yes. 

Cole: That was out to Sunrise? 

Springer: Yes. That's where we spent the bulk of our time. 

Cole: What were the Navajo customers like? 

Springer: Oh, they were friendly. I don't recall any--offhand--I assume there probably were some--I don't recall any instances where there was a lot of problems. I don't recall any occasions. In the early days--this is prior to the pickup--but in the early days they would come. If they came from a long distance, they would camp at the store and stay overnight. In other words, they'd come in and do their trading and then if it was a long ways home, they just stayed overnight, and then they went back the next morning. And of course everything was horse and wagon in those days, early on. I have good recollections of the early days. I was glad I was out there when I was. I'm not crazy about it today, but I'm glad I was out there when I was. 

Cole: What's changed to make it not as attractive today? 

Springer: Well, it's like a lot of other things, nobody has any time today. The Navajos are like anybody else. They only have so much time to spend doing this now, and then they're gone. They don't have a lot of time to sit around and gab. Previous to this, they always had time. They'd sit down and maybe talk for half an hour. And of course the trader did too--he had a lot of time. So it kind of worked both ways. But nobody has time to sit down and gab anymore: Everybody's gotta go. "I hafta go!" That's the biggest thing, I think. Of course I'm sure you've heard this from some of your other interviews, I think the biggest thing to change the reservation and the Navajo was the pickup. I think that's the biggest thing. That, and of course the roads got better. They got to where they had better roads and that sort of thing. So things started changin' right after that. 

Underhill: You mentioned that your dad was hired initially because he did know how to keep records. 

Springer: Uh-huh. 

Underhill: What kind of business records did your dad's post, or other trading posts, keep in that time? 

Springer: Oh, we had small--well, we called 'em charge pads--you just listed the individual's purchases for the day, and this sort of stuff. And you just kept a continuous record of this, and the item was written down and priced out, and these then were your receivables. And they were kept in--our operation, they were kept in what we called a McKaskey Register [phonetic spelling], and each individual had his own slot, and these were torn out and put in this register, and they were continuously updated all the time. So if the need be, you could go through and get your receivables daily, if you wanted to do that, that much. Normally, we didn't. We took our inventories twice a year--once in the spring and once in the fall, to determine what our condition was. 

Cole: I was kind of curious when you went to the trading post in the summer, did your family ever come into town all summer? 

Springer: Oh, yeah, we'd come into town occasionally, but it was only maybe to pick up some grocery items that perhaps the store wasn't carryin', or somethin' like that. We would come in and then turn around and go back. Early, of course.... When I say, "early," when I was preschool when I was out there, it was too hard to come to town. The roads were bad, particularly the time of year it was, particularly in the wintertime, it was quite an experience to get to town. It took a long time, and if the roads were bad, it was a real experience to get to town. So we didn't come to town very often. 

Cole: Did your dad deal in many arts and crafts, rugs, things like that? 

Springer: Yes. Yes, that was part of the barter-- particularly the rugs. They were big early-on. That was part of the barter, that was one of the things that the Navajo had to sell that we could resell. People like John Kennedy, for example, were big rug buyers, that we sold to. And they were big-time, early-on. 

Underhill: Would your dad work with weavers on designs? 

Springer: No, he never did that, he left it up to the individual, and let her creativity or her imagination--whatever she wanted to come up with. He never got into that portion of it. 

Cole: Any particular types of rugs that Sunrise was known for? 

Springer: Well, on part of the--I'm sure you probably have heard of those Ganado reds. Well, that is the same area that the Sunrise Post was in. They were part of that. They had the dark reds with the greys and blacks and whites and this sort of stuff. What I call these "wild" colors didn't come on until quite a bit later. They stayed with the traditional colors. 

Underhill: I keep jumping in here! When you talked about the condition of the post, and taking inventory every six months, do you recall what maybe the average amount, in terms of receivables, was at that time? 

Springer: Oh, golly, we would run $20,000 or $30,000 worth of receivables. As I say, it was ongoing. We cleaned up pretty good in the spring and in the fall, but other than that, everything was just on paper. 

Cole: What kind of an income did it produce for your dad, do you recall? 

Springer: It was a good income. Those early years, I don't recall, I suspect $10,000 or $15,000, I imagine, was a good income in those days. I really don't recall what it might have been in that time. Of course it was more after we got the other stores, but it wasn't.... It was lucrative, it was better than the same job would have paid off the reservation--it was better than that--and primarily because of the hardships you had to go through to earn it. Because initially, nobody else wanted to come out there. So, yeah, it was better than the same job off the reservation. 

Cole: So it sounds like you moved into <Gallup> in the early forties, I'm guessing? 

Springer: Well, let's see, yes, 1940.... The Second World War was goin' on, it would have been along about 1942, 1943. 

Cole: And at what point did your father acquire interest in these other trading posts? Was it at that point, or did he gradually do that? 

Springer: It was a gradual process over the years. It was a gradual thing, it didn't take place all at once. It was just a gradual.... It was one of those things you heard about posts that might be available, and if you could deal on 'em, you did; and if you couldn't, you didn't. It was one of those things. 

Cole: And what was growing up in <Gallup> like then, once you moved in here? 

Springer: Oh, <Gallup> was, and still is, a trading town for the surrounding areas. We're experiencing some growth today, but it's not that the city of <Gallup> can support it, it's the surrounding reservations that make it viable. It's a trading center, and probably always will be. At one time the railroad was big here. We had some uranium mines that were active for quite a while, and right now we have a large open-pit coal mine that's operating. But mostly it's a trading center for the surrounding reservation. 

Cole: And you mentioned at some point you quit going out to the reservation in summers. When was that? 

Springer: Well, of course when I was in school, at that point in time I was working in town and had summer jobs in town, and I didn't go back out on the reservation during the summertime. But when I got out of school, then I did a stint in the Army Reserve for a while. And then at that point in time I went back out. This was, oh, Lord, I don't know, this would have been ... about the early sixties. 

Cole: And when you said you went back out, you went up to work one of the trading posts? 

Springer: No, I guess that's a misnomer. We got down to the routine where I would make a round of all the posts, pick up all the records and this sort of thing--the source records that I needed--and then I would bring 'em back to <Gallup> to work them up, as far as all your financial records are concerned. 

Cole: And were you working with your father still? 

Springer: Yes. 

Cole: Was this an unusual arrangement for a trading business? 

Springer: Probably. I suspect that most of it was done, perhaps, on site. Most of the people hired CPAs off reservation in one of the border towns, to do the records. We never did, but I suspect that's the way most of the traders did it. 

Cole: When did your father become involved with the United Indian Traders Association? 

Springer: He was one of the originators way back. I would think--I'm not sure of the actual date that the Traders Association started, but the early forties, I think, or along in there sometime. It was way, way back. He was one of the so-called charter members. He goes way back. 

Cole: And did he have a position with the Traders, or was he just a member? 

Springer: At that point in time, he was just a member. Later on, he worked up as a director and was the president for more than one term. He held that position. I'm not sure about the time involved. 

Cole: Do you recall what the initial reason for [forming] the organization was? 

Springer: Well, originally, it was to combat common problems that all the traders were having. I think probably the biggest thing that the Association did was pool together and hire prominent attorneys and this sort of thing to deal with leases on the reservation, when we dealt with Window Rock as concerned how these leases were going to be handled, and this sort of thing. I think that's probably one of the biggest things that the Association did. Later on, they were in the silver business for a while, and they would buy silver in bulk and then the traders would buy from the Association. And I'm not sure about the term of that. I don't know how long that lasted--I'm not sure. That was early, and I'm not sure about that. 

Cole: Do you remember, did the Association accrue quite a bit off that end of their business? 

Springer: Not really. They sold it, and they invested the proceeds of that sale in ATandT stock. They didn't go out to make money, it's just that ATandT continued to grow and split, and grow and split, and this sort of thing. And then, I forget what year it was, but ATandT split off and spun off all the so-called "baby Bells," and those stocks grew and this sort of thing. So eventually it accrued to quite a sum of money. As a money-maker, it was a small investment at the time. It just, over the course of twenty or thirty years, amounted to quite a bit--eventually--due to circumstances. 

Cole: Were you a member of the Association yourself? 

Springer: Uh-huh. 

Cole: When did you join, do you remember? 

Springer: Oh, I had been a member for, I don't know, probably twenty-five years, I guess. 

Cole: Have you had positions within the organization, other than a member? 

Springer: I've just had the treasurer's position. In the Traders Association, the individuals were not members--the trading posts was where the membership was. So, in fact, if you paid your dues to the Association, then you were a member--whoever the owner of that particular trading post was--you were a member of the Association then. So it's been quite a long time. 

Cole: And describe maybe the duties as treasurer. 

Springer: Well, the biggest thing, I think, was you collected the dues and you sent out the little dun letters that people were a little bit slow, you did that. Then at the annual meeting that was normally held in the fall of the year, you gave 'em a financial statement to show what the condition of the Association was. That was the biggest deal. 

Cole: Do you have any idea of how large the organization was in peak years? 

Springer: At one time I think we were well over a hundred members. I can't remember exactly. It seemed like it was 115-120, something like that. That included some associate members that we had, but at the peak, that was about it, I think. 

Cole: What would somebody do to become an associate member? 

Springer: They were people like Pendleton Mills, for example--they were an associate member. Of course they sold to the traders a tremendous amount of the Pendleton products--the big blankets and shawls and this sort of thing--and they were an associate member. Let's see, it seems like there was somebody else. I can't remember right off hand. But that's an example of an associate member. They weren't directly involved in the business--only indirectly were they involved with us. 

Cole: Would some of the <Gallup> businessmen that were kind of wholesalers be considered eligible for full membership? Or were they.... 

Springer: No, they wouldn't--not unless you were actually involved in the trade. You had to be dealing-- either have an operation, have a trading post, on the reservation, or dealing directly with the Navajo. 

Cole: Do you actually remember who the individual was that decided to invest in ATandT stock? 

Springer: I'm sure it was (chuckles) a so-called committee decision, but as to who was involved in it, I'm sure my dad was. But beyond that, I don't know. I'm sure it was a committee decision of some kind. But as I say, that goes back a little bit before my time-- or I wasn't very old at the time, so I'm not sure about that one. 

Cole: Do you remember then some of the different issues that they dealt with over time? 

Springer: Yes. They took on the State of Arizona from the aspect as to whether Arizona state sales taxes were legitimate on the reservations, and eventually won that in that fact that they weren't. Of course the state claimed that they were, or should be collected. That was one of the bigger cases that they won for the Association--well, not for the Association, all members, anybody on the reservation benefitted from that decision. As I say, the leases, and I can't remember right off hand. 

Cole: Like on the Arizona sales tax issue, did the Association have the funds within their coffers to hire attorneys, or did they have to get extra money from the membership? 

Springer: I believe at that point in time I think they made assessments. They went to the members and said that "the attorneys are going to cost this much, and we need a little help." And in fact, most everybody did. Most everybody was assessed and they paid their assessments, and that's the way the attorneys were paid. So the membership dues, with what few expenses we had, about paid for the expenses. But anything out of the ordinary, had to go to some kind of an assessment to raise enough funds for that. 

Cole: Was that your job, to collect the assessment, too, then? 

Springer: Well, it was my dad's job. I didn't get in on too much of that. A lot of this stuff took previous to me. So that was his job, but it wasn't mine. I missed out on that one. 

Cole: Was that difficult for him to collect that money? 

Springer: Oh (sigh), it kind of depended on whether they believed in what you were trying to do. The Indian trader was highly independent, very independent, and if he believed in what you were trying to do, it wasn't a problem. If he wasn't real crazy about it, then it kind of was a problem. But most of 'em were okay, most of 'em were all right. 

Underhill: What percentage of the Indian traders who would have been eligible for membership joined the Association? You mentioned at its peak about a hundred--100 out of maybe 200 eligible fellows? 

Springer: At that peak, I don't believe that there were 200 out there. I suspect that we had, at the peak, maybe two-thirds, or maybe three-fourths. I think at one time we've probably had most of 'em, but we never did get everybody. 

Cole: Any idea what portion of the traders were in the border towns? 

Springer: We didn't have too many traders that were in the border towns that were members--not initially, anyway. Most of the membership had posts on the reservation, and in the heyday of the Association, we had people on the Zuni Reservation, on the Hopi Reservation--of course the bulk was on the <Navajo Reservation>. But not too many from the border towns. 

Cole: You mentioned the issue of leases. Why were they so difficult to get? 

Springer: Well, it was initially the Navajo Tribe.... We were goin' at it, everybody was going after their own terms--for example, five years, ten years, fifteen years, whatever. What the Association tried to do was get a standardized lease of some kind, where the terms were the same for everybody, and we were partially, or fairly successful doing that. It broke down a lot of years later, but initially we were pretty successful. We initially--these leases that I'm talkin' about--we had twenty-five years. Well, it's pretty difficult to get a twenty-five-year lease today, but at that point in time, we were successful in getting those leases. Everybody's lease was the same, the terms were the same, the rental agreements were the same, and all this for everybody. So it benefitted everybody. 

Cole: What changed, that made it more difficult? After those twenty-five-year leases ended, what had changed within the system to make it difficult __________? 

Springer: Well, the tribe didn't want to enter into that again. They felt at that point in time that the leases were too long. They didn't want to get into another twenty-five-year agreement. And they preferred, as opposed to dealing in a group, they wanted to deal with the individuals. I assume that it was a benefit to them, I don't know. After that, it was just so-called "every man for himself," and you just did the best you could. You just got the best deal that you could, so [went out that way?]. 

Underhill: Did the Association ever encounter any corrupt tribal officials in their dealings with trying to arrange a standardized lease? 

Springer: Oh (sigh), I don't recall any instance of that. I don't know, maybe some of the people ran into it. I don't recall anything like that, though, no. And I don't recall my dad mentioning anything like that. As I say, there may have been some instances, but I don't recall anything. 

Cole: How long did you and your dad keep your interests in the trading posts? 

Springer: I got out, I finished 'em up in 1992, was the last year that I was active and participated. 

Cole: What were your experiences in trying to renegotiate leases? 

Springer: Well, it got to the point that we could only get short-term leases. And by short-term, I'm talkin' five years. Well, from our viewpoint, you couldn't do a lot in five years--particularly with capital improvements and this sort of thing. It was too short to get your money back. It was too short of a period. So consequently it made long-range planning difficult. If you only had a five-year lease, you didn't know at the end of that five years if you were gonna get another lease or not, so it made long-term planning a little difficult. It was, as I said, probably a difficult period. 

Cole: Would the Association, did they continue to try to deal with that lease [situation]? 

Springer: Not at that point in time. As I say, after that initial twenty-five-year period was over, they weren't active in the lease portion of the negotiations. They weren't active in that. 

Cole: Did that bother the membership? 

Springer: Well, it depended. If the individual that dealt with them got a good lease, he wasn't gonna complain. He wasn't gonna argue. The individual that got a bad, or didn't think that he had a good lease, may say somethin', and on occasions did, because the tribe was, according to him, treating him unfairly, or something like that. But it got down to--the Association tried to stay with problems that were affecting the bulk of the membership, and tried to stay out of individual problems. I mean, if an individual had a problem with the tribe, unless it was something way out of the ordinary, they tried to stay away from that. They didn't get involved in those deals. 

Cole: And what do you remember about the FTC hearings? 

Springer: I wish you hadn't brought that up. (laughter) Here again, it was difficult to explain to somebody out of Washington as to exactly how we operated. They wanted us to operate just like somebody in one of the border towns would operate. Of course we contended that we had a different kind of trade. They wanted us on a cash basis. And of course the Navajo wanted credit and enjoyed his credit, and wanted things to stay the same. But they said, "Well, if he brings you something to sell, you pay him cash for it, as opposed to taking that off his bill, whatever it was he owed you." In other words, as I say, they wanted 'em to deal like the white man did. That's what they wanted. And it was difficult to explain to them that in fact we were a little unique, and they didn't want us unique. They wanted us to deal like.... And that was the start of the cash economy that you've got out there today. You don't have a lot of credit, you have pretty much of a cash society out there now. 

Cole: What do you think brought about the whole rise of that issue? 

Springer: Well, I don't know. There was some.... What am I tryin' to say here? Some problems, for lack of a better word, I guess. There were some problems, and that in fact initiated it. As I say, the Association could not speak for everybody. The individual members operated their businesses in their own fashions, whatever that was, so that in fact, there was probably some areas where individuals members and people that weren't members, there was problems with the pawn and this sort of thing. And that's about the time that they stopped takin' pawn on the reservation, and of course all the pawn moved to the border towns, which is my opinion they didn't help the Navajo people any, but that was their decision, so we were forced to go with it. 

Cole: Did you attend any of the hearings yourself? 

Springer: Yes. 

Cole: Describe what those were like. 

Springer: They had a panel of about, I can't remember, seems like there was about four or five people. You were asked to bring in records, and they quizzed you on what your practices were, and this sort of thing. I think the thing that I remember the best was that one individual, one of our people, said, "What I'm telling you is the truth, and if you don't believe me, you could come out to the post and I'll show you." The panelist's response was, "Well, I'm paid too much to go out there on the middle of the reservation." So that was the end of that discussion. 

Cole: Do you remember the makeup of the panel? Were they all from Washington, or was it a mixture? 

Springer: I don't remember, no. I don't know if they were all out of Washington or not. I can't remember that one. I don't know if they all--some of them were, but I don't remember if they all were. 

Cole: How involved was the Association in this issue? 

Springer: They were involved, but only on the perimeter. They didn't get directly involved with.... In other words, the Association didn't hire an attorney to take on the FTC. They didn't do that. What it evolved down to was that each operator hired their own attorneys and this sort of thing to appear before the FTC. 

Cole: Did every trader ________. 

Springer: No, there's was examples made of certain traders. It wasn't reservation-wide. They picked certain organizations. We had one of our posts that was involved. But it wasn't reservation-wide. 

Cole: Any idea why you were one of the lucky ones? 

Springer: I suspect our size had a little something to do with it. 

Cole: Meaning bigger than most? 

Springer: Well, as I say, at one time we had five posts under management. Babbitt Brothers out of <Flagstaff> were also involved. I suspect that's what it was, but I don't have any proof that that's what the reason was. 

Cole: I know there were a couple of traders that seemed like they possibly had legal action taken against them. I think Blair and Wheeler and McGee. Did the Association become involved in those cases? 

Springer: No, they didn't. 

Cole: Do you remember anything about why those people were.... 

Springer: I don't know. I can't remember. They weren't all the same problems--there were individual problems that they were going after, and I can't remember exactly what they were involved with. I don't remember that. 

Cole: When individual traders like that had that kind of difficulty, did they actually ever approach the Association for help? Not necessarily in just the FTC, but in other situations? 

Springer: Well, as I said, there were some individuals that were having particular problems-- whether it was with the FTC or somebody else. But the Association, as long as it was an individual thing, they didn't get involved in that sort of thing. It had to be something pretty widespread before the Association got involved--something that affected a lot of people, or a lot of the traders. 

Cole: Was there any method that a person could bring an issue to the Association? 

Springer: At that point in time, we had directors' meetings on a quarterly basis, and any member was welcome to bring any particular problem that he might have, before the directors, and the directors would study it and see if there was anything they could do with it. That was the main route for the individuals to come to the Association. And of course at the annual meetings they could bring up anything they wanted to. 

Cole: Was the position of treasurer a member of the board of directors? 

Springer: Yes, he was a member of the board of directors, yes. 

Cole: And those quarterly meetings, did they meet in the same place, or did they move around? 

Springer: No, we moved around. We tried to have one in <Flagstaff>, one in <Gallup>, and one in <Farmington>, and then we had the annual meeting. So that was how that was handled. 

Cole: And just so I get the chronology straight, how long did your dad serve as treasurer? What year did he.... 

Springer: Oh, golly! (laughter) I don't know. He held the position a long time. I would say he held it probably twenty years before I assumed the slot. Dad passed away in 1979, so it would have been probably the late fifties, early sixties. 

Cole: Did they have to vote you in, or did you just sort of.... 

Springer: Well, they didn't vote me in, I took Dad's duties because he wasn't able to. Late in life, he wasn't able to. So I assumed his duties, and the board agreed with it. I guess after a while they thought I was doin' a good enough job that I was finally elected to the slot. 

Cole: Was that a paid position? 

Springer: No. It was a donated position. 

Cole: Did you all invest in ATandT? (laughter) 

Springer: I wish! No. Looking back on it, hindsight, I wish I had! I wish I had. 

Underhill: What were the annual meetings like? 

Springer: Well, they were quite a social occasion. We had--originally you had a banquet and you had a dance afterwards, and there was live music. And it was the one time of the year that people from parts of the reservation that you normally didn't get to see came into it. It was quite a social occasion. And of course.... This I never understood. They had their business meetings on Sunday morning, and of course this was after the banquet, and after the dance, and all this sort of stuff, and of course the refreshments were rather (sniffs)--there was a lot of 'em. (laughter) and I never did understand why, on Sunday morning, at eight o'clock, then everybody was supposed to be bushy- tailed and be able to handle all this sort of stuff. Needless to say, the business portion of it didn't last too long. 

Cole: So there was no meeting on Saturday at all, except for the social? 

Springer: No, there wasn't anything on Saturday. That was originally how it was done. It evolved to less and less and less, until it got down to a point where it evolved to a business meeting on Saturday, and then that was it, period. 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Cole: This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're visiting with Jay Springer today. It's December 17, 1998. Also present in the room are Karen Underhill from Northern Arizona University, and Lew Steiger, and this is Tape 2 of a United Indian Traders Association oral history interview.

We were talking about the UITA annual meetings, and I'm kind of curious, what kind of business was conducted at those meetings? 

Springer: Well, the chief thing was the election of the officers and the directors. And then it was open to the floor, anybody that had particular problems, or anybody that wanted to bring up something before the Association, they did. We had guest speakers, normally somebody that [had] some area of expertise that we needed to know about--particularly we had a lot of the tribal representatives, a lot of the tribal officials as speakers, and this sort of thing, in certain areas that they spoke to us, and this sort of thing. But it was mostly thrown open to the membership, as to whatever problems they might have, and they could bring 'em up. I think the most important thing, as I say, was the election of the officers and the directors. 

Cole: Were they all elected annually, or was it.... 

Springer: Yes. They had staggered terms, so that I think only half of the board came up at one time, and the other half was a carry-over board. So no, they weren't elected each year, no, not all of 'em. 

Cole: Would the vote actually occur at the meeting, or did they send ballots out to the membership? 

Springer: It occurred at the meeting. You were given a ballot with the individuals' names on it-- whoever was going to run. Then you had to be a member in order to vote, and the members then voted by secret ballot. 

Cole: Where were the annual meetings held? 

Springer: Oh, they were usually held at one of the bigger motels in the border towns. A lot of 'em were held at the Shalimar Inn here in <Gallup> when it was new. And they were held sometimes at a country club-- the Farmington Country Club was used, the Gallup Country Club was used. Usually at one of the larger motels where they had a large meeting room and this sort of stuff, and where people could stay if they would come a long distance, where they could just stay overnight. 

Cole: What kind of bands did they have? 

Springer: Oh, they had some good bands. They were usually, my recollection with these here in <Gallup>, the bands were usually out of <Albuquerque>, and they were, oh, I don't know, a four- or five-piece band. They were usually pretty lively bands. 

Cole: Any particular type of music, or did that change? 

Springer: I don't recall. It seems like to me they were pretty much--they played the whole gamut of music. I don't recall anything special. Of course we appointed somebody to host in each border town, and they arranged for the banquet and they arranged for the music and all that sort of stuff, in each area. 

Cole: Were you ever the host? 

Springer: No, I missed out on that one. (laughter) 

Underhill: What was the role for women, or traders' wives, in the Association? 

Springer: I don't recall, until just the last few years, that we ever had a woman director--I don't believe we did. And it's too bad, because there were a lot of women at these posts that were runnin' the post as good or better than the husband was. And there's occasions of--I can't recall immediately--but there were occasions where the husband passed away, and the wife stayed right there and continued to run the post and that sort of thing. But their roles were mostly helpmates and wives. That was basically what it was. As I say, we were remiss in not pursuing getting a woman on the board. We were neglect in not doing that. Looking back, here again, of course your hindsight is always better. 

Cole: Could a post send a representative to the meeting, and could that person be a voting person? 

Springer: Yes, if they had the--oh, what am I trying to say?--the proxy from the member, yes, they could do that. You could have somebody other than the post owner vote for the post. Yeah, you could do that. 

Cole: And would the traders have any particular fare that they'd want for dinner, or did it vary? 

Springer: Oh, it.... (laughs) I think I'm being set up here! Sounds like you already have heard some stories. (laughter) 

Cole: No, I haven't, actually. You're the first person we've talked to who seems to remember much about it. 

Springer: No, I don't recall. It seems like it was mostly steaks and this sort of thing. They had normally had plenty of lamb out there where they were, so we didn't get into that--we didn't get into the lamb. Most of it was steaks, if I remember correctly. Of course we initially had some kind of a fancy dessert of some kind--either baked Alaska or something fancy. 

Cole: Would they ever offer any door prizes? 

Springer: Yes, it seems like we had raffles for, I think, a bottle of liquor. The ladies always--we raffled off, we had flowers for centerpieces on the tables, and the ladies went home with the centerpieces-- we raffled all those off and everything. To my recollection, that was most of it. 

Underhill: Who, among the traders, stands out in your mind? 

Springer: Hm. (pause) Oh (sigh), I don't know. The Indian trader was so independent and so much of an individual that it's hard for me to single out an individual that really, to me, stands out. There were a lot of people that were very successful, but by the same token, like any sector business, there were some that weren't, too. And there were always a few that were stirrin' up things that probably would be left better unstirred and this sort of thing. But I can't think of an individual right now that really stands out in my mind. 

Underhill: You mentioned being an individual or independent. What other characteristics do traders share in common? 

Springer: Well, that, to me, is the major quality that I noticed. They didn't group together unless it was a problem that they couldn't handle as an individual, and then they were inclined to come together for a cause or whatever. But I think that's the biggest thing, or the most important thing that stands out in my mind, is their individualism. That stands out in my mind more than anything else. 

Cole: We've seen, when you look at the trading business, there's a lot of extended families in the business. (

Springer: Yes.) Were brothers pretty competitive with each other, or did they try to get together and monopolize? 

Springer: Well, they could be [competitive], and of course the reason they had extended families in the business was because you could always trust them. You didn't have to worry about whether they were gonna be honest or not. That's why so many of 'em got extended families--particularly if they were gonna take on another post or something like that. They'd put family members in there, because they could trust those, you didn't have to go out and hire 'em and wonder whether they were trustworthy or not. So that was one of the reasons why we had a lot of extended families. But yes, brothers would compete with brothers in this sort of thing. Yes, they would compete on a business basis. Yeah, they'd compete, you bet. 

Cole: Could you describe for us, if you don't mind, how the Association disbanded, and how they decided to fund these different projects? 

Springer: We got to a point where our membership was dwindling, and at that point in time, as I mentioned before, the ATandT stock, through splits and through spinoff of the baby Bells and a few other things, had grown substantially, and we had a pretty sizeable war chest. Since we were a nonprofit organization, then it was decided that in fact we should do some things with this money that would perhaps benefit people. This history of the Association, and the history of some of these traders was at the top of the list. Beyond that, some donations to universities, hospitals, museums, and this sort of thing, in various amounts, to dispose of this war chest that had built up--not through smart investing--it had just occurred this way, just grew. 

Cole: I'm curious, maybe you could explain for us, because other people have asked me, why the traders just didn't split the money up among themselves. I assume it's something to do with the nonprofit status? 

Springer: Yes. Yes, that's true, we couldn't. We couldn't, without.... We were a nonprofit organization, and we couldn't divide the money up among the members, we couldn't do that. It had to go to-- without a lot of IRS problems, we couldn't do that, so that's why we took the route that we did. 

Cole: And then one more UITA-related question. What occurred at the quarterly meetings, the director meetings? 

Springer: Well, the directors discussed any problems that they.... Members would sometimes come to the directors with a particular problem, and at the quarterly meetings, the directors would discuss what problems were out there, and whether or not they thought that the Association should get involved in them or not. And it was more of an informational meeting more than anything else. And as I said, the individual members, of course they were apprised of these quarterly meetings, and they could come, and if they had a particular problem they could appear before the board and tell them what their individual problem was. Of course, if they wanted assistance, they would appear before the board. Some of 'em were helped, and others the board didn't feel was a cause that the Association should take up. So it just depended on what the individual's problem was. 

Underhill: Do you recall the nature of any of those problems? 

Springer: Oh, the biggest thing was probably after we got to go back, after we got out of this twenty-five- year lease period, I think the biggest thing that the members weren't happy with was the terms of the new leases that they weren't getting. There didn't seem to be any--I'm sure the tribe had their own reasoning--but there didn't seem to be any rhyme or reason or consistency to terms of these leases that the individuals got when they appeared as individuals before the Economic Committee. As I say, some were getting five years, and some were getting ten years. Of course the individual was concerned as to why he was only getting this length of time, when some other individual was getting fifteen or twenty years. That was the biggest thing that I recall. They seemed to be--and rightly so. There didn't seem to be a lot of consistency. Of course part of the reason was the tribe would say, "Well, if you want a twenty-year lease, what improvements are you going to make over this twenty years?" Well, to be perfectly fair, some of the individuals would say, "None." Well, then they're only gonna get a five-year lease. The other individuals say, "Well, I'm gonna build a new store." Well, he got a twenty-year lease. And that was only right. If you're willing to spend some money, you should get a longer lease than the individual who said, "No, I'm not gonna spend any money." So that's kinda the way it went. But, even so, they weren't real crazy about it. Even so, they still weren't real crazy about it. That was the major problem that occurs to me. That's the major problem that I recall. 

Cole: What about the whole issue with the Thriftway Stores, when they got all their leases? Did that come up at UITA? 

Springer: It was discussed among the board, but there was never any action taken. We felt that maybe things weren't all on the up-and-up, but the Association didn't take it on, no. The individual members felt this. 

Cole: Were the Thriftway people ever members of the Association? 

Springer: I think they had one or two stores at one time, that were members, but not as a company, no. 

Underhill: Were there any Navajo traders who were members of the Association? 

Springer: Yes, there were a few. I can't recall right now who they were, but yes, we had some Navajo members. 

Cole: Would there ever be cause to have a special meeting of the membership, beside the annual meeting? Would they ever have anything like that? 

Springer: I don't recall that. There may have been, but not in my tenure, I don't recall that. The board could be called for a special meeting, if there was something that was crucial, but I don't recall the general membership being called. There was an occasion here within the last two or three years when we were considering disbanding the organization, and the distribution of some of these funds. We, in fact, called a special general meeting. But beyond that, not in the regular procedures, unt-uh. 

Cole: In looking through the records of the UITA, it appeared right when the organization was breaking up, there were a couple of lawsuits that I've never quite understood what.... They seemed to be suing over the breakup. 

Springer: Oh, there was some individuals that weren't in agreement with the way that we wanted to distribute these funds. They weren't in agreement with them, and so in fact did file. It never went to court, but in fact, yes, they did file suit. They weren't in agreement, the way that the board suggested that they be distributed, they weren't in agreement, and did in fact file suit. 

Cole: Do you remember how that was resolved? 

Springer: Yeah, they had input, and I can't even remember that there was a lot of change. But it was resolved, and the individual dropped the complaint, and that was the end of that. I just flat can't remember. I can't remember what it was that he particularly opposed. I don't remember for sure. 

Cole: Do you have any favorite stories or memories associated with the Association? 

Springer: Oh, I don't know. They were.... Early- on, they were kind of a party crew--at least on the annual meetings. (chuckles) They did a lot of good, but early-on, when they were out on the reservation and didn't come to town very much, when they did, they liked to party. At the annual meetings, it was a real party. I think that was my best memories of it. 

Cole: What about outside the Association, favorite memories about trading, or different traders? 

Springer: Oh (sigh), I don't know. We used to get together on occasions way back. We used to, when we were buying these sheep, we used to, before the era of the truck, we used to drive 'em to the railheads. And of course there were usually several traders that were doing about the same thing at about the same time, and that was sort of.... A small group would meet and get together and this sort of thing. There might be a few parties, but beyond that.... (laughter) I can't recall anything specific. 

Cole: Were those parties along the trail? 

Springer: No, you usually didn't do any partying until you'd finished up, after you got all the sheep on the boxcars and this sort of stuff, and you'd settled up with your buyer, whoever he was. Then it was usually time to party a little bit. 

Cole: Did you ever have the opportunity to push the sheep all the way in yourself? 

Springer: No, I never did do that. I did, in fact, follow 'em. By "follow 'em," you'd get 'em started in the morning and then you'd check with 'em every night when they bedded down for the night, and checked on their progress, all the way through. But as to go all the way through with 'em, no, I never did do that. 

Cole: You hired Navajo? 

Springer: Yes. 

Cole: Would those usually be somebody that was affiliated with your post, then? 

Springer: Yeah, they were--normally either worked for us--and of course in those days we were shipping anywhere from 7,000-8,000 head, and it was a pretty good-sized deal, and you had to have, besides the individuals maybe associated with the post or worked around the post, you had to have his family, and had to hire on other people [to help] handle it, because it was a pretty good-sized project. 

Cole: Were these people paid cash, or just credit at the store? 

Springer: No, they were paid cash when they got through. 

Cole: Can you remember what.... 

Springer: The going rate was? (laughter) No, I'm sorry. 

Steiger: Did they all ride horseback to drive these sheep? 

Springer: Yeah. 

Underhill: Or they went on foot? 

Springer: Well, some of 'em were on foot, but they were on horseback and on foot. 

Underhill: Do you speak Navajo? 

Springer: A few words. Here again, in hindsight I have regretted that in fact I didn't learn more. The best way, of course, to learn is to be in the post itself and deal with the people themselves. That's the best way to learn, and the fastest way to learn. And of course when I was young, it would have been fairly easy to pick it up. But no, I'm sorry to say I don't. I know some phrases and some words, but beyond that, I have to plead that I don't know that much. As I say, my dad spoke excellent Navajo, but I never did pick up that much. 

Cole: Did he have a nickname, your dad? 

Underhill: A Navajo nickname. 

Springer: Yeah, his nickname was Kneeshbzhii. It means "Spaghetti Man," and how he got that name, I'm not sure. I'm not sure of the origin. 

Underhill: Do you know if you had a nickname when you were a little boy? Or you're "Son of Spaghetti Man?" 

Springer: Yes, I was Son of Spaghetti Man, that's right. That's what they called me. I was Son of Spaghetti Man, yeah. That's right. 

Cole: And I assume your dad's posts initially were bullpen operations? 

Springer: Yes, they were. 

Cole: How did those change over time? 

Springer: Well, of course one thing about the bullpen, I can recall, here again, way back-- particularly when Navajos were stayin' over, camping near the post, that sometimes in the evenings they'd come in and they'd have a Yei'ii bicheii right in the bullpen area, where they'd take--of course we're selling corn--and they would take some corn and he'd put 'em in a little paper sack, and that made the rattles for 'em and this sort of stuff. And they'd have this Yei'ii bichei dance right in the bullpen area. I still recall that. That was when I was quite young, but I still recall that.

But we had to go to self-service, and we started putting certain items out in the bullpen area where they could pick up themselves, and this sort of stuff. And eventually that evolved to the full self-service operation, like the convenience stores are today. That's about what it evolved to. 

Cole: How many employees would a post have after it changed over? Did you.... 

Springer: Well, of course that.... It increased the.... Initially, I don't know that there was a lot of change. I'm sure there was, because you had to have more employees behind the--had to have more employees when everything was behind the counter. And when you went to self-service, of course you only had to have one or two clerks. But when you went to that, then the manager or whoever still had to have an area or an office where he could still deal with the people one-on- one, because they had things to sell and things to buy that weren't out in the main store area. 

Cole: Did your stores ever offer, at any point, employees' benefits or profit-sharing, anything like that? 

Springer: No, we never got to that. We did have health insurance, but beyond that, we never had any other benefits. 

Underhill: Did you have a general accounting business, or other businesses, or was your accounting focused specifically on the trading posts? 

Springer: No, it was big enough that I just focused on that. I didn't go outside and have any other accounting clients. It was big enough that that was all I did. 

Cole: How do you view the future of Indian trading? 

Springer: Oh, I think it's about gone. In fact, I don't know how many true trading posts are still left on the reservation--not very many. I think everything is convenience store type operations, and I don't call those trading posts. I think it's about gone. 

Cole: How about the future of Indian arts and crafts? 

Springer: Oh, I don't know. I think it's kind of tenuous. There is so much fake stuff--both in the jewelry and the rugs and everything else--there is so much fake stuff out there now, that I don't know. It certainly isn't what it was several years ago. It's not near what it was. The rugs are comin' out of <Mexico> and the jewelry and turquoise and things are comin' in, a lot of it, from some foreign countries, and I just don't know. If it's gonna be saved, it's gonna take a lot tighter regulation than we've got today. 

Cole: Then maybe how about what you think's gonna happen with the <Navajo Reservation>? 

Springer: I don't know. I would be in hopes that they would be able to do something with that vast labor pool that they've got out there. I would be in hopes they would be able to do something with it. But at least to date, it doesn't seem like that there's been a lot of progress in that area. It just doesn't seem like there has been. Of course they've got that big farming development over there around <Farmington>, around <San Juan>, and it is a big operation, but of course most of it's mechanized. There's not a lot of employment over there. So I don't know. I don't see, unless some large corporation of some kind would come in and be willing to set up some large kind of a manufacturing process or something like that, where they would employ a lot of people, I just don't know whether.... I think it's kind of cloudy, a little murky right now. I don't see a lot of positive things, let me put it that way. I don't see a lot of positive things. 

Cole: I thought of another Association question. How were the big traders, like Babbitts, perceived within the Association? 

Springer: I don't know about everybody--I'll speak for ourselves--we got along fine. Here again, due to their location and our location, we didn't have any problems. And the Babbitts, particularly Paul Babbitt, who was president of the organization; and Ralph Bilby, who headed up the organization for a while, he was president of the organization for a while--I'm not aware of any bad feelings. There may have been some, but I'm not aware of them, if there were. 

Cole: And if you could go back and change anything about your life, or your work, would you do that? 

Springer: No, I don't think so. I enjoyed it. As I say, I was glad I was out there when I was out there. I wouldn't be crazy about goin' back out there today. No, I enjoyed it, and it was a good time of our lives, a good place to grow up. We had all the animals and everything that we wanted, and all this sort of stuff. I think my childhood and my early growing-up.... And I still have a lot of Navajo friends on the reservation. I wouldn't change anything. No, I don't think so, I don't think I would. 

Cole: Another thing that popped into my mind: You mentioned you went to college. Where did you go to school? 

Springer: I graduated from the University of Colorado. 

Cole: And that was in business administration? 

Springer: Yes, that was my degree. 

Underhill: When you were young, did you have a particular dream or aspiration for adulthood? 

Springer: Oh, yeah, sure, like most young people. I couldn't wait to get out of school. I was gonna set the world on fire. Of course you don't do that, but I thought I could. Sure, I was gonna really make things pop, but you find out after you're out of school for a while that things don't work quite that way. So I had to fall into the mold. 

Cole: And did you imagine that you would be in the trading business? 

Springer: No! I didn't! Prior to going back to work out there, working for the organization, I worked a couple of years as assistant manager at a motel, and I kind of liked that. I thought maybe that would be the way to go. But after a while, I got tired of that, so I didn't want that. So I went back to the reservation and stayed there. 

Cole: Was there a name for your organization? 

Springer: No, as opposed to, say, an organization like the Babbitts'. They operated under one name, but we operated as--because of the different kinds of partnerships that we had going--we operated under just the individual store names. They were under a central management, but they weren't combined any other way. They weren't, as you say, under one name or something like that. No, they weren't handled that way, because we had different partnerships. So it was handled that way. 

Cole: Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

Springer: No, I don't think so. I will go back and say I certainly enjoyed my tenure on the reservation, and I wouldn't trade it for anything in the world. I thoroughly enjoyed it, and don't think that I have missed anything by being out there, and not have been in a border town or city or something like that. I don't think I've missed anything. 

Underhill: What did you learn from your early association with the Navajo, another culture? 

Springer: Oh, tolerance maybe. And things may not always be as they seem. As I say, I enjoy the Navajo people, and respect them, and still do to this day. As I say, I think it's a little unfortunate that they haven't progressed a little bit further, faster, but they're a very large tribe, and it's probably gonna take a lot of time before they are able to do some of these things. 

Steiger: I've got one question. Just as somebody who was so involved with the accounting, et cetera: Is there a time period that you could identify as the heyday of trading, when times were best for the traders? And if so, what was that time? Why was that? in terms of just making money. 

Springer: I would say probably the late fifties and the mid-sixties, that time period through there. 

Steiger: And why would that have been? 

Springer: Well, for one thing, we were pretty much being left alone, for one thing. We didn't have a lot of regulation, either from the state or from the tribe or from the federal government, or anybody else. We were pretty much left alone for a while. We weren't being bothered and we pretty much--business was good, and prices were fairly good. By prices, I'm talking about for the things that the Navajo had to sell, like the sheep and the cattle and the wool and rugs, and these kings of things. So I would say that period. 

Cole: Maybe you can't answer this, but how were income taxes calculated when there was so much barter and trade? 

Springer: Whose income tax? 

Cole: The trader's income tax. 

Springer: Well, it didn't make any difference. You came, when you got through at the end of the year, you had either made a profit, or you had a loss. And those were in dollars and cents. So in fact, it was like any other tax return. As I say, you either made money or you lost money. Some of the old-time traders used to say, "Well, if you had money in the bank, you know you made money. And if you didn't have any money in the bank, you lost." Well, it wasn't quite that simple. But it got denominated down, even though you were bartering, at a point where in fact you knew whether you had made money or not. As I say, because you didn't hang onto these things, you disposed of them, and you either made money on 'em, or you lost money on 'em. So that in fact, at the end of the year, you either did have money in the bank, or you didn't. In fact, you could work that down to a normal PandL [profit and loss statement] or a normal balance sheet or something like that. There was a lot of things that during the year that might be a little foggy, but at the end of the year, you tied it down where you could identify it. 

Cole: Being a larger trading organization, did you just unload your rugs and unload your pion nuts when you could? Or did you ever stockpile those and sell them at a more profitable time? 

Springer: We never did do that. There were people that did, that did in fact stockpile and this sort of thing. We never did. At the end of the season, whatever it was, we disposed of 'em, and didn't hold anything over, or anything like that. We didn't get into any kind of speculation or anything. Everything was disposed of at the end of the season, whatever season it was. 

Cole: Anything else, Lew? 

Steiger: No. I won't be thinkin' of it until we're in the car, drivin' away. (laughter) 

Cole: Well, on behalf of NAU and the UITA, thank you for your time. 

Springer: Well, thank you! I've enjoyed the participation in this, I've enjoyed it. 



