WILL SWITZER INTERVIEW

George Babbitt Collection, 57-10



[Tr.'s note: Tape label spells the narrator's name Sweitzer. Platt Cline spells narrator's name Switzer, and I intend to also. Extremely poor tape quality.]



[BEGIN SIDE A] 



Babbitt: We've got our old friend, Billy Switzer here in the office with us this afternoon on this second day of February 1961. Billy and I have been friends ever since I can remember as a child. He's one of the oldest and highest-regarded pioneers living in <Flagstaff Arizona>, today. We certainly are pleased and honored that we have Billy with us.





Billy, when did you come to <Flagstaff>? 



Switzer: September 1883. 



Babbitt: And how old were you when you came? 



Switzer: Thirteen years old. 



Babbitt: How did you come out to <Arizona>, Bill? 



Switzer: We came by train from <Los Angeles California> and <Needles California>. We waited at <Needles> twenty-four hours for the railroad contractors to finish the railway bridge so we could cross on the bridge, rather than the ferry. 



Babbitt: Your father, I guess, brought you out? 



Switzer: Yes, father (unclear) all the rest of the family. There were, at that time, five children: Father, Mother, and five children. 



Babbitt: What was your father doing when he came out? 



Switzer: He first went to work at the Ayer lumber sawmill as a laborer, awaiting to get better settled. In less than a month after he came, he bought nineteen milk cows from an old man named Tanner [phonetic] from <Tuba City>. He turned the cows over to me to milk -nine were giving milk. So he turned the cows over to me, and I milked those cows and peddled the milk around town, carried it around by hand, and sold it at fifty cents a gallon, until it got time to send the cows away for the winter. We got Mr. Tanner to take 'em out for us, and he took 'em down to what is known as the Old Tanner Crossing on the <Little Colorado River>, and kept 'em there for the winter. We had a very mild winter, much the same as this winter, except we only had one snow at Christmastime, a very light now. And then in the first week in March, it started to rain and snow, and it never quit 'til there was four feet of snow and rain on the level. In the meantime, Mr. Tanner had brought the cows home, thinking that the winter was over. Well, we were stalled for hay, we couldn't buy any. So we started to take the cows down to Turkey Tanks, which would be out of the snow enough so they could get feed to live on. It took us two days and a half to make that eighteen miles. We left them there for the winter, and we were lucky enough to get every cow back in the spring. Some of 'em had already calved. As soon as the grass was green enough, and the cows were doing well, we started to milk them again. In the meantime, Father bought a little team of mules and a buckboard, and I delivered milk that way instead of [churning?] by hand. We still sold it at fifty cents a gallon.



In the meantime, the spring of '84 [i.e., 1884], Father took up a homestead out a mile east of <Flagstaff>, which is known as the Switzer place. We lived there nine years. Father worked up a contractor's trade of rock, building rock and digging cellars. I can remember we dug many of the cellars under the business houses as they were being built in <Flagstaff>. The family lived here nine years and then hard times came and they decided to go back to <California>, <Los Angeles>, which they did. Father, with another man from <Flagstaff>, engaged in the wood and coal business in <Los Angeles> until the 1903 panic. 



Babbitt: Well, Bill, before we get too far off of the subject, I was interested in learning what kind of cows were used for dairy purposes in the early days? 



Switzer: Mostly the ordinary range cows that were gentled. 



Babbitt: (unclear) Durham? 



Switzer: They were Durhams and Herefords and some Jerseys. 



Babbitt: And you had white faces in those days? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: What did they run on the cattle ranges, mostly the old Durham stock, wasn't it? 



Switzer: Yes, it was, mostly. 



Babbitt: That was a great big heavy (unclear) fat on it that these modern Herefords have? 



Switzer: That's right. 



Babbitt: They had to walk five, ten, fifteen, twenty miles to water, too, didn't they? 



Switzer: Lots of times they did. 



Babbitt: Bill, you want to get back on that situation with your family? After you finished in <Los Angeles>, you came back to this country, isn't that right? 



Switzer: Yes, I stayed in <Los Angeles> twenty-two months, and we were caught in the 1903 panic. The only bank that failed during that panic was the City Bank of Los Angeles, and Father and his partner had their money there, and it put them out of business. So I came back to <Flagstaff> and started to work in the logging camps. 



Babbitt: (recording turned off and on) Bill, I'm sorry we were interrupted there. We were talking about your family and your dad and his bank trouble. 



Switzer: Yeah, the 1903 panic. When I came back to <Flagstaff>, I went to work in the logging camp south of town, and worked there during the winter. Then the next spring I went to work for Babbitt Brothers at their store. 



Babbitt: How much did they pay at the logging camp, by the way, Bill? 



Switzer: Two dollars a day. 



Babbitt: And board, or not? 



Switzer: And board. 



Babbitt: How many men were working on the logging camp then? 



Switzer: Well, about fifteen in the camp that I was in, and we worked ten hours a day. We hauled logs on a four-wheeled truck with four horses. 



Babbitt: Did you use those big Percheron horses? 



Switzer: A few, but mostly medium weight, around 1,200-1,500-pound horses. 



Babbitt: Well, Bill, a lot of people see these two big wheels that are scattered around strategic places for ornamentation. Just how did you load those big logs on those wheels? 



Switzer: George, I never had any experience with those wheels. They came on after I got out of the woods. I never used one of them. 



Babbitt: You've seen how they do it, though, haven't you? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: How did they do it? 



Switzer: Well, they had a tongue with the [flue?] up in the air, and it met the back part of it down to where they could throw a chain under the logs and over the end of the back of the tongue, on back of the axle. And then they pulled with a rope on the end of the tongue -they pulled it down to where it would lift the log off of the ground, one end, just enough so that they would clear while the horses were pulling it. One end would drag so that it wouldn't run over the horses going downhill. 



Babbitt: Actually sort of an [extentrick?], and when it pulled the tongue down, that lifted the log off the ground an inch or two -was that it? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: And the other end dragged behind? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: How would that do coming down some of those steep hillsides? I would think the logs would get away from 'em. 



Switzer: They generally skidded the logs down first, and loaded 'em at the bottom of the hill. 



Babbitt: In the days when you were logging, it was manpower that you loaded these four-wheel wagons with? 



Switzer: No, we loaded 'em with the horses, what we called a cross-all. 



Babbitt: Weren't you a champion loader? I remember hearing something about your prowess in that [field?]. 



Switzer: Well, I had the reputation of being able to put a load of logs on a four-wheeled truck faster than any man in the woods. I don't know that it's any great credit, but I did do that. But it didn't do me any good, or anybody any good -only the man I was working for. 



Babbitt: Who were you working for? 



Switzer: A man named Cameron. 



Babbitt: That wasn't Riordan's mill? 



Switzer: Yeah, the old ALandT Company, Riordan's. 



Babbitt: Cameron was your immediate boss (unclear) Riordan owned it? 



Switzer: No, Mike and Tim. Cameron had a logging contract with the Riordans, and I worked for him. 



Babbitt: How many logs constituted a load? 



Switzer: It depends on the size. Premium load was three logs, but sometimes you'd put on as many as six, according to the size. 



Babbitt: How long would it take you -inasmuch as you're the champion loader -to load one of these wagons? 



Switzer: Well, I never did time anybody, but the last logging I did was on a quarter-section of land where the Southwest Lumber Company is now -Mrs. Lockwood's [phonetic] land. And they were cutting then any logs that would make two ties. And sometimes we would have as many as eight or ten or twelve small logs on a load. I remember one day I drove up to a pile of logs and I thought to myself, "I'm not gonna fool around loadin' these one at a time." I put my chain under three of those logs and hitched the team on and loaded 'em just as easy as I would loadin' one log. 



Babbitt: That's how you got that reputation as a loader, I guess! 



Switzer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Did you have the Forest Service checking on your activities then? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: They were in the field? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: Marking the trees you could cut? 



Switzer: That's right. 



Babbitt: And watching the disposal of the debris? Did they make you make the piles like they do nowadays? 



Switzer: I don't remember that. At that time there were no crews in the field taking care of the brush. 



Babbitt: Do you remember what the price of lumber was? 



Switzer: No. No, I don't. 



Babbitt: About what time was it you were working out at the lumber camp there? 



Switzer: [It was] 1895 and '96. 



Babbitt: Sixty-six years ago. 



Switzer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: You're still a young-lookin' fellah, Bill. I'm sure happy to see that. Well, after you left the logging camp, what did you do? 



Switzer: I went to work in Babbitts' Store -the grocery department first. Later on, I went in the hardware department.



In 1908, in the fall election, two new men were elected to the board of supervisors. Each one of them went to Babbitt Brothers and asked them if they wouldn't let me go and work as the clerk of the board of supervisors. And Babbitt Brothers agreed, and I went from Babbitts' with the board of supervisors January 1, 1909. (recording turned off and on) 



Babbitt: ... Nettie. And you talked one day about a threatened Indian uprising, and possibly an invasion of <Flagstaff>. You told about selling a lot of ammunition and guns and supplies one Sunday afternoon. Would you tell a little more about that, please? When was it, about, that this happened? 



Switzer: Well, that was sometime after 1901, the following years. And it wasn't an uprising, it was due to a fight between cowmen and the Navajo Indians who were over in the Ashurst Run country, right close to the Ashurst Ranch, hunting. One of the Indians killed a white man because he thought the white man had stolen his horse. The sheriff got together a posse and went over there to arrest the Indian. And when the posse went out, so everybody could have an extra box of ammunition. And I spent the afternoon selling ammunition to those different men who went on that posse. 



Babbitt: What was the name of the Indian who was in charge of that [renegade?]. 



Switzer: Boo-goo-etin. 



Babbitt: What did that mean? No tooth, or something? 



Switzer: No teeth. 



Babbitt: He was a bad actor, wasn't he? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: And you had him in jail here, as I understand it, is that right? 



Switzer: Yes, they did. 



Babbitt: This gang of renegades out here on the edge of town were going to come in and take him away, wasn't that it? 



Switzer: Well, there was some talk of it, but they didn't make any attempt to do it. 



Babbitt: Mrs. Switzer told me that her mother was quite frightened about the possibility of an Indian uprising, and she made Nettie and her brothers come into her house in the center part of town here, and they brought all their valuables? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: They were quite afraid of the Indians, weren't they? Didn't they think there was a possibility of a big massacre taking place? 



Switzer: There was a possibility, and there was some people were frightened about it, but it didn't happen. 



Babbitt: It could have, though. It was just like a spark near a powder keg. 



Switzer: It could have, yes. 



Babbitt: How many people were living in <Flagstaff>, would you say? 



Switzer: Oh, I would say there were 4,000 at that time. 



Babbitt: In 1900? I didn't think there were that many. 



Switzer: Well, taking in the surrounding area, I think it was possibly between 3,000 and 4,000. 



Babbitt: I wonder how many Indians there were in this gang? 



Switzer: I don't have any idea. I never did see any of 'em come into town. 



Babbitt: There were a good many hundred, I've been told. Is that right? 



Switzer: I wouldn't know about that. 



Babbitt: Didn't D. M. Riordan go out and talk to them? 



Switzer: I think he did. 



Babbitt: How old were you when this took place? Let's see, about 1900. 



Switzer: I was twenty-seven years old when I was married, and that was 1897. 



Babbitt: You were around twenty-five or thirty then, somewhere along there? 



Switzer: I was about thirty-five years old. 



Babbitt: Well, they didn't have any police or any force to protect the town, in case the Indians had come in, did they? 



Switzer: No. They had a militia here, but there weren't very many -probably twenty-five or thirty men that belonged to it. That's all the protection we had. 



Babbitt: If the Indians had come in, in the hundreds that were threatening, why, they could have created a considerable amount of damage, and probably caused a lot of deaths, couldn't they? 



Switzer: Yes. I think the time that D. M. Riordan went and talked to the Indians was when the sheriff took a posse -that was long before this -and went out to the Lower Basin at the <Grand Canyon> country, and took them back across the river. The Indians used to come over on this side of the <Little Colorado River>, and bring their herds and live there in the wintertime. They stockmen thought they were encroaching upon their range and demanded that they be turned back across the river. Ralph Cameron took a bunch of men and went out there and did that. That was the time that D. M. Riordan went out and talked to 'em. 



Babbitt: The Indians were always a little bit of a menace back in the early times, weren't they? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: I mean, you were a little afraid of them? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: And you couldn't have gotten help. I suppose the nearest point of contact for help would have been down to <Prescott>, and that was a day or two away, wasn't it? 



Switzer: Yes, or <Fort Wingate> [phonetic]. 



Babbitt: The Indians could have been in and massacred the town and gone by that time. 



Switzer: Sure. 



Babbitt: By the time somebody had come in to help them. Bill, you're one of the old-timers, and we've had a lot of comment about the location of the original flag staff. What is your thinking on that? 



Switzer: I have a record of how that took place, in the files of the Northern Branch, Arizona Pioneers Historical Society, written up by Mike Riordan, which I think is authentic. It came time to have a post office, and several men together -one was McMillan; P. J. Brannen, a merchant; and Ed Whipple, a carpenter -got together and said they wanted to make application for a post office. And, "Well," they said, "we have to have a name to start with." So Ed Whipple said, "I suggest we call it Flagpole." And P. J. Brannen said, "I think <Flagstaff> would be better." Because a year or two before that, on the Fourth of July, on a tree in front of P. J. Brannen's store, which was then in what we called Old Town, some men put up a flag in this tree. P. J. Brannen thought that was a good idea, to take the name of <Flagstaff> from that occasion. That's how <Flagstaff> got its name. I have a very good typewritten story of this on file in the historical society. 



Babbitt: Well now, there's always been a question about the location of the flag staff. Hochderffer, as I recall, claimed it was out east of town here, a half mile or so. Ralph Cameron had a spot up near the Old Town by the railroad track. Now, Old Charlie Clark and Johnny Love and Mrs. Fire [phonetic] and those people claimed that it was over near the old Chinese garden, about where the present city park is up there. 



Switzer: Right. 



Babbitt: There may have been flag poles at all three of those places, I don't know. Which do you think was the original from which the town was named? 



Switzer: From the one at Old Town. 



Babbitt: We'll probably have a flag pole too, don't you think? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: I remember you were telling me one time, when you were a youngster, (unclear) about running into Old Sandy Donahue, who was quite a character. I'd like to hear that story, if you wouldn't mind telling us, Bill, and tell us a little about Sandy Donahue, too. 



Switzer: When I first came here, I was thirteen years old, and Father was able to rent a house from a man named Donahue [who saw?] Father at the mill. Sandy Donahue was foreman of the [chute?] loading ties and bridge timbers. At that time, they were being sawed for the Central Mexico Railroad. I went one day and asked Sandy for a job. He said, "Yes, kid, I can give you a job, because you [cut the edge?] and (unclear) that we can put between these timbers out here. We don't get cars fast enough to load 'em as fast as we cut 'em, and we have to pile 'em up. And if we put [edgins?] between 'em, why, they'll dry out better." So he gave me a job and I worked there about a week. I never asked him how much my wages was. And a man named Wakefield was the superintendent of the mill, and he came by one day and I said, "Mr. Wakefield, how much are you going to pay me for what I'm doing here?" He looked me over and he said, "Well, we won't need you anymore after today, young man." (laughter) 



Babbitt: Well, how much did they finally pay you, Bill? 



Switzer: I think fifty cents a day (unclear). 



Babbitt: You were a little kid then, huh? 



Switzer: Just thirteen years old. 



Babbitt: What was this about the mill? Wasn't he in the saloon business here? 



Switzer: Yeah. Sandy put, I think, the first saloon on the south side of the tracks, which was over there at the corner, just across the street from the Flagstaff Steam Laundry. He put in a stock of liquor so that he still held his job at the mill. He left the door open all the time. If somebody wanted to go in and get a drink and left the money on the bar, that was all right. If they didn't, why, he got his drink anyway. 



Babbitt: He trusted everybody, huh? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: He made good money (unclear) do it. 



Switzer: Yes, he did. He was (unclear) fine man. 



Babbitt: He loved to fight, I understand. 



Switzer: Well, he wasn't so much one to fight as his brothers were, but he was a good, all-around citizen. 



Babbitt: He was very generous, wasn't he? 



Switzer: Yes, he was. 



Babbitt: Isn't he the one that bought that milk from you, you were telling me about? 



Switzer: No, that was some other man. He was an old fellah that built the first building on the lot now occupied and known as the Black corner. He built a two-story frame house there. He met me on the street one day, and I had my milk. He said, "Kid, what are you doing?" And I said, "I'm selling milk." "Well, you just come with me." And he went and took me in the saloon and told the bartender to take a gallon of milk from me every day, and pay me fifty cents. Well, I took it three days, and then the bartender said he didn't want any more milk. So I didn't leave any for two, three days, and I met this old man again, and he said, "Did you leave me any milk today?" I said, "No, the bartender said he didn't want any more." He said, "You come with me." Went into the saloon and he told the bartender to take a gallon of milk every day as long as I brought it, and give me fifty cents a gallon, and if he didn't have any use for it, he said, "throw it in the street or the gutter." 



Babbitt: That helped you out, didn't he? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: What was his name? 



Switzer: I can't remember his name. 



Babbitt: And he owned that saloon (unclear). 



Switzer: That was the first saloon built there. And there's been a saloon on that corner all the years since. 



Babbitt: Can you remember some of the other old business firms that were here in <Flagstaff> in the pioneer days? Ed Whipple had a saloon, didn't he, up in Old Town? 



Switzer: I think he did. I remember a man named Bailey had a saloon there, and when I first came here, drinks were twenty-five cents a drink. This man, Bailey, cut the price to two for a quarter. And two, three nights after that, somebody threw a bunch of [bung?] out on his porch and blew the front end of his building out. But they never did raise the price of drinks back to twenty-five cents -it was always two for a quarter, for years and years. 



Babbitt: Well, let's see, Brannen -was he operating in those days, the Brannen Department Store? 



Switzer: P. J. Brannen had a general merchandise store at Old Town. In the year of '84, he had started it in the fall of '83 and built a stone building on the corner where Joe Fallon has his saloon now. 



Babbitt: That's on the main highway, 66, and San Francisco, on the northeast corner. 



Switzer: And Railroad Avenue, yeah. He run a general merchandise store there, moved down from Old Town. So a general merchandise store. And my father worked for him, building sidewalks, finished some of the inside work and built the sidewalk on the San Francisco side. 



Switzer: Wasn't this Brannen move sort of a departure? The Old Town was really up on the west side of the hill, Observatory Hill there, a half-mile or so to the west? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: Wasn't there a little faction, one for the New Town and one for the Old Town? 



Switzer: Well, yes, the Old Town people resented the fact that people moved away from there. They wanted to stay there and that be the town, because that was the only water available in the town. 



Babbitt: In that little spring up there. 



Switzer: That Old Town Spring. At that time, it flowed a good stream, and furnished enough water for all of the town. The mill didn't use any of that water -they got their water from the old Pumphouse section down nine miles south of town. 



Babbitt: Well, McMillans came in and built a hotel, too, as I understand. 



Switzer: Yes. And a man named [Porter?] ran it. 



Babbitt: I heard something about a poker game that McMillan got in with some other fellahs. Did you ever hear about that, how he collected his poker debt? 



Switzer: I wouldn't know about that. 



Babbitt: Well, I understand he owned a band of sheep, (unclear) those sheepmen, and the fellah didn't pay off, and then McMillan got a rifle and went up and said, "Here, I want my sheep. I won those in a poker game the other night." Didn't you ever hear that? 



Switzer: Never heard that. I'll tell you what I did hear, that McMillan and other men had been robbed by a bunch of renegades that come in here. The renegades did that several times, and finally McMillan got together a bunch of -what do they call 'em? 



Babbitt: Vigilantes? 



Switzer: Vigilantes. And went after 'em. They hung nine of 'em on one tree limb, out there between Old Town and the Clark Spring. 



Babbitt: Is that the one that Old George Hochderffer was talking about? 



Switzer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: I've got a picture of that tree, Bill. It had a very heavy trunk that turned out at an angle. That's where they're supposed to have hanged all those men. 



Switzer: That's right. I have a photostatic copy of that newspaper account, now.



[END TAPE 57-10, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



Babbitt: I guess nobody ever admitted that they were part of a vigilante group. 



Switzer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: I suppose you had to do that, you didn't have much law and order, did you? 



Switzer: No, we didn't. 



Babbitt: Well, then, didn't (unclear) come in and start a bank, or was there somebody before [Dalton?]. 



Switzer: Somebody before (unclear), a man named Hoskins. 



Babbitt: Oh, Arthur Hoskins. 



Switzer: Yes, he came in from the East and started a bank in the McMillan Building. 



Babbitt: I was told they had some pretty high interest rates. 



Switzer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: Do you remember what they were? 



Switzer: Twelve percent a month. 



Babbitt: A month?! Whew! (laughs) (unclear) That must have been (unclear) high interest rates. 



Switzer: Uh-huh. 



Babbitt: Did you know Hoskins? 



Switzer: Yes, I met him, and I knew him as a banker. I didn't have any business relations with him. 



Babbitt: And I suppose Gosney [phonetic] too? 



Switzer: Yeah, I knew Mr. Gosney quite well. He was a very nice man, and I liked him very much. You could always depend on him. If you ask him something, he'd tell you. If you wanted to borrow some money from him, and he couldn't loan it to you, why, he didn't make any bones about telling you about it. He always did it in a nice way. 



Babbitt: Can you think of the names of some of the other old-timers around here, some of the everyday cattlemen? 



Switzer: There was a man named Fain, William Fain, was supposed to be a quite-well-to-do cattleman, and he came to <Flagstaff> in 1884, and asked Father to build him a house so he could move his family here and send his children to school, which Father did. William Ashurst, Henry's father, was another well-to-do stockman who ran cattle on the Ashurst Mesa. 



Babbitt: Do you remember the brands on any of those other outfits? 



Switzer: Mr. Ashurst ran with mule shoe, one lone mule shoe. 



Babbitt: Then there were some others. Weren't the Daggs in here too? 



Switzer: They were sheepmen. The Daggs men were responsible for the Tonto Basin War. 



Babbitt: Did you ever hear any of the details how that started, that Tonto Basin War? 



Switzer: Yes, Daggs wanted to throw sheep down into the <Tonto Basin> country, which [taking stock?] was reserved for the cattle interests. He hired a man named Tewksbury, who threw the first bunch of sheep down over the rim. And that started the Tonto Basin War. A man named Rockwood, a sheepman, Rockwood and Patterson, run their sheep on the winter range in that country over there in the Hay Lake country, south of Canyon Diablo, and run their sheep over in the (unclear) Lake country in the summertime. Victor Rockwood was coming to town from his camp to Canyon Diablo for supplies, and he was ambushed on the road, in a bunch of cedars over there, and shot while he was in his wagon. 



Babbitt: (unclear) by whom? 



Switzer: By.... What is his first name? 



Babbitt: It was another white man, wasn't it? 



Switzer: Yeah. It was proven that Daggs hired him to do it. Because Daggs wanted the range that Patterson and Rockwood were [feeding?] their sheep on. 



Babbitt: Wasn't your wife a Rockwood? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: That was her father, then? 



Switzer: Her father. 



Babbitt: And he was killed? 



Switzer: Yes. 



Babbitt: I guess they never could prove anything on anybody, though? 



Switzer: No. But Mrs. Lockwood, Laura Brannen's mother, (unclear). 



Babbitt: They were a law unto themselves in those days, apparently. 



Switzer: Yeah. 



Babbitt: In other words, if they wanted to (unclear) somebody was killed or run off, right? 



Switzer: That's right. 



Babbitt: Any other stockmen? There was the big A-1 Cattle Company out here too, wasn't there? 



Switzer: Yes. A <Chicago> company came out here and acquired a lot of range and stocked it with cattle. The first foreman they had was a man named Studmire [phonetic]. He was a Mormon. Father and I went up there to [Purd?] Valley one day, hunting a cow, and....



