JEWEL McGEE INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.15

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. We're at the home of Jewel McGee in <Farmington New Mexico>. It's February 11, [1998], at 10:40 in the morning. Also present in the room are Karen Underhill of Northern Arizona University, Lew Steiger, and Jewel's wife, Leona McGee. [About 34 min. into the interview the narrator’s son, Lavoy McGee, joins the conversation.] 

Cole: Jewel, I'd like to start by asking you when and where you were born. 

McGee: At <Kirtland New Mexico>, 1914. 

Leona McGee: March 10, 1914. 

McGee: Oh, yeah, tenth of March, 1914. 

Cole: And who were your parents? 

McGee: Carl McGee and Pearl McGee. 

Cole: And had they been traders? 

McGee: No. 

Cole: Next I'd like [for you to] kinda, maybe if you could, give us a brief chronology of when you began working in a trading post, and then what trading posts you worked for. 

McGee: Well, I worked at--when I first got out of school, I went out to a little ol' place out north. They called it <Tsaile>. I herded sheep and worked in the store. Then I went from there to Red Mesa--<Arizona> down here--and I worked there for, oh, I don't know, two years, probably, and then I went over to <Red Rock Arizona>. You know where that is, there, (

Cole: Uh- huh.) 

McGee: Lukachukai. That's where I ended up owning. I went in with my uncle. I started to work for him, and then I bought him out and owned it for a long time. 

Cole: Do you remember about what time period you bought that first? 

McGee: About 1933, along in there, is when I first went there. 

Cole: What were the living, economic, and social conditions like for you at the trading post at that time? 

McGee: Oh, they were--we raised our family out there, and that was the most enjoyable parts of our lives, bein' out there at that time. We really enjoyed it, bein' out there with the Indians, and different things. 

Cole: What do you remember about their lifestyle or social conditions at that time period?--your customers. 

McGee: Well, they lived a very common life. They just had what we'd call the necessities. Their homes weren't modern, [they] lived in hogans, and all that stuff. Of course their transportation was teams and wagons. I think when I first went out there, there was one Indian that had an old pickup, and that was the car situation. 

Cole: Do you speak Navajo? 

McGee: Oh, yes. 

Cole: How long did it take you to learn? 

McGee: Never did get it all learned! (laughter) I don't think anybody ever does. Anybody that really learns to talk fluent Navajo has gotta be raised there. My kids sometimes shoulda done it. You’d go in the store, and sure I learned Indian, and I learned the store talk, but when you get out any other places, why, I get lost pretty quick. 

Cole: When you first started at the trading post, were there many Navajos that spoke English at all? 

McGee: No, very few. 

Cole: So how did you communicate while you were learning the store language? 

McGee: (points with finger) By pointing. (chuckles) Pretty soon, [if he came in?], he'd say the name of the can of tomatoes, and you had to learn to remember that. And you just gradually pick it up. 

Cole: Do you have a Navajo nickname? 

McGee: Yeah, "Hairy Boy." 

Cole: And how did you come about getting that? 

McGee: That's what they named me--seein' all this hair on my chest and my arms, I'm a hairy boy. 

Cole: How is that said in Navajo? 

McGee: ‘Ashkii dit»’o. 

Cole: And then at what point did you feel like you became accepted by the Navajo? 

McGee: Oh, I don't know, I guess after a year or two when the Indians got to comin' in more and tradin' with you, why, you was accepted more. They'd come in and visit and stuff like that. You'd just have to feel like you're kinda like one of 'em. 

Cole: How would you describe the Navajo-Anglo trade relationship to someone unfamiliar with it? 

McGee: I don't quite get what you mean there. 

Cole: If you were to explain how trade worked in your post in the 1930's, to, say, someone like me that had no idea.... 

McGee: Well, we used to credit the stockmen and everybody like that. We'd give them credit accounts, and then we'd buy their lambs and their wool. Of course we always had their rugs. It was an item with 'em that we marketed and sold for 'em--bought 'em and sold 'em. 

Cole: You mentioned that your stores didn't do a lot of business in arts and crafts, but you did mention [stock]. Tell us a little bit about the stock business. 

McGee: Well, they had lots of--it was a good stock country out there, you know, between those creeks and mountains and the red wood. There was lots of stock in there. I used to buy about 4,000 lambs and 400 bags of wool every year. Talking about big bags, not little ones. 

Cole: How did you get your stock to market from the Reservation? 

McGee: We herded 'em in, sold 'em, and shipped 'em on the railroad. 

Cole: How long did it take to do the herding? Did you go along with them on that? 

McGee: Yeah, about eight days to come from the store to the railroad. 

Cole: And where was the railroad at? 

McGee: Here at <Farmington>. 

Cole: Could you describe the pawn and barter system, how that worked? 

McGee: Well, generally, we'd take in pawn, you know. Of course we'd value it, like say what it was worth, and then we'd take it in for part of it. We didn't buy it to sell--we wanted him to redeem it. We had a six-month limit, but we never hardly sold any of the good stuff, 'cause we didn't want to. We'd hold it 'til he'd come and take it out. And it was mostly barter. I mean, he'd come in and pawn it for groceries. Or if he wanted cash, why, we'd charge him a percentage on it. 

Cole: Was there much of a business in cash at that time? 

McGee: You mean, Navajos have cash? 

Cole: Right. 

McGee: Not at first, no. We used to laugh about it--our pelt sales was about the only cash we got all during [the year]--outside of wool and lamb season. 

Cole: I was sort of curious that you would have been on the Reservation beginning during the Great Depression (

McGee: Yeah.), 

Cole: and maybe did you feel any effect from that? Or did the Navajos? 

McGee: Oh, my goodness. One time we took a bunch of lambs to <Denver>--couldn't sell 'em here--so we shipped 'em to <Denver>, and I think we got three dollars a dozen for 'em, above the freight. (laughter) So you can see how good we did on that! I think we’d paid a nickel a pound for 'em. 

Cole: And then sort of along the same line, do you remember the John Collier stock reduction program? 

McGee: Yes, I sure do. That was terrible. Drive big herds of goats in there and just kill 'em. Of course, they weren't wasted, the Indians took 'em--for the meat. But it had to cut 'em, 'cause the range wouldn't carry 'em all. 

Cole: Maybe if you could explain to us, ownership of trading posts, or the whole leasing system, how that worked. 

McGee: Well, at the end, we ended up with a twenty- five year lease. Of course, we didn't own the buildings, everything we put there was permanent and belonged to the tribe. But we did have the right, like if you wanted to come in, why, you could buy it from us, but you were in the same way--in the end, they ended up belonging to the tribe. 

Cole: Now, you mentioned a twenty-five-year lease. Did that start in the 1930's? 

McGee: No, that was way later. We fought 'em for years to get that. At first it was just.... Well, we didn't have to have a lease with the tribe--we just had it with the government. And that's when they come in with the tribe, and they kinda took over. We had to have both--with the tribe and the government. 

Cole: So from the 1930's into probably the 1950's was a lease just with the federal government? 

McGee: Yeah. 

Cole: And then probably, was it about 1955 that the long-term leases came? 

McGee: Yeah, it was quite a bit later, yeah. I think those twenty-five-year leases have been up, so it would have been before. 

Cole: After that twenty-five-year lease, did you continue to lease from the tribe? 

McGee: Yes. 

Cole: Did you work with the Navajo on improving their rugs or anything like that? 

McGee: Oh, yes. Sure we tried to get 'em to improve their rugs--especially their stock. I used to buy good bucks and rams, give 'em, take 'em out and put 'em out with 'em every year. When they first started, why, they were all old long, hairy--you know what a goat is, don't you? Their wool was more like a goat's. They liked it for that, 'cause it was good for weaving. Of course, we didn't like it much to market sell--it wasn't very good, 'cause it was too hairy. 

Cole: Did you do the same thing with cattle or horses also? 

McGee: Yes. Horses, no. They had lots of them all the time. But cattle, why, we helped them. 

Cole: Did you do much business with horse trading at all? 

McGee: No. 

Cole: Do you have any artisans from your area that stand out in your mind, Navajo artisans? 

McGee: No, I don't think so. 

Cole: I'm sort of curious, what characteristics do traders have in common, and maybe what makes a good trader? 

McGee: Well, I didn't know they had much in common, but I think the good trader was the one that worked with the Indians on the things that he wanted him to do, and helped him. Some of 'em just went there, and all they was there was for the dollar they get out of him. Of course, you know, in anything, you have people like that. 

Cole: When you think back about your days in the trading post, what were some of the more popular items that you carried? 

McGee: Well, I was just a general merchandise store. Of course, your old coffee and flour and stuff, that's your most popular item. Levi Strauss overalls. (laughter) 

Cole: What about, say, for the women? Was there anything that they prized more than [anything else]? 

McGee: What do you mean? Jewelry or clothes? 

Cole: Jewelry or clothing or things that you sold. 

McGee: Well, bracelets and squash blossoms--and then yard goods, of course, that they made their skirts out of. Velveteen was their blouse. That's what they made their blouses out of. 

Cole: I'm sort of curious, what kinds of changes did you see then when you started? You started in the 1930's. How did trading evolve? Did it stay behind the counter? Or did it grow to bigger stores? 

McGee: Oh, it changed. Like the store I was at, why, I remodeled it and made it self-service, enlarged it, and had departments of hardware and dry goods and groceries. 

Cole: Did you then have to hire quite a few employees to run those stores? 

McGee: Well, we generally hired one man, a white fellow, and then we had Indians that helped clerk. 

Cole: Did you ever develop, or see a need to develop any kind of a benefit program for employees? 

McGee: No. That was unheard of in those days. 

Cole: How many trading posts did you end up owning by the time, say, later into the 1960's or 1970's? 

McGee: Oh, we had Red Rock. That, of course, was my main place. And then I bought in, my brother and me, we had Dennehotso and Mexican Water and Sweetwater. 

Cole: And Red Mesa, too? 

McGee: Yeah. 

Cole: And then what was your brother's name? 

McGee: Roscoe McGee. 

Cole: So you were partners. And does your trading business continue to today? 

McGee: No, they're all gone. 

Cole: When did you finally sell out or move off the Reservation? 

McGee: (to wife) Do you remember? 

Leona McGee: (whispers) 1966 or '67. 

McGee: 1967 or '68, I think. 

Cole: Is that when you moved into <Farmington>? 

McGee: No. No, we'd lived here a long time. I went back and forth for years. 

Cole: Why did you do that? 

McGee: Kids was in school in here. 

Cole: So did your family--you said initially they lived on the trading post, but then when they became school age they moved? 

McGee: They had to move in here. Of course, they came back summers and-- they'd either come out weekends, or I'd come in weekends. 

Cole: Did your family work at the trading post when they were out there, then? 

McGee: The kids did. My boy is the only one-- that’s he, he’s the one (gestures toward Lavoy who is off-camera). He's the only one that went into tradin'. None of the rest of 'em did. 

Cole: Another thing I was sort of curious about: Were you providing a postal service at all? 

McGee: We carried the mail, yes. We didn't have a post office, but we just, out of a box, you know, with different letters on it. They'd come in, we'd get the mail for 'em. They just sent their mail in care of Red Rock Trading Post. 

Cole: And then I know over the years there were different things that happened with the Railroad Retirement Board System checks, Social Security checks, things like that. What kinds of change did that [bring to] the trader and the Navajo customer? 

McGee: Well, it made lots of changes, 'cause after, you know, we got to shippin' 'em out on the railroad, why, if you get a hundred people workin' on the railroad, and then in comes the retirement checks, why, that's a hundred checks comin' in there at the store. Made a big difference. 

Cole: Would the Navajos work on the railroad all year round? 

McGee: Yeah. Yeah, whenever they wanted Indians, they'd call me at the store and say, "Can you get us twenty-five, fifty Indians to come to work?" And we'd get 'em to go, and take 'em into <Farmington> here and ship 'em. 

Cole: They wouldn't just stay in <Farmington>, then? 

McGee: Oh, no, they went all over--<Denver>, all over the <United States>. 

Cole: Did most of them then come back eventually, to their home areas? 

McGee: Oh, always, yeah. 

Cole: And then did you see a change in their lifestyle or anything, because of that employment? 

McGee: Well, sure it helped 'em economically, 'cause they had money. When they was out workin', they sent money home. When they come home, why then they got retirement money, or whatever you call it. Unemployment, I guess you'd call it, with the railroad. 

Cole: I'd like to maybe switch gears a little bit here and ask you about the United Indian Traders Association. When and why did you join? 

McGee: I joined 'em for survival. They were just about to kick all the traders off. 

Cole: And when was that? 

McGee: Well, it was in the [late thirties], 1936, [early] forties, along in there. 

Cole: Do you remember how many members there were at that time period? 

McGee: I think there was about 104 traders. 

[Some interruption--People talking, and walking back and forth in front of the camera.] 

Cole: Were you a charter member of the United Indian Traders? 

McGee: No. It was started just before. 

Cole: Do you remember any of the charter members at all?, who they were? 

McGee: Well, my uncle that I was in partners with, he was a charter member, Carlos Storer [phonetic spelling], Al Lee, a bunch of those older fellows. 

Cole: Did your uncle, do you remember, have a jewelry mark? I guess apparently they had some kind of a stamp that United Indian Traders developed to authenticate jewelry. Do you remember.... 

McGee: No. We didn't make jewelry out in our country. 

Cole: And then with your long-time affiliation with the Traders Association, what were some of the bigger issues that you remember that the Association had to deal with? 

McGee: Well, it was mostly just gettin' things worked out with the tribe, about lettin' us stay on there, and about the buildings and--all the different things that would come up, you know, in leasing from somebody. 

Cole: Do you remember the Federal Trade Commission and the DNA [Dinébe’iiná Náhiilna’ Bee Agha’diit’aahí]--the issue over leasing? What do you remember about that in the early 1970's? 

McGee: I don't remember much about it. 

Cole: That's fine. What do you remember of the Association, how it operated on an annual basis? Was it also a social association, or was it just totally work oriented? 

McGee: Oh, we generally had a get-together once a year, a big meeting, and talk about problems, and then a big dinner. We'd have it at <Gallup> or <Farmington>, or someplace, and everybody'd go. 

Cole: Sort of getting toward the end here, how has trading changed over time? 

McGee: Well, it's changed altogether. It really isn't a grocery and hardware business anymore--it's all artifacts. The ones that are there just deal in rugs and jewelry and stuff like that. Changed altogether. The grocery business and merchandise is probably all over out there. 

Cole: Has tourism had an impact on trading? Did you see many tourists when you first started, versus later? 

McGee: No, we didn't used to have tourists out in our country. 

Cole: What are you most proud about, being an Indian trader? 

McGee: Well, I guess I'm proud of being successful financially, and I'm proud that I helped them in their stock business. I built some of the best sheepherders on the Reservation. Like one time I wanted to put out some different kind of bucks for the Indians, and they wouldn't let anybody else do it. The government told me to "just go ahead and do what you want to. You made this stock business out here anyway." So they give me full reign of the rams and bucks and stuff that I put out. 

Cole: Outside of the stock business, what did you teach the Navajo, if anything? 

McGee: Well, I couldn't teach him anything, much. I just tried to teach him to be honest in his dealings with things, pay his accounts and do like he should do. 

Cole: What would you say you learned from the Navajo? 

McGee: Well, I don't know. I guess I learned a lot: learned how to manage businesses and credit relations. 

Cole: [I'd like to ask you] maybe a couple of questions about your family. How did you meet your spouse, and when and where did that happen? 

McGee: Well, you know, we come to town weekends some of the time, and I run into her. (chuckles) 

Cole: That was in <Farmington>? 

McGee: Down at <Kirtland>. 

Cole: And how many children do you have? 

McGee: Seven. 

Cole: And where were they all born? 

McGee: Oh, of course I forgot--after [the first one] got school age, they were all born in town. 

Cole: And how did your children, when they were out on the Reservation with you on weekends and in the summer, how were their dealings with the Navajo? 

McGee: Oh, they liked it out there. They'd run around--and helped herd sheep. We used to have to, after a time when we'd lose him [Lavoy], we'd have to go find him--followed some sheep herd off, herdin' it. (chuckles) We had one old girl that'd come in there with her sheep, and Lavoy would follow her off every time. 

Cole: Do you remember any humorous stories that stand out in your mind, all your years as a trader? Or any unusual stories? 

McGee: Oh, I can't think of any right now. 

Leona McGee: (whispers) Medicine man. 

McGee: Can you think of one? 

Leona McGee: Medicine man, Mol-yon [phonetic spelling]. 

McGee: We had an old medicine man out there, and one day I'd lost a--we used to set our scales out in the hay barn, you know, and we'd buy hay from the Indians. And I lost my little fifty-pound weight. And so, we hunted and we hunted, and we couldn't find it. So they said, "Well, go get this old medicine man, Mol- yon, to come find it for you." So I did, and he went out there in the hay barn. The leaves was about a foot deep. He done his little chant, and pretty quick he looked up, and he grinned. He points two ways. So they went over there and dug, and they did, they found a weight in each way. Now, you can laugh at that, but I saw it happen! (chuckles) 

Cole: If you could change anything about your life or your work, what would you change? 

McGee: Oh, I'm satisfied with it. I really enjoyed life on the Reservation. 

Cole: What do you think the future of business with the Native Americans will be? 

McGee: I don't think it'll ever amount to much, because they're gonna come to town anymore. They got good roads and good cars, and you can't compete with Safeways and big dry goods stores, especially. 

Cole: Is there anything else that you'd like to add? 

McGee: No. 

Cole: Well, on behalf of the United Indian Traders Association Project, we'd like to thank you for your time. Anything else you think of and [would] like to add, just let us know at a later date, and we'd be happy to add that in. 

McGee: Okay. 

Leona McGee: (inaudible) 

[Break in recording--Begins again, mid-conversation] 

McGee: The sick and the burials after I was there, 'cause we had--what was it?, an old hospital and a preacher. What was his name? 

Leona McGee: I don’t remember the one that was there. 

McGee: Well, anyway, he took care of that. But up until the time they come, why, my uncle used to have to go up on the mountain and get 'em when they was sick and take 'em to the hospital--do all that stuff. And he helped in burials. I think I only helped in just a few burials. 

Karen Underhill: What other kinds of services did you provide? You were there to help with burials, and you were there to supply goods, and you were improving livestock, and what other kinds of things did you do as a trader for the Navajo? 

Lavoy McGee: We helped 'em conduct their business. You know, like with the Social Security agent and the welfare people. We were intermediaries in lots of ways and even interpreters, and write letters, read letters to 'em. 

McGee: We were the ones that registered 'em, you know. We worked for the government in that way. When Social Security started, why, we did that. When they'd come into the store, we'd fill their papers out and fix it up for 'em. 

Lew Steiger: I have just one little question, if you don't mind. How did you get started in the tradin' business? And what was your first trip into that country like? Did you do it horseback? Or did you drive a truck? Or how'd that go? 

McGee: I didn't drive one, but I rode in one. They had a few pickups. The trader generally had a pickup, and I went with him. 

Leona McGee: You went in with Roscoe. Went to work, when you were out of high school, went with Roscoe. That was your first experience at Red Mesa. 

McGee: No, it wasn’t. I went out to <Tsaile> first. I herded sheep and I helped run a little store out there. I mean, I didn't really herd sheep, but I helped lamb 'em and do things like that. And then I worked in the store in the daytime. 

Cole: Who was that for? 

McGee: Chunky Tanner. 

Leona McGee: Tsaya. 

McGee: Tsaya Trading Post. Steiger: And what year would that have been? 

McGee: 1933. 

Cole: Growing up in <Kirtland>, did you have experience with livestock? Is that what your family did? 

McGee: Yes, Dad had cows and stuff. 

Cole: What brought your dad to the Southwest? Was he born here, or did he move? 

McGee: He moved here. Come from back in <Missouri>, I guess. I guess a bunch of 'em come, and they just moved out and settled in <Kirtland> down there. 

Cole: Do you know what time period that was? 

Leona McGee: How old was your dad? 

McGee: Oh, that was.... How old would Melvin be? 

Leona McGee: I don't know. 

Lavoy McGee: Must have been the early 1900's. 

McGee: Yeah--It’d be the early 1900's. 

[Break in recording--Begins again, mid- conversation.] 

Leona McGee: Between here and <Tuba> somewhere. 

McGee: _______________. 

(several talking at once) 

Lavoy McGee: Come from <Oklahoma>. 

Leona McGee: How did they travel? 

McGee: Team and horses. 

Leona McGee: That's all I'm asking. 

McGee: Wagons. 

Leona McGee: Did he come as a child, or was he older? A child, wasn't he? 

McGee: Yeah. 



