Loie Belknap Evans Part 4

Interviewed by Richard Quartaroli 

April 5, 2009



QUARTAROLI:  It’s Sunday, April 4 or 5, 2009.  Richard Quartaroli with Loie Belknap Evans.  The family had a ranch out here on the east end near Desert View, correct?

EVANS:  Near <Grandview>.  Yeah, my grandma, my dad’s mom, who used to come to the canyon early on, and that’s how my dad happened to meet my mom.  This must have been in the thirties, maybe, ’38-I’m not really sure.  But somehow purchased the Pete Berry Ranch, which is south of Grandview Point, off in the woods out there.  It was about 135 acres.  At the time she bought it, most of the buildings were still there, and there was an old car.  I can’t remember what the wonderful old car was out there, whether it was an old Packard or....  Wonderful old car that was out there.  And there’s a wonderful movie-I don’t know if you’ve seen it, it’s at the Cline.  Have you seen that one?

QUARTAROLI:  No.

EVANS:  It’s really neat-of her out there at the ranch, and the old car and the buildings.  You can see the....  It was a cattle ranch, he had his mining operations-Pete Berry did-too, over at Grandview.  Water’s a problem.  There was a big earthen dam, stock tank, so they must have collected.  And then you could see collectors on the roof for the water.  Just wonderful old root cellar, wonderful old place out there.  It’s not that far from the Hull cabin.  Have you driven out that way?

QUARTAROLI:  No.

EVANS:  So anyway, we had it in the family.  It was one of those things.  My dad would say, "Well we should probably sell that thing," and Buzz would always say, "No, no, no!"  But we hardly ever went out there.  I just started going out there, really, I think after my parents were gone.  I kind of started getting a little attached to it.  Really beautiful piece of property.  It’s kind of mixed oak and ponderosa.  Obviously there had been Indian camps out there, because you find pot shards and tips and stuff like that.  But the buildings were all torn down during World War II.  I think they were just....  I mean, people were grabbing anything.  And so they were pretty much disassembled, so there’s nothing out there.  I do have an outhouse seat, beautiful old wood seat from out there, that I think my dad had brought home at one point, with the sego bloom painted-these wonderful flowers on it.  So I have that hanging in the bathroom at home.  But the root cellar’s there, just kind of out there in the woods.  We finally, I guess probably 2000 or so, Buzz decided it was finally time, so we did sell it.  It’s a pretty historic place, and somewhere in some of the boxes at home, I have some records from the ranch, like planting records and seed things.  I should probably get that stuff to you at the Cline.  I have a few more boxes for you, I think.

QUARTAROLI:  Okay, we’ll take it.

EVANS:  Great old place, though.  Great old place.

QUARTAROLI:  The building that’s there was built-you said most of the buildings were torn down.

EVANS:  Uh-huh, so there’s no buildings there now at all-no buildings-just the root cellar, but it was just a stone, kind of down, kind of in ruins.  But you can tell that it’s been cleared, that they probably tried growing some stuff, and they probably had cattle out there.  Really a pretty piece of property.

QUARTAROLI:  Is it still private property then?  Or is it part of a park?

EVANS:  It is private.  Actually, our intent was to-we sold it to the Federal Land Exchange, and the whole intent was to get it traded back and have it become part of the forest.  Everything else around there is forest, and the Arizona Ski Trail?  What is that called?

QUARTAROLI:  Arizona Trail?

EVANS:  Arizona Trail-goes right near there.  And that was sort of at that time when that whole thing around <Tusayan>-you know that sort of village that they were gonna do.  So we really felt it was gonna go back to the forest, and then they didn’t sell it, they sold it to an individual who lives in <Phoenix>.  I have talked to him, the one time I went out.  The last time I went out, he had put up a big "private property" sign, which we never did.  I didn’t want anybody to know it was private property.  And you could tell, people go out there and hunt or whatever.  You know how people feel about a place they’ve been going, thinking it’s just kind of public.  Anyway, his new sign was broken down.  But I found a phone number, I called him.  Awfully nice man.  He knew nothing of the history.  His whole thing was wanting-he does radio telescopes, he wanted to put some radio telescopes out there.  But it’s been a few years since I’ve talked to him, so I don’t know, I haven’t driven out there for a long time.  But it’s a neat place.  And I think that road continues on to <Cameron>, or it comes in on-is it 64 that goes to <Cameron>?  And this road, you can actually take it-I mean, it kind of parallels, the Buggeln Hill goes down the dirt road and then it comes in somewhere before you get to <Cameron>.  It’s like a county road.

QUARTAROLI:  So to get to it, you take the same road through the [unclear].

EVANS:  Yup.  Uh-huh, you just keep going.  I think it’s about five miles on that road.  All of a sudden you kind of come to a place where it’s open.  I mean, everything else is so treed, but you can tell it’s a place where it’s been cleared.  A lot of sagebrush.  I know at one point I just thought it would be so neat to do something out there.  But it’s a long ways for us, it’s a long way to come over.  So anyway....  But it was kind of fun to have that little piece of history in the family-a little more candid canyon history.

QUARTAROLI:  Your dad’s mom?

EVANS:  My dad’s mom, uh-huh.

QUARTAROLI:  What was her name?

EVANS:  Laura.  That’s where I got my name.

QUARTAROLI:  And Buzz couldn’t pronounce Laura.

EVANS:  Came out Loie, yeah.  She was married twice, and I think had three kids from the previous marriage, and then my dad was quite a bit younger when she married Mr. Belknap, and grew up in upstate <New York>.  But then she just traveled.  I mean, she was just eccentric.  She bought this place, and....  (mic adjusted)  She bought the Berry Ranch, and then she bought the house in <Boulder City>, and she was part of that Boulder Dam Grand Canyon Tours.

QUARTAROLI:  That’s something we didn’t get into too much.  There were a couple of mentions of that.

EVANS:  And I don’t know that much about the history of that.  I do know there’s some letters-and I don’t know if you have those in the files too at the Cline.  You should probably have those.  Every now and then I come across something else like that, where things weren’t going so well with the company.  But it was just a little ahead of its time, I think.

QUARTAROLI:  That was Depression era still?  Was that thirties?

EVANS:  I think so, yeah.  And they had the tour boats and the airplanes and the tri-motors.  Probably just the Depression, the war, and then....  I never met her.  I don’t know what year she died.  She died before I was born.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear] visiting [unclear].

EVANS:  Oh yeah, we used to come out and visit.

QUARTAROLI:  [unclear] house.

EVANS:  Yeah, and that was always lots of fun.  My mom, the rascal.  But I don’t know, we might think of some other things later.

QUARTAROLI:  We mentioned this last week:  You and Buzz haven’t done that many <Grand Canyon> trips.  You probably, did you mention, probably didn’t do a <Grand Canyon> trip together?

EVANS:  That’s right-except for the lower end.  I did three dory trips.  I did mention that.  But I did do three dory trips in, must have been mid-nineties, with Factor, Kenton Grua, as a cook.  And that was just a lot of fun.  And I really got to know Kenton, really just from giving-you know, when we gave the collection to the Cline Library and got to know Kenton and Diane really well.  He really wanted Diane to learn how to row a boat.  She really, at that point hadn’t gone on a lot of trips, and so he wanted to do a Sportyak trip in <Desolation>.  Did we talk about this?

QUARTAROLI:  No.

EVANS:  So John and I and Kenton and Diane did a really fun fall trip in <Desolation>.  That was her introduction to rowing, and it was just a lot of fun.  But then after that, he started inviting me to come along and cook on his dory trips back when Dories was hiring cooks to come.  So I did three trips cooking on trips that he was leading.  So that was really fun, to be on a dory trip.  I love camp cooking, and just to be down there.  It was really wonderful.  And Lynn, our daughter, came on one of those as my assistant through the whole trip.  I think John came on one of them.  So those were kind of my latest <Grand Canyon> trips.  Did some weed pulling for the Park Service a few years ago, too.  (chuckles)

QUARTAROLI:  Camel thorn?

EVANS:  Oh yes.  Ravenna- that was my favorite, digging out the ravenna grass, cutting down Russian olives.  That was a lot of fun.

QUARTAROLI:  Well, we talked about getting both you and Buzz and maybe Joe together at the guides training seminar.

EVANS:  That would be so great.

QUARTAROLI:  Some spring, that’d be fun for you guys, and also for the guides that are on the [unclear].

EVANS:  That’d be a fun thing, especially to have Buzz along, to talk about some of those pretty historic trips.  And I’m sure his being down there would probably trigger a lot of memories too.  And Buzz, you get him talking, there’s a lot of good stories in there.

QUARTAROLI:  Oh yeah.

EVANS:  A lot of good stories.  So that would be a lot of fun, we’d love to do that.  So just let us know.

QUARTAROLI:  Okay, I’ll talk to Lynn and give her the word that we’re gonna work on some spring, the next couple of years.

EVANS:  Won’t take much to get me there, for sure.  It’s harder to get Buzzy out of <Hawaii>.

QUARTAROLI:  Right.

EVANS:  But I think he had such a great time at the meeting.  He just enjoyed it.  But they both did-just thoroughly enjoyed it.  And he loves working on the river guides.  He loves that <Grand Canyon> Guide, he just loves it.

QUARTAROLI:  He’s gone through quite a few of the revisions, so he’s gettin’ 'em pretty well buffed out now.

EVANS:  He is, he is.

QUARTAROLI:  Next spring or two he’ll have a little breather.

EVANS:  I think so.  I don’t feel any big deadlines coming up right now, and that is a great feeling, with the river season upon us, and I think we’re stocked up and pretty happy about that.

QUARTAROLI:  Before we quit here-we’ve  been goin’ at this for a while-Dock Marston, you talked about a little project some of us are doing, and Buzzy’s wife, Jodi, has a nephew who works at the Bohemian Club.

EVANS:  Or belongs anyway.

QUARTAROLI:  Or belongs to the Bohemian Club.  So trying to finagle an invite there to get a little more information on Dock.  You and Buzz and Jodi talked about some Dock stories.  And I can’t even remember which ones, who was involved in telling which ones.  But do you have any other recollections of Dock we might not have hit upon?

EVANS:  I think we probably covered most of them.  Most of my recollections were young, and probably up to being a teenager, with that jet boat, the time of that jet boat trip.  Most of my memories of Dock were of his driving the big Cadillac up, and packing food, and lots of talking around the living room, holding court sort of.  (chuckles)  Always very....  You know, for the most part, to our family, just very kind.  I know he had problems later.  When history....  He did so many remarkable things, and I think he was also a....  You’d have to look at the history and the time and how....  I just hope his history can be written and really say the amazing things that he did, without getting into some of the tough personal things that you often hear about.  He was remarkable.  Anybody who could gather that much history, and that amount of correspondence.  I just remember all of the letters that my dad would get-always "Cheerio! Dock."  Really remarkable, what he accomplished.  Visiting him up in that big ol’ house up in <Berkeley>.  He lived alone for a long time.  Margaret was gone pretty early on.  After she was gone, I think that was probably a tough thing for him, and maybe part of the reason that he-you know, it was hard to live alone, and maybe there were some changes there.  Sometimes your partner keeps you on track.  But I know my dad sure loved him.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you ever attend any of his movies, any of his lectures?

EVANS:  Not really lectures.  I saw movies at-we’d see 'em at our house occasionally, but I never really went to any of his lectures.  I don’t even know where he did those.  I guess I wasn’t even that....

QUARTAROLI:  They’re in the collection, and you’ll see an announcement, "Dock Marston," on a poster or something, [unclear] showing his movies.  And so I’m assuming that he would narrate them.

EVANS:  Probably more in <California>, do you think, he probably did those?  I would guess.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah, but I think he also, looking through the superintendents’ reports for <Grand Canyon>, they would note the visitors when the river runners came through, and I think he showed the movies a couple of times here on his trips through-maybe the ones from the previous year or something.  So I think he would do it as he traveled around, maybe do it in <Salt Lake> or something too.

EVANS:  Yeah.  You probably looked at all his movies that you have in the collection?

QUARTAROLI:  No.  There’s not enough time.  I have to do some work sometime!

EVANS:  I know.  Wouldn’t that be so much fun?  I hope his history gets written.  I think it would be a great thing to be able to pull that one together.  Of course he never finished his book, but my dad said he would never finish his book, because then what else would he have to do?

QUARTAROLI:  Well, he kind of finished, but it’s hard to tell, there are so many drafts of the various chapters, that even the final draft he has is not final.  That’s the problem, they’re never quite sure what else he wanted to put in it.  Plus he didn’t reference anything.  He knew where he got the information, and why he put that.  So when you look at it, there are no references, and his collection’s over 400 boxes.

EVANS:  Wow!  I had no idea it was that big.  Isn’t that remarkable?

QUARTAROLI:  Four hundred and thirty-two boxes.

EVANS:  That’s remarkable.

QUARTAROLI:  And so in order to figure out how he made his decisions, it’s daunting to go through.

EVANS:  So are you the one that’s gonna do it?

QUARTAROLI:  I’m not sure.  I’d like to do some articles highlighting Dock, but I don’t know about a biography.  It’s not in me.

EVANS:  I wonder who’s gonna be the one?

QUARTAROLI:  I’m not sure.  He does deserve some [unclear] recognition.

EVANS:  He does deserve some good recognition, I think.  Very few people around that really knew him, that are left.

QUARTAROLI:  Right, that’s why we’re asking [unclear].

EVANS:  And went on trips.  And Buzz is the one who obviously had the closest contact on the most trips with him.  I don’t know, did he talk about it quite a bit?

QUARTAROLI:  Uh-huh.

EVANS:  Oh good.  That’s good.  He’d be the one.  He spent a lot of time with Dock.

QUARTAROLI:  Because he went on trips your dad wasn’t on.

EVANS:  Yeah.  And he was twelve.

QUARTAROLI:  Right, twelve, fourteen.  We have a picture of him driving the Cris-Craft, and Dock’s had a letter, "Dear Buzz," or "Canyoneer Buzz, here’s the proof."  Twelve years old.

EVANS:  Yeah.  I know!  Pretty amazing.  I just think it’s interesting that Buzz’s river career kind of ended when most people’s start.  His went from ten to sixteen or seventeen, and then he went off.  Eighteen or nineteen, I guess.

QUARTAROLI:  Then he was in the Navy?

EVANS:  Right, after that.  ’65, I guess, yeah.  But then kept-the river guide kept him in a little bit.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah.  At the Belknap exhibit opening, you had me do a couple of interviews with people, and I think Evan Dale was one.

EVANS:  Evan and Dorothy.

QUARTAROLI:  But I don’t know who else.

EVANS:  I think Jean Segerblom.

QUARTAROLI:  I kind of have a recollection of that.

EVANS:  And I think maybe Al Hayes.  Was Al Hayes there?

QUARTAROLI:  Not sure.

EVANS:  If he was there, I bet you did one.  I can’t remember either.  He’s a wonderful old archaeologist that my dad worked with a lot, and Al would come on a lot of our river trips and do archaeology.  But I was thinking maybe Al and Karen Hayes were there.  Probably didn’t do one with Michael Kabotie, I’m guessing.

QUARTAROLI:  No.  Do you have those tapes?  Did I give those to you?

EVANS:  I think I do.  I think I do, and I don’t think I’ve listened to them.  I would like to.  It’d be fun to go back and listen to 'em.  Yeah, it was wonderful that Evan and Dorothy were there.  You know, it is interesting, the whole Dale clan, they really got their start-you know how many of them are involved in river running-but it was really because of my dad that they all kind of got their start in river running.  O. C. did Sportyak trips.  A lot of good boatmen started in the Sportyak.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah.  Was R. J. Johnson one of 'em?  Or he just knew him from <Boulder City>?

EVANS:  No, R. J. came on a river-I think this is what I remember-is that he came on a river trip, maybe with his dad-just went as a passenger on a Sportyak trip, and made himself pretty useful.  And early on when we needed somebody to maybe stay on and help with a trip or something, he just started.  He was good.  He used to come up to <Boulder City> a lot.  I think they had a trailer then at the lake.  And so R. J. spent a lot of time up there, just started working more and more for my dad-even painting oars or whatever, around home.  He just kind of worked his way into guiding Sportyak trips.  So yeah, he definitely got his start in a Sportyak.  He worked for us for a long time.  Now he likes his dory.  But Terry still has a Sportyak.

QUARTAROLI:  Yeah.  And you’ve still got....

EVANS:  We have five-two big ones and three little ones.

QUARTAROLI:  Maybe it’s time to....

EVANS:  Dust 'em off, yeah!  They are pretty dusty.  Three of 'em are in a storage unit in 

<Moab>.  We get 'em out and take 'em on the daily every now and then.  It’s kind of like gettin’ out your collector’s car.  (laughs)  They are, they’re classics!

QUARTAROLI:  I’ve never rowed one.

EVANS:  Oh!  Well, you’ve gotta come do it.

QUARTAROLI:  I think a Deso-Grand trip [unclear].

EVANS:  I do too.

QUARTAROLI:  Do you still have the yak packs?

EVANS:  We have a couple yak packs.  I think one of the boats we don’t have a yak pack, but you can just use river bags, it works.  And then the two large boats.  We would do unsupported Sportyak trips without a raft sometimes, because in those big yaks you could carry coolers in either end.  I’ll tell you one more story.  This is pretty funny. We were doing an unsupported fall trip, and O. C. Dale was on it.  I think it was back even before he married Roberta.  I think maybe they were-if I’m remembering this right-they might have just gotten married.  Again, it was one of those lackey trips.  It was a Smithsonian trip where they did the screening for people.  And I’m sure we pushed off from <Ouray>.  We had a lady who, it became evident really soon that she should not have been on that trip.  And she just decided she wasn’t gonna row, and so she just laid down in her Sportyak and that was it.  She just laid down, she wasn’t rowing.  So O. C. towed her down the river.  We had no raft, we just had the big Sportyaks.  And it’s really a pain to tow someone through rapids, and it takes away from the safety aspect if you’re towing a ... body.  I mean, she just absolutely laid down.  So we had this idea, Roberta was on a trip upstream, just a private trip, and O. C. knew that she was not that far behind us.  And so I can’t remember exactly where we were in the canyon, not down too far.  But we left a huge tarp on the bank and in duct tape wrote, "Roberta," so there’s no way she could miss it, and left a note saying-she had a raft-"Catch up with us as fast as you can."  So she did.  She rowed down, and we loaded the lady and the Sportyak on the raft, and everything was fine.  That was kind of a wacky one.

QUARTAROLI:  Did you travel together then?

EVANS:  Oh yeah.  She just stayed with us, and rowed the lady on out.  Most of the time we never had a problem when we didn’t have a raft, but that was one.  I think after that we went, "Maybe we should do that."  But that was pretty funny.  And she had a wonderful time after that.  She came to life and she really enjoyed the trip.

QUARTAROLI:  She knew what her limit was.

EVANS:  She did!  She did.  But that was a new one.  She wasn’t gonna even try.  Maybe that’s a good one to end on.

QUARTAROLI:  I think so.

EVANS:  Let’s go have some dinner!

