DANIEL BROOMFIELD INTERVIEW

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

Discussion of technical aspects of recording not transcribed. A third, unidentified person, "Ben" is present for the first few minutes of the interview and makes a few comments. Chris, the cameraman, is recording this interview. The date of the interview is August 3, 1999, and is taking place in <Flagstaff Arizona>. 

Maxwell: I'm Dr. Carol Maxwell, and this is... Do you want to say your name? 

Broomfield: Daniel Broomfield. 

Maxwell: Now, I think we can get going. Let's go ahead and talk about what your life was like before you came to <Flagstaff>. 

Broomfield: My life was real wonderful. 

Maxwell: What was it like? Where were you? 

Broomfield: I was in <Franklin Louisiana>. That's my home. 

Maxwell: What did you do there? 

Broomfield: I worked at the paper mill. 

Maxwell: What did you do in the mill? 

Broomfield: Well, I was workin' in the paper factory, rollin' paper, big rolls of paper. 

Maxwell: Were you running the machines, or what were you doing? 

Broomfield: No, I wasn't running machines, I was stacking it up. 

Maxwell: How old were you then? 

Broomfield: Oh, I was real young, in my twenties. 

Maxwell: Were you married? 

Broomfield: No, I wasn't married right then. I got married a little later on. 

Maxwell: Were you single when you came to <Flagstaff>? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Had you grown up there? 

Broomfield: Where, <Louisiana>? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Broomfield: I was raised up in <Mississippi>, in <Carthage Mississippi>. Then my mother and dad moved out here, and they sent for me to come out here. And I got me a job in Saginaw Lumber Company. 

Maxwell: Is that why you came here? 

Broomfield: Well, it was more money. That's why I came out here. My dad was a log cutter, and he sent for me to come out here and got me a job. I worked at Saginaw Lumber Company for five years, then all us changed over to Southwest Lumber Company andgt;cause Saginaw sold out. 

Maxwell: But you were happy when you were in <Louisiana>? 

Broomfield: Yeah, I was happy, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Where were you living in <Louisiana>? 

Broomfield: <Franklin Louisiana>. That's where I was born. 

Maxwell: But in a house or.... 

Broomfield: A house. 

Maxwell: Your own house? 

Broomfield: No, it was in my grandfather's house. 

Maxwell: You were living with your grandfather? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Anybody else in the household there? 

Broomfield: Nobody but him and his wife. 

Maxwell: So you were about twenty? 

Broomfield: Right along in there, yes. 

Maxwell: And you were working at the mill, stacking paper. 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: And then were you thinking of moving away from there, or were you thinking of staying there? 

Broomfield: Well, I wasn't thinking about moving, until my mother and them come out here. 

Maxwell: When did they come out here? 

Broomfield: They came out here in 1945. 

Maxwell: How did they come to move out here? 

Broomfield: Well, he was a log cutter, so he said he made more money out here, so they all left. 

Maxwell: Where was he working then? 

Broomfield: He was working at <Carthage Mississippi>, cuttin' logs. 

Maxwell: Carson? 

Broomfield: Carthage, C-A-R-T-H-A G-E. 

Maxwell: Carthage. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Was the timber industry still going good and strong in <Carthage> when you left? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, but they wasn't makin' no money. And so a lot of 'em moved out here. And so everybody just went to followin' each other. And so I came out here and got a job at Saginaw, and he was workin' over there. We just started workin' here. I worked over there five years for Saginaw, and then we all changed over to Southwest. 

Maxwell: How did he find out about the better wages out here? 

Broomfield: He found out by somebody. I don't know who it was. 

Maxwell: I know, I was talking with Mrs. Hickman.... 

Broomfield: See, their home is in <Louisiana>, too. 

Maxwell: Yeah, and where they were the timber industry shut down. 

Broomfield: They all moved out here at the same time. 

Maxwell: Oh, did they? 

Broomfield: My dad and all them came out here at the same time, uh-huh. Then they all started cuttin' logs out there for Happy Jack. 

Maxwell: Who all came when your dad came? Who besides the Hickmans? 

Broomfield: Oh, it was quite a few people here. Wasn't too many peoples here when we moved here. 

Maxwell: Do you remember who came out with him besides the Hickmans. 

Broomfield: No, not really. Do you, Ben? (Ben can be heard faintly in the background) 

Shird: We hauled buildings. 

Broomfield: We built all this around in here. 

Shird: We built all this (inaudible). 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I know you did. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. Then I started drivin' truck for Southwest, when we changed over there. 

Shird: (inaudible) 

Maxwell: Let me take you back to <Louisiana> for a minute. So, you're working in <Louisiana>, and your dad and his friends hear about better wages in <Flagstaff>, and they move out here. Then what happened? Did you get a phone call or a letter? How'd they get in touch with you to let you know about coming out? 

Broomfield: They wrote me a letter. 

Maxwell: And what did they say? 

Broomfield: They told me to come on out here and get me a job. 

Maxwell: And then what did you do? 

Broomfield: See, I was married then. 

Maxwell: Oh, you were married then. 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Were you living with your wife? 

Broomfield: Yeah, with my wife, then. 

Maxwell: With your wife and your grandparents? 

Broomfield: No. After I left my grandparents, I got married. And then me and her was livin' together. Well, we were livin' with my mother and dad. 

Maxwell: And then what happened? 

Broomfield: Then when I moved out here and got me a job, and so I sent back there, my mother and them went back home to visit, I sent them money to bring her back out here, so her mother wouldn't let her come out here. And so I told her, well, if she didn't want to come, just give her the money anyway. And so let her stay back there. If she wants to stay there in <Mississippi>, let her stay. 

Maxwell: Did she stay? 

Broomfield: Yeah, she stayed. 

Maxwell: What was her name? 

Broomfield: Flora May. [phonetic spelling] 

Maxwell: What was her name before she married you? 

Broomfield: Ah, what was her first name? Hm. You know, I don't even know my wife's first name. I think it was Chapman, Flora May Chapman. 

Shird: (chuckles) 

Maxwell: What county were you married in? 

Broomfield: <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: What county? 

Broomfield: <Carthage Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: And so Flora May Chapman? 

Broomfield: Yeah, that was her stepdaddy's name, so I think it went in his name. 

Maxwell: How old was she when you married her? 

Broomfield: Me and her was in our twenties. 

Maxwell: And then her parents wouldn't let her come? 

Broomfield: No. 

Maxwell: How come? 

Broomfield: I don't know. Her mother wouldn't let her come out here. I told my mother and them, "Well, leave her back there then." I've seen her once or twice since I left back there, and that's been fifty-something years ago. So if she didn't want to come, so why not let her stay there. So I sent her the money to come with. My mother done bought a brand new car, so they went back home to visit, so I told 'em, "Bring her back." So she didn't come, so I said, "Well, she don't wanna come, she just don't wanna come." 

Maxwell: So at first you came by yourself, thinking she'd come after you? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How'd you feel about going out there, about changing, going this far away from <Mississippi> and <Louisiana> and all that? 

Broomfield: Well, I felt all right -somebody gonna get me a job. 

Shird: I gotta go. 

Broomfield: You goin' (inaudible). 

Shird: Yeah. 

Broomfield: Oh, you waitin' on your lunch, huh? 

Shird: Uh-huh. See y'all. 

Broomfield: Well, maybe we can come by your house. They'll probably gonna come by your house. You'll be at home, won't you? 

Shird: Yeah, (inaudible). 

Broomfield: Yeah, I know. (door closes) 

Maxwell: So when you came, how did you come? 

Broomfield: I came on the train. 

Maxwell: What was that like? 

Broomfield: The train? The train was okay. 

Maxwell: What was it like for you traveling on the train in those days? Was it segregated? 

Broomfield: Yeah, it was. When I came out here, where I caught the train [was] in <Jackson Mississippi>, and it come to <Amarillo Texas>. And so I didn't know -see, I was sittin' back there by myself, and so a white lady come back there and sit down beside of me. So I wanted to get up and move. I did! 

Maxwell: How come? 

Broomfield: Well, I was just scared. I don't sit aside of no white person. And so she said, "What you runnin' for?" I said, "Well, I'm not supposed to be sittin' beside you." And so she said, "You can sit aside me all you want to." She was an old lady. She was out of <California>. And so when we got to <Amarillo Texas>, we changed trains and come on to <Flagstaff>. She still sit aside of me. She said, "Where you goin' to?" I said, "I'm goin' to <Flagstaff> where my mother and dad is." And so she said, "You can sit aside me all you want to. Ain't nobody gonna bother you." And so I didn't know what to say! I said, "Well, okay, ma'am." So me and her sit there and we laughed and talked and got up and got us a sandwich. She said, "C'mon, ain't you hungry?" I said, "Yes, ma'am!" So we went back there in the kitchen and got us somethin' to eat, and sat there at a table. People just lookin' at us. She said, "Don't worry about it. They ain't gonna say a word. Why don't you come on and go to <California> with me?@ she said, AI am rich." I still was scared to go to <California>. I started not to get off the train back here. A friend of mine said, AYou'd better get off and go see your mama now. (laughter) Mama said if I'd have went on to <California>, Mama wouldn't know where I was at, see. 

Maxwell: Right. 

Broomfield: And I didn't know how to write Mama and them back then -you know what I mean. I didn't know the address, see, andgt;cause they used to stay behind First Baptist Church. Used to be some houses back there. So I said, "I'd better get off this train here and go where my Mama and them at and get me a job and go to work." And so I started to goin' on to <California>. She said, "C'mon, go with me. I'm rich, I'll get you in a beautiful home." I said, "Well, ma'am, I've got to stop in and see my mama and them. I ain’t seen her for a couple of months." So I got off the train and I ended up here. And so I come on and got me a job. It took me six months before I could get a job. 

Maxwell: Was she right? Did nobody bother you on the train? 

Broomfield: Nobody didn't bother me. Unt-uh. They had some soldiers on there, so all of us got close together and got to laughin' and talkin' and had a good time. And so, "C'mon through here." So they was travelin'. And so that was it. So another guy caught the train in <Holbrook> to come on ahead to <Flagstaff>. He was from <McNary>. He come on here, he had a job workin' at Southwest, edgin’. So me and him got off the train together up there. So he said, "Which way we supposed to go?" I said, "Well, they always tell me to go south when you get off the train." (laughter) That’s (inaudible through laughter) for him. He said, "How come it had to be south?" I said, "That's where all the colored people is at, on the south side." So we went on down the south side. We find El Rancho Grande, and Sally V. and Lloyd were runnin' it. And so I said.... They said, "Dang, what you doin' here?!" I said, "Mama done sent for me to come out here. Where do they stay at?" They said, "She stay right across the road back there. You come right at the house." So I went over there and Mama was glad to see me, you know. She said, "How'd you find me?" I said, "Sally V. and Lloyd told me where you stays at." So I live around here. And, at that time, Indians couldn't buy whiskey and stuff. Unt-uh! They didn't allow andgt;em to buy it. Didn't even allow 'em in a bar. [Arizona citizens repealed the Indian Liquor Ban in 1954 shortly after the federal repeal of this law dating from 1802. In 1912, Arizona was required to write this federal restriction into its constitution in order to attain statehood (Cline).] 

Maxwell: In the Grande either? 

Broomfield: In the Grande or nowhere, unt-uh. And so I started bootleggin' wine and whiskey. That's how I made me some money. Uh-huh, good money! 

Maxwell: Where'd you find the whiskey and wine? 

Broomfield: I'd go in the bar and buy it, and send it to 'em. They give you good money for it, uh-huh. Some of 'em give you $200-$300 for three or four bottles of wine. 

Maxwell: That was in 1945? 

Broomfield: Well, I came out here in 1946. So my mama said, "Where'd you get all that money?!" I said, "Mama, don't say nothin', I've been sellin' wine and whiskey." She said, "To who?!" I said, "To them Indians." She said, "Boy, you gonna get caught!" I said, "Well, I hope I don't. I gotta make a livin' some kinda way, until I get me a job." So then I finally got me a job, I worked at Saginaw for five years and then Saginaw sold out, and then everybody changed over here to Southwest. All the seniority followed 'em over there. Actually, I was supposed to have forty-some years in over here at Southwest, but they cheated us out of some years. 

Maxwell: How's that? 

Broomfield: Well, they said the union wasn't no good. And so they cheated us out of a few years over here. So I said, "Well, I work over there 'til I get ready to retire, if I live long enough to retire." See, that's my retirement truck right there. That's what I was drivin'. 

Maxwell: You drove those trucks? 

Broomfield: I drove them trucks. 

Maxwell: (to cameraman) Can you get a picture of the truck? 

Broomfield: I drove them trucks for thirty-five years. 

Maxwell: Right there. Am I in your way? Cameraman: Not at all. You’re not even in the shot. 

Maxwell: Oh, good, great. That's a really neat truck. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, thank you, ma'am. 

Maxwell: You drove those? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Tell me, when you first got off that train, what did <Flagstaff> look like? 

Broomfield: Wasn't many people here then -very few people. 

Maxwell: About how many would you say? 

Broomfield: Oh, I'd say a few thousand people. <Flagstaff> wasn't as large as it is now. They've done built up since I've been here -new homes. Now, I get lost around here now myself. 

Maxwell: Yeah, it's really grown, huh? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah. I didn’t know all them homes [were] back up there close to that peak up in there. Me and my girlfriend went up through there. She was goin' around to the yard sales, every yard sale she seed, she stopped. She kept me all day one Saturday. I said, "I ain't goin' with you no mo'!" (laughter) I didn't! I quit goin'. She'd go by herself. I said, "Why you gotta stop at every yard sale?" Door-to-door! I said, "Pat, what are you buyin'? You ain't buyin' nothin'." "Oh, I just wants to look." I said, "Well you look from now on. I ain't goin' with you no mo'." (laughter) So she's in <California> now. She lost her stepdaddy, see. So she went over there last week to his funeralBfor this week. 

Maxwell: What did the town look like when you got off the train? 

Broomfield: It wasn't much of a town. 

Maxwell: What did it look like? 

Broomfield: Nothin' but Babbitt was here. Everywhere you go, it's Babbitt. Even out there on the reservation, it was Babbitt. And they weren't supposed to have nothin' out there, but they had it out there -stores and everything. All of it belonged to Babbitt. 

Maxwell: So they were bootlegging goods to the Indians too? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. So they all had a fight over the land up there, all those Indian property. 

Maxwell: What was that about? 

Broomfield: The land. The people were buyin', takin' up all their property, tryin' to make 'em move off their property -you know, their land and stuff. So they all got into it about it, and so I ain't hear no more about it. So I guess they got it all straightened out. Uh-huh....So I love it out here. I won't move back home. 

Maxwell: Were the streets dirt? 

Broomfield: Dirt road. Wasn't no streets. 

Maxwell: Anywhere? 

Broomfield: Wasn't no road streets [i.e., paved streets] here when I moved here. Wasn't nothin' here but them big boulders. You had to make you a trail. Uh-huh, you did. 

Maxwell: Were there board sidewalks by the buildings in the town? 

Broomfield: No. Wasn't nothin' here, unt-uh -just pure-dee ground. 

Maxwell: On the south side? 

Broomfield: On the south side -everywhere. 

Maxwell: How about on the north side? Were there sidewalks over there? 

Broomfield: Unt-uh. Wasn't nothin' here. 

Maxwell: Were there a number of business, though, right? 

Broomfield: Well, Babbitt and them had their stores up here, and Penny's [phonetic spelling] and them. Penny's and them used to have a store up there, and Blurshop [phonetic spelling]. That's where we buy our clothes at. 

Maxwell: Blurshop? 

Broomfield: Blurshop, uh-huh -men's shop. 

Maxwell: Did you see many people walking around on the dirt streets? 

Broomfield: Not too awful many, unt-uh. People didn't go out too much then, after they all moved out in here. Everybody stayed home. 

Maxwell: So Sally V. was running the Grande, huh? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Boy, she's been there a long time. 

Broomfield: Ooo! for many years. 

Maxwell: Was it an old building then? 

Broomfield: Old building, uh-huh, right there on 'Frisco. 

Maxwell: Was that when there was two stories and you had the swinging doors to walk through? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: It was kind of a social center, wasn't it? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Dancing and pool? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: So when you first got here, did you go live with your mom and dad? 

Broomfield: Yeah, I was livin' with them, until I got me a place of my own. Well, I built my own house over there behind Mom and Dad, see, on their property. 

Maxwell: Did they own that property? 

Broomfield: Yeah, my dad's over there now -over there on Elden right there. Right there by the church right there on Butler. 

Maxwell: So you built a house behind his house on his property? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. Yeah, he told me to build me a house back there. So I went there, and I got my lumber cheap. So I built my house. I got another guy to help me build it, so I built it by myself. 

Maxwell: How'd you get your lumber cheap? 

Broomfield: Well, see, I worked for the company, and you get a cut on your lumber if you're workin' for the company. If I'd have bought my lumber somewhere else, I'd have to pay a higher price for it. So they give me half price on it. 

Maxwell: So let's see, when you first came, it took six months to get a job, you said? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How was that? Why was that happening? 

Broomfield: Well, they just wasn't hirin' nobody. 

Maxwell: What time of year was it? 

Broomfield: That was in 1946. 

Maxwell: But what month? 

Broomfield: I came out here in April. 

Maxwell: So they hadn't started back up cutting timber for the Spring? 

Broomfield: Well, I mean, they was workin', but they just wasn't hirin' no hands, see, until they got openin's. See, I put my application and everything in, until they got openin's, and then I finally got a job over there. I worked for them five years. 

Maxwell: How long was it between when you got the letter from your parents, 'til you got out here? 

Broomfield: Wasn't long, about a month or so. 

Maxwell: Okay. What was your dad doing when you got here? 

Broomfield: He was cuttin' logs. 

Maxwell: I'm sorry, what was his name? 

Broomfield: John L. Williams. 

Maxwell: I know your dad! 

Broomfield: He's my stepfather. 

Maxwell: He's a nice man, I like him. 

Broomfield: Yeah, he goin’ go fishin' every day. 

Maxwell: Yup. 

Broomfield: And raise the garden. 

Maxwell: Yeah, it's a beautiful garden. 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: What was your mother's name? 

Broomfield: Emily Williams. 

Maxwell: Is she living? 

Broomfield: No, no, Mama's been dead. Mama died in 1988. She was eighty-eight years old. So my dad, he's eighty-eight. 

Maxwell: Then Miss Lloyd is your sister? 

Broomfield: Lloyd? Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Arthur Lloyd's mother? 

Broomfield: Oh! you talkin' about Mooda?! [phonetic spelling] 

Maxwell: Yes. 

Broomfield: Eloise? 

Maxwell: Yeah. Right here at Butler and.... 

Broomfield: That's my oldest sister. 

Maxwell: That's what I thought. 

Broomfield: Yeah, Arthur Lloyd. I didn't know you knew Arthur. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Broomfield: Yeah?! 

Maxwell: Uh-huh, we're good friends. 

Broomfield: Yeah, that's my nephew, Arthur. Eloise is my sister, my oldest. My baby sister, she lives in Bakerville, her and her husband. They're buyin' a home over there. 

Maxwell: I testified for Author. 

Broomfield: Yeah. Yeah, he's good 'til he gets on that dope. 

Maxwell: Yeah, he's a good man. It's too bad about that stuff. 

Broomfield: Yeah, he come down here and stole my pistol, too. 

Maxwell: Oh, gee. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, and pawned that. Of course his son come down here and stole my gun -Zachary. I hated that. I went up there and reported my gun was stolen, so if somebody come up killed with it, then it won't be on me. I reported it. I said, "They stole it." I know who got it. See, I know who got the gun, but I ain't told 'em who got it or nothin'. So I just let it go. I'll buy me another some day. I don't tote no gun. The only time I carry a gun, that's when I'm goin' squirrel huntin'. I go out and kill me somethin' to eat. 

Maxwell: Back when you got here, did a lot of people tote guns? 

Broomfield: No, people wasn't totin' no guns, unt-uh. When I first came here, I didn't even own a gun. Unt-uh. When me and my wife got married, everybody goin' rabbit huntin' around here, killin' forty and fifty rabbits apiece, a day! 

Maxwell: Wow. 

Broomfield: I said, "Good God Almighty! I ain't eat a rabbit in years and years now. (laughs) I ate so many of 'em when I was young." So I ain't been rabbit huntin' lately, unt-uh. Now these days, people don't even know how to cook a rabbit. They don't! If you ask 'em, "You know how to fix a rabbit?" "No, I don't know nothin' about fixin' no rabbit!" I said, "That's what you were raised up on!" Uh-huh! Now, you take my sister over there -Eloise can cook rabbits, squirrels, and everything else, but she just don't want to cook 'em. I said, "You know how to fix that. You were raised up on it." "I don't know how to fix that!" I said, "No, since all this new stuff come out now, that's what you fix." Just like these canned biscuits. You know, you used to get in and make them fixed biscuits. (laughs) Stick your hand down that dough and stir that. (laughs) So then new canned biscuits come out.... They're like my wife when she was livin', "You'd better bring some biscuits back." I said, "You know how to make biscuits. I don't like them canned biscuits!" "You'd better bring some biscuits back." So I'd get six, seven cans of biscuits and bring 'em back. (laughter) I said, "Wait a minute now, y'all done quit cookin' now, huh? You want these canned biscuits now. I don't like them canned biscuits. Gimme them fixed biscuits where I can eat." "You'd better bring some biscuits back." I said, "Well, I'll bring some biscuits back." We went on about it. I said, AWell, you just done quit fixin' 'em, huh?@ And so she quit fixin' them biscuits. Once in a while she'll fix some. 

Maxwell: Did your wife change like that, too? 

Broomfield: Like what? 

Maxwell: Did she go from home cooking to store stuff? 

Broomfield: Yeah, uh-huh, mostly. Now, she didn't mind cooking. Unt-uh, now, she would cook. She would cook beans and rice and stuff, and greens and stuff. But if she wants some, she'd get in the kitchen and cook 'em. She didn't mind cookin', unt-uh. And when I was workin', she didn't mind gettin' up, fixin' my lunch. We never had an argument over that. If I had to go to work at two o'clock in the morning, before day, she up fixin’ my lunch. She didn't fix my lunch overnight. She fixed it when I got ready to go to work. She'd get up and fix it. I didn't have to argue with her about that, unt-uh. So we got along real good. That's her right there. 

Maxwell: This is your wife that you lived with here? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Let's go back to that six months when you first got here. Tell me all the stuff you used to do during that time. 

Broomfield: Remember, we sold that wine and stuff to them Indians. 

Maxwell: But what was a typical day like? What time would you get up? 

Broomfield: Oh, I'd get up early. 

Maxwell: And why’d you do that? 

Broomfield: I had to go sell that wine. 

Maxwell: So they bought it early in the morning, too? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah, any time of day. I knew the guy -he's done passed away now -we called him "Little Brother." He was settin' up there in the window up there one day, in Charley Scoto’s window, where they got that mountain climber there. So Indian guy they called "Kit Carson" come down there and bought some, give Little Brother some money to buy some whiskey and stuff with. Little Brother went and got what he wanted to get. You know, the Indians told him what kind to get. Little Brother come back out there. He says, "I told you to get me such and such a thing." Little Brother hit that Indian upside the head with a two-by-four. That didn't hurt that Indian. Kit Carson whooped six cops up there at the Weatherford Hotel -six of 'em at one time! They didn't arrest him, either. Unt-uh. He put them little skinny--them six cops, by hisself, in that motel room. They went over and left him there, said, "Well, we can't handle andgt;em." Little Brother hit that man upside the head with a two-by-four, and it ain't stun him. I said, "Little Brother, you'd better go." Freight train goin' up that hill over yonder, over there just over the hill. Little Brother run and caught that train and left then and we didn't see Little Brother in twenty years after then. He was scared to come back here. I said, "You'd better run! If he catch you, he gonna kill you." So Little Brother left then. 

Maxwell: He was afraid of the Indian, not the cops? 

Broomfield: He was afraid of the Indian guy what he hit with that two-by-four. I'd have been scared, too! That two-by-four broke and just splattered. It ain't hurt him. I'd of been gone too! And Little Brother come back here, he had a house full of children. A house full of children. I said, "Man, who's all these children here?" He said, "Them's mine." I said, "Oh! Kit Carson got you goin', and you come back in with a wife and a house full of children, huh?" (laughs) Little Brother says, "Shut up, Dan. I thought I done kilt that Indian." I said, "You ain't even stunned him! That man didn't even shook his head. You'd better go! That train goin' up there, you'd better catch that freight and get away from here." He went on to <California> and got married. And after he passed.... Him and his wife separated, after he moved back down here to <Phoenix>, and his wife separated. She moved back to <Arkansas> or somewhere or another. When he passed away, she come back out here to his funeral -her and all the kids. Ben went down there to the funeral. I didn't go. And so Ben said she asked about me. And so I said, "Well, you tell her I said hi if you see her again." And so that's how Little Brother got away from here. I said, "You'd better go 'cause that Indian's gonna kill you, man, if he gets his hands to you. He done whooped six cops. You'd better go." Little Brother run and caught that freight train. And that was down on 'Frisco. That train goin' up that hill over yonder. He caught that train before it got away from here. Sure did. Went on to <California>. And we ain't seen Little Brother in twenty-some odd years. Come back in with a house full of children and a wife. I said, "Oh, you got you a family now." "Yeah, dang it, I had to do something. Man, I thought I done killed that Indian." "You didn't even hurt that Indian, man. You're talkin' about the Indian that whooped six cops. And the cops let him alone." I said, "You'd better go." And he left here, too, runnin'. And he ain't come back in twenty-some odd years. I said, "Well, I ain’t gonna...." Well, I did do an old man that way one time, but I felt sorry behind. 

Maxwell: What happened? 

Broomfield: Well, I took his money, and I didn't get him nothin'. And I run to my wife who was at the house cookin’ with the back door open. (laughs) A hundred and something dollars. Money was good then. I took that hundred-some dollars and run to the house. Me and that Indian goin' through them rocks over there, I was fallin' down, he was fallin' down. I got there, I said, "Open the door, babe!" (laughs) I said, "Open the door!" When she opened the door, I fell over in that house and shut the door. He didn't try to come peek in the house. She said, "What's the matter? You done clipped that man for his money!" I said, "Uh-huh." I didn't come out in two weeks, either. (laughs) I was scared to come out. I told my wife, you know what, I'm sorry I done that old man that-a-way." Now, he was gonna give me some money to get him some wine and stuff with. But I done the man wrong. I feel sorry behind that. I said, "I won't do that no more 'cause some dumb Indian gonna catch me, they're gonna cut my head off and throw it down that river.@ I said, AI quit that.@ The money they give me, I'll go and get 'em their wine and stuff. I'll slip it and get it to 'em. I said, AYup, I'm gonna quit that, takin' them people's money. They got to live just like me." 

Maxwell: Sometimes you have to do something before you figure out you don't want to do it. 

Broomfield: Well, yeah. You figure out you're wrong. You figure out you done wrong, so you forgive your own self sometimes. Now, I told my wife, "I done that old man wrong. Sure did." He was an old man, too. See, I done him wrong. 

Maxwell: So this was after you married? 

Broomfield: Yeah, me and my wife was married then. 

Maxwell: When did you meet your wife? 

Broomfield: I met her in 1946. 

Maxwell: So same year you came here. 

Broomfield: Me and her got married in 1947, sixth of May. 

Maxwell: So you kept selling wine to the Indians after you.... 

Broomfield: No, after we got married, I was workin' then. I had me a job then, gone to work at Saginaw. 

Maxwell: So tell me more about that six months. You'd get up early in the morning, you'd be selling the wine.... 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah. I’d get up all day and go sell it. 

Maxwell: Then what would happen about the middle of the day, or after that? 

Broomfield: Oh, I'd go home and eat. My mother would be there to cook dinner, so I'd go set down and eat dinner with her. My dad, he'd be workin'. So it was me and my sister. Eloise was stayin' there too. 

Maxwell: Oh, Eloise was there too? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How did Eloise come to come out here? 

Broomfield: Mama done brought her out here when they came. 

Maxwell: Oh, she came with them. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How old was she then? 

Broomfield: Eloise was real young. Eloise's daughter was just a little baby then, Montoya [phonetic spelling]. She was just an arm baby. So Mama and them done brought them on out here with them and left me back there in <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: So she must have been in about her mid-twenties then? 

Broomfield: Eloise? 

Maxwell: Eloise, yeah. 

Broomfield: No, see, I’m older than Eloise. 

Maxwell: Oh, you're older than her? 

Broomfield: Yeah, I'm the oldest. 

Maxwell: How old was she then? 

Broomfield: Eloise was around about eighteen, nineteen years old. 

Maxwell: And Montoya was an arm baby? 

Broomfield: Just an arm baby then. 

Maxwell: Did she have a husband at all? 

Broomfield: Who, Eloise? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Broomfield: No, not when she came out here. She got married after she got out here. She was married to Arthur’s daddy. 

Maxwell: Did your mom do the cooking? 

Broomfield: Mama always did the cooking. She didn't allow nobody in her kitchen. 

Maxwell: What kind of stuff did she cook for you? 

Broomfield: She cooked greens and stuff, beans and stuff, okra and all that kind of stuff. 

Maxwell: Beans like field beans? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Field peas? 

Broomfield: Green peas. 

Maxwell: But not like the frijole kind, but the real field pea? 

Broomfield: Yeah, green peas. 

Maxwell: Yeah, black-eyed. 

Broomfield: Yeah, uh-huh. That's somethin' I wish I had now! (chuckles) I love them black-eyed peas. 

Maxwell: (inaudible) You know who cooks those is Claudille. 

Broomfield: Yeah, Eloise can cook 'em. Eloise can cook them peas and stuff. 

Maxwell: Eloise can cook 'em too? 

Broomfield: Yeah, but she wears me out with them snap beans. 

Maxwell: Did your mom raise food in a garden? 

Broomfield: We did, in <Mississippi>. 

Maxwell: How about here? 

Broomfield: My dad raised a garden here. He used to raise mustard greens and cabbage. He's got some cabbage goin' on now. 

Maxwell: And he was in that same house at Butler and Lone Tree? 

Broomfield: Yeah. Well, when they first came here, they was down right behind the church house. Used to be some houses behind the church house over there, right across the corner there now. 

Maxwell: The other side of Butler? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. But then he built this house where he in now. 

Maxwell: And then so your dad would raise a garden, but he worked at.... 

Broomfield: He worked with Southwest. 

Maxwell: Southwest? Not ALandT? 

Broomfield: No, Southwest. 

Maxwell: And what did he do for them? 

Broomfield: Cuttin' logs, log cutter. 

Maxwell: A sawyer? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Did he use those two-man saws? 

Broomfield: Yeah, back in them days, until the power saws come out. 

Maxwell: When did they come out? 

Broomfield: Oh, power saws have been around now for quite a few years -way before he retired. 

Maxwell: In the forties? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah. 

Maxwell: And then what would you do after you go home and get somethin' to eat? 

Broomfield: Nothin'. Go back and set up on the street, shoot pool. 

Maxwell: So you kind of waited until they started hiring? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: And then what did you first get hired to do at Southwest? 

Broomfield: Well, settin' chokers when I first got hired for Southwest. 

Maxwell: What's that? 

Broomfield: Well, that's puttin' a cable around a log, so the caterpillar can put it into the row. 

Maxwell: Once it's already cut down? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: What was that like? 

Broomfield: Oh, it was kinda fun. I did have a picture of that, but I don't know what happened to that picture. I set chokers out there for about five years. Me and Ben Shird up there. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, and then I got on a truck. No! then I started skitterin' logs myself. I got on a caterpillar. 

Maxwell: How do you skid a log? 

Broomfield: Well, you just hook a choker onto it, on a log, and hook it onto the cat, and pull it over to the road and drop it, and then go back and get you some mo'. 

Maxwell: So they didn't have any horses out there then? 

Broomfield: No, no, no. 

Maxwell: All mechanized? 

Broomfield: They had caterpillars then, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Was it dangerous? 

Broomfield: Yeah, it's dangerous. All them jobs out there are dangerous. 

Maxwell: What kind of things did you see happen out there that were dangerous? 

Broomfield: Well, I seen two men get killed at one time. 

Maxwell: What happened? 

Broomfield: Snag fell on 'em -one of them old dead snags. 

Maxwell: A snag's a dead tree that's standing? 

Broomfield: Yeah. Caterpillar just had went by that old snag, and they were standin' out there talkin', and that snag happened to fall and fell right on both of 'em. One of 'em lived for five, or six hours after he got hit, but he died before they got him in here to the hospital. So it killed the other one instantly. 

Maxwell: Wow. That must be a terrible thing to see. 

Broomfield: It is. A guy run over there and told us all about it. I was settin' chokers then, runnin' the choke-setter around there. He said, "You know, two guys, Joe and them, got killed over there." All of us quit work. Boss man come back and told us, "Who told y'all to quit?" They said, "There's two men done got killed over here, and you want us to keep on workin'?!" Everybody was fixin' to quit the job right then. Say, "You must be crazy! Two men done got killed here, and you want us to go on and work on?! We're not gonna do that. We don't work that-a-way." 

Maxwell: Who said that? 

Broomfield: That was the foreman. And he wanted to fire us all. I said, "Well, go ahead and fire us!" We had a union then, see. Union gonna back us up. Yeah, I said, "Now you want us to go on and work over these dead people here, them two friends that got killed here at once and you want us to go ahead on and work?! Man, you got to be sick!" And so we didn't work either. We said, "Go ahead and fire us! We're gonna get you fired! You want us to go on and work over two men that done got killed here. We're not gonna do that. Unt-uh! No, they've been out there in the woods many years just like we have. We're not gonna do that, unt-uh." We went over there and looked at 'em. Sho' did. Alejandro, he lived about five, six hours after then. We took him over there to get an ambulance out there to get him, pick him up. He died around Mormon Lake, comin' into town, to the hospital. 

Maxwell: You were out at <Happy Jack>? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, I was at <Happy Jack> then. 

Maxwell: And so was the foreman the one who wanted you to go back to work? 

Broomfield: Yeah, he wanted us to go on and work. "Who told y'all to quit workin'?!" "Nobody. Them two men done got killed over there. We're not gonna work over them two men that got killed. They're workin' out here just like we are." He didn't want us to quit. He wanted to try to fire all of us. We said, "Well, go ahead and fire us. We're gonna get you away from here!" It was lightnin' and thunderin' goin' on one day, there was hailin'. Hail was big as a baseball. We all got in the crew truck, you know, and settin' up in there 'til it stopped. And he come out there in his pickup, he dry now. All us out there gettin' beat to death with that hail. "Who told y'all to quit and get in this truck?!" We told him, "We did! We're not gonna get out there and get beat to death with this hail, man. You got to be sick! You're in your pickup and we're in our crew truck." I was drivin' the crew truck, see. I was the oldest. He wanted to fire us then. We said, "Go ahead and fire us! You ain't out here in this hail and stuff." You couldn't even see a choker-setter. Couldn't even see the tree! I said, "Man, what's wrong with you?!" (laughs) He come out, he was clowin’ and goin' on. I said, "Man, you clown all you want. We ain't gettin' out there in that hail and stuff." One kid was settin' choke behind another guy. I was drivin' cat then. He was settin' down aside one of them old dead snags, lightning hit him and killed him right there. He wanted us to go the hell on and work over him. I said, "Man, you got to be nuts! What ails you?! You want us to go work over that man, and he just got lightning struck and killed. And you want us to go ahead on and work?! 'Who told y'all to quit?!' We told our own self to quit!" Boy, he wanted to clown up and try to fire us. We said, "Go ahead and fire us! That's up to you. You can fire us, every one of us, if you want to. I'm drivin' this crew truck, and I'm gettin' inside the crew truck. It was thunderin' and lightnin'. The lightnin' killed that man. Unt-uh! we're not gonna work over that poor man. Hell no." 

Maxwell: So the whole crew.... 

Broomfield: Just quit work and get in the truck. 

Maxwell: What was this man's name? 

Broomfield: Ed McCoy. 

Maxwell: Was he a white man? 

Broomfield: He was a Mormon. 

Maxwell: What about the crew? 

Broomfield: I was the only Black out there, see. The rest of 'em were Mexicans and Indians. 

Maxwell: Were there whites, too? 

Broomfield: Some of 'em were white, yes. 

Maxwell: So it was pretty mixed? 

Broomfield: Yeah, it was all mixed up. 

Maxwell: But the foreman was a Mormon, a white guy? 

Broomfield: He was a Mormon. Yeah, he was white, but he was a Mormon. 

Maxwell: What were the Mormons like? 

Broomfield: Ah, Mormons is just -they're all right, but they want you to go they way all the time, you know. They're always right, but you ain't never right. After I retired from work, he passed away, Ed McCoy did. So he had a heart attack there one year, and then got sick and had heart surgery. So he lived a few years after that, so he didn't make it too long after I retired. No, he died before I retired. 

Maxwell: It sounds like he was pretty hard on you guys. 

Broomfield: He was. Yeah, he was tough on you. But we didn't pay him no attention, unt-uh. See, his son was runnin' the loader, Dale McCoy. His son was runnin' the loader, loadin' them logs up. So he learned how to load logs with that loader, loadin' them trucks up. So his son worked down there at <Payson> -you know, down there at <Pine>, at the Mormon church, after he retired from Southwest. So he worked down around the church. He get paid, workin' around the church. 

Maxwell: Was his son part of the crew then? 

Broomfield: Yeah. He was loadin' truck out there after I started drivin' truck. 

Maxwell: So was his son stopping when you guys stopped? And was he yelling at his son? 

Broomfield: His son was operatin' cats too, just like I was. 

Maxwell: So when the hail came, did his son get in the truck with you? 

Broomfield: He got in the truck just like the rest of us. 

Maxwell: What were the other foremen like? 

Broomfield: Well, I had another foreman, he fired me after I got on truck the first time. He didn't want me on no truck, see. 

Maxwell: Why? 

Broomfield: 'Cause I was Black. Joe Rankston [phonetic spelling]. He fired me. He told me I'd never get another job with Southwest. I come right on up here, the next week I got a job right over here to the mill, workin' for Southwest, right on. Then I went back out in the woods. He told me I would never get another job with Southwest after he fired me. He didn't want me on no truck, see, 'cause I would be the oldest driver. All my seniority, is part of you where you go. So I was the oldest. He didn't want me to be the oldest man on truck. I told my wife, when my wife get on one side of the bed and pray, I get on the other side and pray. I said, "I'm gonna make it if the good Lord will let me do it. I'm gonna learn how to drive trucks." That's what I learned how to drive, and I've been drivin' ever since 'til I quit. 

Maxwell: How'd you learn? 

Broomfield: I just got on a truck and started drivin'. I would get in a truck and ride in with some of them truck drivers, and they showed me how to shift and everything. I could operate them caterpillars -it shifts just like a truck. They say, "Daniel, you're a good truck driver. All you got to do is learn how to shift. We're gonna turn you loose with it." So they'd ride with me. They said, "You do good! Just as good as me. I don't see why they don't want you." I said, "No, you know why, 'cause I'd be the oldest truck driver." [i.e., the truck driver with the most seniority] I turned out to be the oldest truck driver after I learned how to drive real good. But I got that truck, they had me that truck made, and this is my wristwatch they give me. See? They've got "Southwest" on that. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah! When did they give you that? 

Broomfield: When I retired. 

Maxwell: That's nice. You've had that a while. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. It need cleaning. And so I was the oldest truck driver. The mill was on strike over here one year, but out there at <Happy Jack> we wasn't on no strike out there, see. Come in here, had to go through the picket line. So by me bein' the oldest truck driver (chuckles) I stopped over on top of Mormon Lake Hill. All the trucks was behind me, followin' me. I stopped up there, made like I had to tie my load down, you know -tighten my load up. I said, "Y'all go ahead on. I'll be on, I'll catch up with you." They said, "No, you the oldest truck driver." "I don't care if I'm the oldest truck driver. Go ahead on." I was scared to go through the picket line up there. There were cops in <Flagstaff>, <Williams>, <Winslow> was out there by that oil machine right over here on Butler. All that picket lines. I said, AI'm scared to go in this gate. Some of them dudes might have a shotgun and blow my head off, drivin' up through there with a load of logs on here.@ My boss man called me that Sunday and told me, "If you want to work, you'd better be to work Monday mornin'. We're not on no strike out here in <Happy Jack>. You go through that picket line." "Man," I said, "if you was in <Texas>, you wouldn't go through a picket line. I don't care if you ain't on no strike, you'd better not go through that picket line. They'll kill ya'! They'll blow your home up, family and all." But here, I was scared to go through the picket line. I said, "Lord!" My heart got in my mouth. I'm scared to go through this picket line. We ain't got no business to run over these poor people up here. They had shotguns, high-powered rifles, everything up on top of them oil wells and out there and all that stuff. You know, all over outside the road, from Little America clear on up here on 'Frisco. I said, "Lord, look at these shotguns and rifles here! Somebody's gonna get hurt." But they didn't shoot us. I tried to make some of them guys get ahead of me, but they wouldn't. "You're the oldest truck driver!" I said, "I don't care about bein' the oldest. I can get killed just as quick as you can." (laughter) I stopped so some of 'em would pass on by me, you know. Now, I ain't got to stop. I said, "I'm gonna let some of them go on ahead of me. If some of them get shot, I'll be right in the middle of it." But I was the first one. They said, "You're the oldest truck driver!" I said, "I don't care about bein' the oldest. You can go on, too. You're haulin' logs just like me." (laughter) They said, "Unt-uh, we're gonna stay behind you." All the main foremen, the superintendents and all of 'em from the mill over there were standin' out there by the scales where we weigh our load at. They were standin' out there lookin'. "Come on through!" I said, "Man, I'm scared to come through there. There's no tellin', some of them guys might have a shotgun and thing you know." I was scared. I don't know how I got through that place. I said, "Lord, have mercy! Somebody's gonna get messed up here." I finally made my mind up to go on and pull on up in there on the scales and got my load weighed, and went around and got unloaded. I come out of the gate. I didn't come back out through the other way, I came out the other way, come out through Butler this-a-way. We supposed to go out and hit the freeway this-a-way. I come out through Butler here. I said, "I ain't goin' out that-a-way, unt-uh! I'll come out through this way." The boss man said, "What you went out through that?" I said, "I'm scared. You ain't in that truck. I'm the one in that truck." "Well, we want some logs in this mill. We got to have some logs in this mill." So I went out to the woods and got me another load of logs, come on back in. I said, "Well, all them cops and things still out there, Lord have mercy, somebody's gonna get hurt, here. I had to hear about them people gettin' blowed up in <Texas>. Them people gonna strike down there, you'd better not go through their picket line, or they'll kill you, they'll blow your home up, and your whole family. And they don't be playin'. Unt-uh. They don't be playin' with ya'. They'll kill ya'. Don't you go through that picket line!@ 

Maxwell: Do you think the other guys were afraid to drive first? 

Broomfield: Yeah, they were scared. I was scared, too! I didn't care if I was the oldest driver. The oldest driver, it don't make any difference. I said, "Lord, have mercy." I done got to be the oldest one go through here first. I said, "Y'all go ahead on. I'll catch up with you." "No, you're the oldest driver." They all pulled right behind me when I stopped. I said, "What y'all stoppin' for? You ain't got to stop." "Yeah, you the oldest driver." "That don't make no difference. All of us can get killed." I was scared. I mean, I was scared. My wife said, "Baby, were you scared?" I said, "Uh-huh." My wife was standin' out there at the window, standin' over there. She was standing out there, lookin', and she said, "Lord, I hope my husband don't get hurt." I'm prayin' to the good Lord I didn't either. She said, "Baby, were you scared?" when I got home later. I said, "Uh-huh. My heart was in my mouth when I went through that picket line." "Well," she said, "I'm glad you ain't in <Texas> nowhere, 'cause them people will kill you back there, if you go through their picket line. They mean for you not to go through there. Nobody! Unt-uh." So Joe Russell [phonetic spelling] was the boss over there on the yard at the planing mill. (chuckles) He went over to Little America and got some of the lumber haulers, got their trucks and drove it in there hisself. Joe said, "Daniel, I'm goin' in there. C'mon and follow me." I said, "Yeah, but you're the foreman. I ain't no boss. I'm scared to go through." Them guys wouldn't go in that yard, them truck drivers. Joe go over there, get their trucks and drive it in there. Joe didn't know nothin' about drivin' no truck. I said, "Joe, you know how to drive them trucks?" "Yeah, I'll get it in there some kinda way." And so he made it in there and brought it out and got it back over there to Little America where them guys was at. And so they took their trucks and loaded it and tied it down and went on about their business. They said, "We ain't goin' in that yard and right through that picket line. Unt-uh." 

Maxwell: They didn't follow you all in? 

Broomfield: Them other drivers did, followin' me -Southwest trucks. I said, "Lord, have mercy, somebody's gonna get messed up here today." I got scared when I seed all them guns, all them cops. Had the county, city, and state and everybody. I said, "Lord, lookit here, with all these guns here." 

Maxwell: What were the cops there for? 

Broomfield: To see that nobody bothered us, goin' in the gate, goin' through the picket lines. They had guns all up on top of them oil tanks over there -everywhere. I said, "Lord! look at the guns!" Never see that. Just like when that Tison Gang got loose here. Me and George Hamm [phonetic spelling] was haulin' some pulpwood over to <Snowflake>, up through Heber [look up on map]. They had all the highways blocked off. The cops stopped us -the county, state, and everybody stopped me and George Hamm. I didn't have no gun in the truck. They asked us, "Mister, y'all got a gun in these trucks?" I said, "No, sir, I ain't." I didn't know George had his little pistol in his log truck. They said, "When you come back over here, you have a gun in that truck." I said, "Well, our boss don't allow us to haul no gun in these trucks." He said, "I don't care what your boss say, we telling you, put a gun in that truck. You're out here protecting your life. That Tison Gang done got loose here, and they're killin' everything they see." I said, "Yeah, I heard about the little baby they done shot." 

Maxwell: What's that? 

Broomfield: That little baby they killed with a shotgun. 

Maxwell: Who was the Tison Gang? 

Broomfield: They were crooks. They were killin' people. 

Maxwell: When was that? 

Broomfield: Oh, quite a few years now. Yeah, they killed that little baby out from <Tucson> down there. 

Maxwell: Why'd they kill the baby? 

Broomfield: Just shot it. Two of the brothers in prison now. Some people up in <Colorado> or <Utah>, one, was on a lake fishin'. They killed them. Went up there and shot 'em and killed 'em and took the van. And so they caught 'em down there, out from <Tucson>. The daddy was in there. They tried to outrun the cops. But the daddy jumped out and ran out across that hot desert. They couldn't find him, but the next few days, they found him out there under one of them old cactus -dead. He died, it was too hot, you know, he couldn't get no water, no nothin'. And they found him out there. 

Maxwell: Was that in the forties? 

Broomfield: No, that was way later than that. 

Maxwell: The fifties? 

Broomfield: Somewhere up in there, uh-huh. [The Tison brothers broke their father out of an Arizona state prison and were on the lam in August of 1978.] 

Maxwell: Tell me, what was your wife's name? 

Broomfield: Elvira. 

Maxwell: Before she married you, what was her last name? 

Broomfield: Brooks. [phonetic spelling] 

Maxwell: How did you meet her? 

Broomfield: I met her here in <Flagstaff> after I came out. She was out here when I came here. She came out here in 1945, her and her mama and them. 

Maxwell: Why did they come? 

Broomfield: Well, her daddy got a better job. He used to work for Southwest, setting chokes and things. 

Maxwell: How did you meet her? 

Broomfield: Well, we just got to talkin' one night up there on 'Frisco, up there at the street, up there at Sally V.’s. We'd been talkin', talkin', and talkin', so we got together. Me and her, I figured she was a good woman. So me and her just got married. See, we were married forty-seven years, almost, before.... I didn't know I didn't have my divorce from my other wife. So I had to get my divorce. So me and her has been together them many years, and it wasn't a legal marriage. And so my dad said, "You gotta go get you a divorce from the other wife." So I went up there and they searched around to see if they could find my other wife. I knew where she was. I could go right straight to her house right now, there in <Jackson Mississippi>. Daddy said, "Well, do you know where she live at?" I said, "Well, last I heard, she was in <Carthage Mississippi>, where I left from. I know she was in <Jackson>, 'cause I had done been to her house two or three times, every time I go home sometimes. Never could catch up with her. So now I got my divorce. Cost me $700. 

Maxwell: Wow, forty-seven years later? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, almost. Then me and Elvira got remarried, up in the courthouse. Ain't this somethin'? It cost me $700 to get rid of a woman, and didn't pay but three dollars to get one. (laughter) Me and Elvira laugh, you know. My daddy said, "It cost $700 to get a divorce?" I said, "That's what it cost me, that's what I had to pay." No sooner my divorce went through -I got me a lawyer -no sooner my divorce went through, I turned right around, went up there, got my marriage license. Me and Elvira got remarried. (chuckles) And so the judge asked us, said, "Do y'all want to get remarried? Y'all are legal married, 'cept it don't work that way in <Arizona>." Now if it was back in <Texas> or <Louisiana> or somewhere, you legal married. So you don't need no license, you already got your license. If you stay with a woman back there a year or five years -whatever it is -you're legal married, you don't need no marriage license, you're legal married. But here, it don't work that way, not in this state, unt-uh. So the judge looked at us. He said, "Y'all been together these many years?" I said, "Almost forty-seven." Well, that was about forty-six years old. About forty-six, we got remarried. Not forty-six. Let's see, she passed away in 1993. It was three or four years before then. 

Maxwell: About 1989 or 1990? 

Broomfield: Somewhere along in there. And so no sooner we got remarried, me and Elvira, the judge asked Elvira, "Do you want to remarry?" Elvira said, "Yeah, we done been together these many years. So who else do I want? Nobody!" No sooner he married us, and we didn't have no witness, but the secretary, she was our witness. She signed the marriage license. No sooner me and Elvira got remarried, we left and went on to <Laughlin Nevada>]. 

Maxwell: Went to where? 

Broomfield: Went to <Laughlin>. (someone enters, background conversation not transcribed) 

Maxwell: I wondered if he could turn his camera around and.... 

Broomfield: Take a picture of my wife? 

Maxwell: Yeah. 

Cameraman: I'll stop it for a second and move it over there-a little smoother. 

[END TAPE 1, SIDE B; BEGIN TAPE 2, SIDE A] 

Maxwell: We're on Tape 2, Side A. It's always nice to put it on the tape. Okay, let's see, where were we? We were talking about your wife, Elvira. What was her name before she married you? 

Broomfield: Elvira Brooks. 

Maxwell: You met her at the Grande, and you figured out she was a good woman? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: How was she a good woman? 

Broomfield: Well, she was workin' and I was workin'. 

Maxwell: Where was she working? 

Broomfield: She was working for housework. Well, she was working at restaurants then, her and her next older sister. 

Maxwell: What did she do at the restaurant? 

Broomfield: Washing dishes. 

Maxwell: Do you remember which one? 

Broomfield: She worked all over <Flagstaff>. 

Maxwell: Really? How come? 

Broomfield: Well, she wouldn't get too good of money at one place, and she'd just go to another job. Of course during them days, women had good jobs then, they could get a job anywhere. So she started workin' up there, so she's been workin' ever since me and her got married. 

Maxwell: So she washed dishes at all these different places? 

Broomfield: Yeah, until she started workin' housework. 

Maxwell: Do you remember who she did housework for? 

Broomfield: Yeah, Beverly Armstrong. Used to run the drugstore up here on the hill up there by the (inaudible). Mr. Armstrong's wife. 

Maxwell: What was that like for her? 

Broomfield: Oh, she loved it out there. She worked out there twenty-some years. 

Maxwell: Wow, that's a long time. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, until she passed away. 

Maxwell: So back when you first came, you met her in 1946. (

Broomfield: Uh-huh.) And how long did you court? 

Broomfield: We courted about a year. 

Maxwell: What did you do to court? What was it like to court someone then? 

Broomfield: Well, she was just a good woman. I seed she was a good woman, so me and her got talkin'. I seed she was a good woman, I just asked her, we were courtin', I said, "You’s a good woman and workin' woman. I'm a workin' man. We ought to get married." She told me, "Okay." Her mama didn't want me and her to court, but she couldn't help it. And so we courted anyway. And we got started from that, and got married. We stayed with her mama and them for over a year after we got married. 

Maxwell: How old was she? 

Broomfield: Elvira was younger than me. We just went on and got married. I was workin' that day when we got married. She was supposed to meet me at the courthouse to get the marriage license. I got off a half a day. And I told her to meet me at the courthouse certain time. She never did show up. The courthouse closes at five o'clock. And here it was about twenty minutes to five then, and no Elvira. I said let me get out here to this house. And they were all down there, walkin' around the house -her mama and her sister and all of 'em, walkin' around there, cryin'. I said, "Cryin' ain't gonna help that. You come over there to the courthouse." We went and got marriage license and went and got married. And so we stayed with her mama and them a little over a year. And then my dad come over there and woke me up at twelve o'clock one night, "You and Elvira get up and come and go with me." Went on over there to the house with him. So he said, "Now, there's a shovel and a pick and a (inaudible)." I said, "What's up, Elvira?" Elvira said, "I don't know, Dan." It was hot, the moon shinin' just as bright. He said, "Now, you see them boulders there? Start beatin' on them boulders, breakin' 'em up and get paid off, go over there to the warehouse and get you some dynamite." I said, "What am I gonna do with dynamite?! I don't know nothin' about blowin' up no dynamite right. I might blow my own head off!" He said, "You can get somebody to blow them rocks up. Now, you got all that scraped off, build you a house there. He said, AA house of your own is better than stayin' up in a house of somebody else." I told Elvira, "Well, he is right." 

Maxwell: Is that that little rock house that's still on Butler, behind the church there? Is that the one you built? 

Broomfield: No. I built right behind my dad's house, in his yard. 

Maxwell: The one that he's in now? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. 

Broomfield: See, he tore it down after I moved. Me and Elvira moved down here after the lady who did own this house. She died. Now, she used to be my mother-in-law, too, see. 

Maxwell: Who did? 

Broomfield: The lady what used to stay here, passed away here, Miss Lula Jackson. She passed away, and her husband, he left them and moved to <Utah>, he and another woman. And so me and Elvira were lookin' for a house to stay in, moved in, after my mother passed. My dad put me out, told me I had to find me another place to stay after. He put the City on me. See, at that time, me and Elvira didn't have no runnin' water in the house. We were using their house, see. And so he got mad at me and told me I had to get out, after my mother passed. Well, I told Elvira, "We'll just go look for us a house." He'd been wantin' to do that a long time ago, put me out. 

Maxwell: Why was that? 

Broomfield: Well, he just got mad at me for no reason, I don't know. And so me and Elvira.... He married again. His wife was in <Washington>. She passed away, and he went up there to her funeral, buried her, and come back here. See, he was up there in <Washington> when my wife passed away, see. He was up there then, seein' about his dead wife. And so when he come back, I done moved down here. The guy what owned -when his wife died here, he left then and went to <Utah>. And the other woman he was goin' with, the guy that was stayin' here with another woman.... They moved to <Utah>, and so she asked me did I want to move down here? andgt;Cause she hear that Elvira and me was lookin' for a house. I told her, yeah, I found one, but all they want me to stay there is about six months. I need a house to stay in, not just to move every day. All my stuff would be scattered up and down the road. So she said, "Well, y'all can move in here! 'Cause me and A. D. [phonetic spelling] goin' to <Utah>, movin' to <Utah>." He had his truck and things loaded down, already loaded up. I said, "Well, how much you want a month for it?" "Four hundred fifty dollars a month.@ That's what I was gonna pay out at East Flag. I said, "Yeah. Well, what about ya’ll furniture and stuff in there?" They said, "That's gonna stay here." So I started rentin' the house. So I gave them $450 for the first month to A. D., the man that owned the house here. (laughs) That woman jumped up out over that couch over there and grabbed that $450. She said, "I'm the one that called you and Elvira and told you about movin' down here." I said, "But the man owns the house. This is supposed to be his money." "It's my money!" Boy, she grabbed that $450. I said, "Well, I tell you what you do, you give me a receipt for my $450, 'cause the first thing you say, I ain't give you no $450. Give me a receipt now." So she had a book, she wrote me a receipt out. I kept that receipt, too. They moved on to <Utah>, got up there, she didn't stay up there six months. She was feedin' the man dope and stuff, kept him in the hospital every week. The man be down there down in Prescott, every week. She was feedin' that man food and stuff and dopin' him up there every time he'd eat. That man actually died. After they moved to <Utah>, went up there, and she was gonna do the same thing up there. He was living with his sister and them. And they found out what she was doin' to him, they put her out. She's from <New Orleans>. Put her out the door. Throw a 357 magnum upside her head. And she fell out like you done cut a tree down. Uh-huh. They told her, "We know all about that stuff what you puttin' down." Since she left 'em up there, and moved back to <New Orleans>, they say he ain't been sick a day. Never. She had Tommy Coleman [phonetic spelling] the same way down here on 'Frisco. (Maxwell: Really?!) She tried to get next to my daddy. My daddy found out about her. He didn't allow her in his house. She tried to get to him 'cause he had that home over there. See, she was gonna take that. Yes, sir! After that woman died here, Lula, A. D. went and bought the woman a dress to bury her in. Lookin' for the dress and the woman that he was foolin' around with had the dress on at the funeral! Now ain't that somethin'?! Never did find the dress, but the woman was in the funeral with the dress on. I said, "Lord, have mercy, I think I'd have snatched it off of her right there." I bought my wife a brand new dress to put on. Nobody snatched it off, I betcha. Unt-uh. I said, "Lord, have mercy, what's wrong with these people these days?! The world is gettin' crazy!" It ain't the world, it's the people in the world. That's who it is -it ain't the world. The world ain't done us nothin'. Unt-uh. It's the people in the world. That's who's goin' crazy. I said, "Lord, the woman's sittin' up in the church with the woman's dress on, that he was lookin' for to bury her in. That's pitiful." 

Maxwell: It is. 

Broomfield: He was goin’ with the woman before his wife passed away. He clown my dad outside the church house one day, about that woman. "Y'all don't know what y'all missin'." My dad said, "We ain't missin' nothin'. Sure ain't. That woman crazy." She had Tommy Coleman down there on 'Frisco goin' for it every week, too. So his ex-wife come up and got him, took him to <Phoenix>, and got him cured. When he come back, he was stayin' out there with Tommy. When he come back here, he got the cops to put her out of his house. He didn't want to kill her. The wife got him cured down there in <Phoenix>. He got a house full of children. All of 'em grown now, and great-great grandchildren. So Tommy's doin' good now. 

Maxwell: Tell me about when you married your wife. How come her parents didn't want you to marry her? 

Broomfield: Well, they didn't really know exactly who I was, but after they got used to me, they .... But I took care of all of 'em. I fed every one of 'em. 

Maxwell: So it's just that they didn't know you for a long time? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Did you guys have any children? 

Broomfield: No. She told me one day her mama scared all the children away from her. I said, "How'd your mama scared all the children away from you?" (laughs) We laughed about that many a day. I said, "Baby, how'd your mama scare all the children away from you? Your mama ain't got nothin' to do 'bout that. She had y'all, didn't she?" My wife said, "Yeah, daddy, you're crazy." I said, "No, I ain't crazy." We laughed about that many a day. No, she never did have any kids. I got one daughter, but it's not by her. You might know her, I don't know -Loraine [phonetic spelling] Smith. She went into her mama's name until last year. And then she changed her name over to my name. I told her, "You ain't no Broomfield. You go as Smith." She changed her name up there. I went up to the courthouse with her, she changed her name into Broomfield. See, what she done this for, she's tryin' to take this house if somethin' happen to me. But I didn't have no will made out to her. I had a will made out to my two sisters and my brother-in-law and myself. Now, she took my will paper, my daughter did. She erased my sisters' and them's name off of there, put her name on there, see. But I can mess her up behind that. See, she forged my sister's and them's name off of there. See, put her name on there. Talkin’ andgt;bout she's gonna hafta get rid of my sister's and them's name off of there. I said, "How you can do that? You gonna erase their names off?" That's what she did. So her cousin and them told me, said, "Dan, you can mess her up behind that. She ain't supposed to do that, you ain't had no will made out to her. What she's trying to do is take your home." I said, "She can't get it 'cause there ain't no will made to her. Unt-uh, it's made out to my two sisters and my baby sister's husband. There's four wills made out: one to me, and my two sisters, and my brother-in-law. Not now to Loraine. She took my papers out and wouldn't even give 'em back to me. I said, "Well, keep 'em!" I can get another copy made, and her name ain't on andgt;em, unt-uh. So an insurance guy come here one day and said, "It'll cost you $1,600 to get away, get her off of that." I said, "Her name ain't on the paper. How can she get anything here?" "She can take everything you got, even when their name ain't on it.@ I said, AShe don’t go as no Broomfield. She just changed her name here last year, and to my name.@ I said, "It don't make no difference.@ I don't care if she did put her name as Broomfield name. Unt-uh. She wasn't no Broomfield when she was born. She was in her mama's name, Smith. 

Maxwell: How old is she? 

Broomfield: I ran up in there, she's pretty close to forty years old. She's lookin' at thirty-somethin'. 

Maxwell: How long did you and your wife live without water in the little stone house? 

Broomfield: All our life, since we been over there. 

Maxwell: For forty-some years? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: That's a long time! 

Broomfield: See, my dad wouldn't let us put none in the house. We needed a shower in there, tub in there, my mama and them told us -him and her both told us that we could use their shower and things. So we did, 'til after my mother passed, and then he got all mad up and told us we had to find us another place to stay. So he had the City come down there and make me move. The City asked me, "You got any kind of papers on this house, that he signed or somethin' or other? You can mess him up, make him put a bathroom into your house. Another room off to the house where you can have a shower in it, running water and everything." Yes, sir! He wouldn't let us do it. No, 'cause he wanted to plant all them garden there back of my house, see. I said, "Well, this is his property. I’m not gonna say...." So I told my wife, "Let's move." So now, I got just about three years and a half, no more, to pay for this house. I'm buyin' it now, see. I'm just about through payin' for this home. So me and my wife started buyin' as we moved down here. Stayed here a few months, and then I started buyin' that house, after A. D. lost it. See, the guy who was stayin’ here, he lost the house, borrowed $20,000 on it, after that woman he was goin' with, to buy her a brand new car. That car had everything in it you can name. It'll tell you when your dress still hangin' out, your shoes hangin' out. (laughter) I swear to God it did! It'll tell you when the door ain't closed. I said, "What-all she's got put in that car?" She had that car fixed up. Made that man go up there and borrow $25,000, and that's how he lost the house. So I started buyin' it, after he couldn't pay the note on it. 

Maxwell: Oh, you bought it from the bank? 

Broomfield: Yeah, uh-huh, from the guy that owned it. 

Maxwell: What was this woman's name? 

Broomfield: Alberta. Now, she had a house full of children. A house full. My brother-in-law was stayin' with one of her daughters over there and brought her home. Then after their mama done left him, she come over here, wanted her daughter to come over here, and wanted my kitchen table in there. I said, "No, you can't have nothin' in here. I moved in the house and started buyin' it." I asked the dude what owns the house -he lived in <California>, Charles Blake. I said, "Charles, what about me buyin' the house, instead of payin' rent?" He said, "Well, suits me fine." So I went right on up there and got me a lawyer -me and him both together. I signed the papers, started buyin' this house instead of payin' rent. The rent I pay, I'm buyin' me a home, see. I'm makin' it out by myself. I draw enough to make out by myself to pay for my house. And (chuckles) so her daughter come over here, the one my brother-in-law was livin' with, she wanted me to give her the kitchen table. I said, "What am I gonna do for a table?" I had to get rid of all my stuff to move in here. So I asked Charles, what owned the house, the guy that owned the house, out in <California>, I said, "Any of this stuff you want out of here?" "That stuff ain't none of mine." He said, "All that stuff in that house, everything out in the tool shed, is yours. You're buyin' the home, everything there is yours. I don't want nothin' out of there. All that stuff is yours." I've got a washer and dryer and everything back there. Everything I need. Garden digger. I got all that. All this stuff down here belongs to me. And so Charles said, "Daniel, all that's yours. I don't want nothin'. Them people can't come within a hundred yards of that house. Don't let 'em come in and take nothin' from you. That's yours, you done bought it." I said, "Well, good." So my stuff I had in my other house over there, so I had to get rid of all of that -all but my small deep freeze. I kept it. 

Maxwell: Did you see this kind of thing happen in the past? 

Broomfield: No, I didn't. You know, me and my wife, we was wantin' to buy.... Well, I should have had me four or five homes here, when I first started workin'. Homes were cheap. I could have bought me some homes and things around here for $4,000-$5,000. 

Maxwell: Really?! 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, or $2,000-$3,000. Rip and run the street young. Didn't care. Ben Shird over there, he could have had the same thing out here. He was makin' more money than me, when he started cuttin' logs with my dad and them. Ben was makin' good money, over a hundred and some dollars a day. I ain't never made no hundred dollars a day. The only time I made good money was workin' overtime. 

Maxwell: Was that back in the forties? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Boy, that was good money, wasn't it? 

Broomfield: Yeah, that was good money. See, when I was comin' up, you could take a dollar and go to town and get a sack of sugar for ten cents or five cents -a five-pound sack of sugar. You can't do it now. 

Maxwell: Was that because of the union, that wages were that good? 

Broomfield: Well, there wasn't no union then, not in them days. They just started the union here lately, around in forty-somethin'. 

Maxwell: When was that strike where you drove the truck through the union? 

Broomfield: Yeah, we had a union then. 

Maxwell: When was that strike? 

Broomfield: Um, I forget what year that was. It was quite a few years ago. 

Maxwell: In the fifties? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah, way back in there, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Do you remember what it was about? 

Broomfield: More money. They were strikin' for more money. 

Maxwell: So it was the sawmill people? 

Broomfield: (aside to someone else) 

Maxwell: So it was the sawmill people's strike, and not the lumberjacks? 

Broomfield: Not the Happy Jack wasn't on no strike. It was just the sawmill. The mill was on a strike. 

Maxwell: So what was the community like when you first moved here, those first four or five years? Was there much of a community? Were there churches and social groups? 

Broomfield: Weren't too many churches and things here then, unt-uh. 

Maxwell: Did the black kids go to school with the white kids? 

Broomfield: You know, I can't.... Yeah, they all were mixed up. 

Maxwell: How did that go, do you know? 

Broomfield: Well, they all got along all right. They all were mixed up when I came here. 

Maxwell: What school was that then? Was that South Beaver? 

Broomfield: Yeah, South Beaver over here. Used to be a school right there. 

Maxwell: Was Kinsey built then? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Who went to Kinsey then? 

Broomfield: I think my nephew and them all went over there. 

Maxwell: Would you say there was a Black community back then when you first came? 

Broomfield: When I first came out here, there wasn't too many Black people here, until all us started comin' out here. 

Maxwell: About how many, do you know, where here, before y'all came? 

Broomfield: Well, actually, it was about fifty or sixty Black people, maybe a little more. 

Maxwell: Did they have a church? 

Broomfield: The Black folk? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Broomfield: Yeah, over there at First Baptist. See, it used to be a white church over there, but now they done built another church over there, bigger. 

Maxwell: The one at Lone Tree and Butler? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: So that was white? 

Broomfield: No, it was a Black church. 

Maxwell: But isn't it now still? Or is it mixed, or what is it now? 

Broomfield: Oh, anybody can go there, if they want to go there. 

Maxwell: Yeah, I've gone to a couple of funerals there. 

Broomfield: Yeah, anybody can go to that church. A lot of white people joined that church over there, I think, over there at First Baptist. 

Maxwell: Was the town very segregated or racist when you first came? 

Broomfield: Not really. Everybody got along. You do your job, and I'll do mine, so everybody got along just fine. Nobody never fight and clown and go on, like they do now these days. 

Maxwell: Really? So it's worse? 'Cause I know this is a pretty racist town. 

Broomfield: It is. It used to be, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: But it used to not be that bad? 

Broomfield: Nah, unt-uh. Since all this dope.... See, when I moved out here, we didn't know what dope and stuff was like that. Unt-uh. 

Maxwell: What was it like then? 

Broomfield: Oh, it was good. 

Maxwell: When did the dope come? 

Broomfield: Now, you know I don't know that. I don't know where that dope and stuff come from. When I was back home, we didn't know what no dope was, never seen none. If we seed it, we didn't know what it was. After we got down here and all, dope stuff started up. Look at that there they caught down there on the highway here the other week. 

Maxwell: I didn't hear about that. 

Broomfield: Five-and-a-half million dollars' worth, between here and <Phoenix> on I-17. Five-and-a-half million dollars. 

Maxwell: What was it, cocaine? 

Broomfield: I don't know which one it was. I couldn't get the real understandin' of it, whether it was cocaine or crack or what. But five-and-a-half million dollar's worth. 

Cameraman: I think he's thinking of a marijuana truck. I think I saw something about a marijuana truck. 

Broomfield: Yeah, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: It must have been a semi. 

Cameraman: The police make up the numbers out of the air. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I guess I'm not quite sure how to get at it. I'm wondering if people helped each other as individuals, or just how it worked for the newcomers. 

Broomfield: Well, people helped each other around here. 

Maxwell: It sounds like your parents helped you. 

Broomfield: Yeah, but I helped my parents. I helped them more than they helped me. 

Maxwell: Oh, how was that? 

Broomfield: Well, see, my sister, she never was able to work. So I take care of her and all the children, her grandchildren. I raised Arthur, too. And his son, too, almost, Zachary. I do the buyin' of groceries and take it over there to 'em to cook. But when they cook, they don't call me to come eat. Unt-uh. I buy steaks and stuff and tote it over there. When I go over there to eat, they done ate it all up. Well, I'll just pick me somethin' to eat down here. 

Maxwell: How come she was never able to work? 

Broomfield: She's sickly. She had that old arthritis. She had a drawin' in her leg, you know. 

Maxwell: I meant to ask you how old Elvira was when you married her. Was she in her teens? 

Broomfield: Yeah, Elvira wasn't quite twenty. 

Maxwell: So she was close to twenty then? 

Broomfield: Pretty close to, yeah. I'd say she was about nineteen, somewhere along in there -about nineteen. I'm a few years older than her. 

Maxwell: And you two lived in that house for a long time, forty-some years? 

Broomfield: Forty-some odd years. About forty-five years. 

Maxwell: Was it a stone house or a wood house? 

Broomfield: Just a little ol' wood house. 

Maxwell: So you cleared the rock away and then.... 

Broomfield: Yeah, built it. 

Maxwell: You built it yourself? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: How'd you know how to build a house? 

Broomfield: Well, I got another guy to help me. He was a carpenter. 

Maxwell: Who was that? 

Broomfield: His name was Jay Mabley [phonetic spelling]. He passed away a long time ago, had a heart attack. 

Maxwell: Did you have a kitchen in there? 

Broomfield: Yeah, we had a kitchen and a bedroom. 

Maxwell: What kind of food did you cook? 

Broomfield: Oh, we cooked greens and stuff, beans and stuff. I had a gas stove and everything in there, and gas heater. 

Maxwell: Any meat? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, we had deep freeze, two deep freeze. 

Maxwell: What kind of meat did you cook? 

Broomfield: Steak and pork chops and stuff -chicken. 

Maxwell: Store-bought meat? 

Broomfield: Yes. 

Maxwell: I've talked to people who were in here in the forties who ate all wild meat until they were in their teens. 

Broomfield: You know, I haven't ate any elk meat or deer meat in years now. See, Elvira, she didn't like that kind of wild stuff. She wasn't too particular about it. Now I never ate no bear meat, and she have ate some. She said it's good meat, tasted good. Friends of mine out there at <Happy Jack>, over there go bear huntin' all the time. (chuckles) They went and killed a bear and sent her a piece, and she ate a piece of that. Now, I don't want no bear meat -somethin' gonna kill me, and I'm gonna turn around and eat it. Me and her laughed. She said, "Dan, you crazy." I said, "No, I ain't crazy." And so she ate a piece of it -it was all ready to cook. She cooked it and sent her a piece of it, and so I brought it to her, she ate it, she said, "Bear meat tastes good. Tell Jim to send me some more of it." I said, "That's they bear meat. I don't want no bear meat." So she ate it. She said, "Yeah, it tastes good, Dan. It don't taste like no wild meat." So she loved that bear meat. Her husband goes huntin' every year, bear huntin'. 

Maxwell: So she knows how to cook it then? 

Broomfield: Yeah, I told her how to cook it. You know, Jim showed me how to cook it. 

Maxwell: How do you cook it? 

Broomfield: Put the bear down in the ground, put you some hot coals to it, and cover it up. Let it cook right there. 

Maxwell: Do you clean the bear? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Skin it and all that? 

Broomfield: Skin it, get that hide off of it. A lot of people take the hide and make fur coats out of it. 

Maxwell: Do you wrap it in anything, or put it right in the dirt? 

Broomfield: You wrap it in foil and stuff. 

Maxwell: What about the head? 

Broomfield: They take the head and put it for a trophy. 

Maxwell: So it's just like the body, legs, and all that? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, yeah. 

Maxwell: How about the feet? 

Broomfield: They take that and make trophies out of it too. 

Maxwell: So you kind of pare it down. 

Broomfield: Yeah, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Do you put anything in there with it? 

Broomfield: Well, you season it and everything, you know. 

Maxwell: What do you season it with? 

Broomfield: I guess they season it with pepper and salt and stuff, you know, and barbecue sauce and stuff. 

Maxwell: Just put the coals on it? 

Broomfield: Yeah, uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Anything else? Do you put dirt on the coals? 

Broomfield: Well, you cover it up with somethin' that they cover it up with. I don't know how they cook it -you know, really how to cook it. I never seen nobody cook it. So I guess they've got one of those things, put it on there, you know, and turn it over and over and over, you know. Keep one side from burnin' up. 

Maxwell: Oh, you cook it over the ground? 

Broomfield: Under the ground. They cover it up with some kind of thing. I don't know how they cook it. I never seen nobody cook it. 

[END TAPE 2, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 

Broomfield: They say it’s good meat. I killed one in the day. 

Maxwell: Where was that? 

Broomfield: Along Lake Mary Road. 

Maxwell: I was going to ask you, when you worked out at <Happy Jack>, did you go out there every day and come back here? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: How'd you get out there? 

Broomfield: In my pickup. I had a little old white Toyota pickup -not like this one here. 

Maxwell: Back in the forties? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah. I been goin' back and forth out there every day. 

Maxwell: Wow, that's a long drive. 

Broomfield: Sixty miles one way. 

Maxwell: Wow! sixty miles one way. That's a long commute. 

Broomfield: Round trip day. 

Maxwell: What hours did you work? 

Broomfield: Different kind of hours. They have schedules for you to go out on. 

Maxwell: How long was a shift? 

Broomfield: All day. All day long. Get your loads in, that's it. Sometimes you get off two or three o'clock. If you done pulled your three rounds, that's it. If you load that truck up and park it, and turn your time in, you're through for the day. 

Maxwell: How about when you were setting chokers? 

Broomfield: We'd go back and forth every day, too. 

Maxwell: How long a day did you work then? 

Broomfield: Five and sometimes six days a week. 

Maxwell: Ten hours a day? 

Broomfield: Sometimes ten hours, sometimes twelve. 

Maxwell: I heard there were twelve-hour shifts in the past. 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: That's a long shift. Did you ever work an eight-hour or was that too short? 

Broomfield: Oh yeah, eight hours sometimes. 

Maxwell: Were there any things like community picnics or anything like that that went on? 

Broomfield: They give a picnic once a year. 

Maxwell: Who did? 

Broomfield: Southwest. 

Maxwell: How about around here on the south side? 

Broomfield: You mean the mill? 

Maxwell: No, just people. 

Broomfield: Oh! we had picnics out there at Fort Tuthill on Fourth of July. And nineteenth of June. They didn't give a picnic for the Fourth of July, you know. They give a picnic round out there at Fort Tuthill. 

Maxwell: Who did that? 

Broomfield: The Elks Club. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay. Did you and your wife go to those? 

Broomfield: We used to, but we quit goin'. Go out there, people'd be runnin' from place to place, from your table to that table, huntin' food. A lot of 'em just go out there to hunt somethin' to eat. And I told my wife, "Unt-uh, I ain't feedin' everybody. There'd be more people at your table than anybody else's. I ain't feedin' the whole crew out here." So we started cookin' our food there at the house, barbecue ribs and stuff, potato salad and stuff. Eat here at the house. We enjoyed it here at the house better than we did out there in all that dirt and stuff. 

Maxwell: Did people come when you barbecued? 

Broomfield: Down here at my house? Unt-uh, no. We didn't have no houseful, unt-uh, unless some of my family, I give them some. 

Maxwell: What did you and your wife do for fun? 

Broomfield: Go to <Laughlin> and <Las Vegas>. She loved that. The same day we got remarried, we went on to <Laughlin>. I won a $3,200 jackpot. That was a dollar machine. She won $400 on a quarter machine. So we enjoyed ourselves that day. And so they give us a free dinner, steak dinner, 'cause we just got remarried. They said, "Y'all look like newlyweds." I said, "We just got remarried." They said, "Well, here's a ticket. Go downstairs and get you a steak dinner." We went down there, they give us the biggest steak they had down there. I couldn't eat it all. My wife said, "Daniel, can you eat it?" I said, "No, I can't eat all this steak." But it was free! 

Maxwell: That's nice. 

Broomfield: Buffet style, was cheap. Of course, you buy four dollars for two plates, eat all you want. Eat all that out that one plate, go around and get you another plate, for that same money that you done paid out for. 

Maxwell: What did you do for fun when you guys were young? 

Broomfield: Oh, we'd go out on weekends, and dance and go on. 

Maxwell: Where would you dance? 

Broomfield: Up there at the El Rancho Grande. 

Maxwell: What was it like in there? 

Broomfield: Oh, it was good. People didn't clown and fight and go on like they do now. Everybody treated each other just the same. 

Maxwell: Was it a nice place to go then? 

Broomfield: Really was. Nobody didn't fight and clown and go on, unt-uh. Everybody got along. 

Maxwell: So you'd go out? 

Broomfield: We used to go fishin' up to Lake Mead and places, and <Roosevelt Lake> and Powell, and leave all your stuff layin' around the camper. Nobody wouldn't bother it. But you'd better not leave nothin' layin' out now. Unt-uh. You come back and you might not even have no wheels under your vehicle. They'll take it off. They'll gitcha. Don't leave nothin' layin' around now out there in the open. Unt-uh. We used to go up there and just leave out stuff layin' at the camp, and we'd be gone up to the lake all day. Come back, all our stuff's still right there. But you can't do it now. They'll steal everything you've got. 

Maxwell: Did Elvira fish too? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah! she loved it. She could eat 'em, too! Uh-huh. She could eat fish ten times a day. 

Maxwell: How'd you cook 'em? 

Broomfield: Well, she just put 'em in hot grease and cook 'em. 

Maxwell: Put 'em in cornmeal? 

Broomfield: Yeah. Put a little salt and pepper and on 'em and throw 'em in that hot grease and let 'em cook. 

Maxwell: Did you cook 'em up there while you were fishing? 

Broomfield: Oh, yeah. That's where it's good, out on the lake. Eatin' all that grit and stuff with it! 

Maxwell: It tastes better. 

Broomfield: It tastes better out, you know, than it do in the house. Now, she can eat fish cold, don’t care if it was cooked yesterday, she'll get up in the morning and eat fish. I said, "Baby, you really love fish, don't you?" She said, "Yeah, I just love fish." She could eat 'em, too, uh-huh. And my dad can eat 'em. He goes fishing every day. It's a wonder he ain't on the lake now. He might be. He goes fishing every day. 

Maxwell: He does! 

Broomfield: Yeah, he's over there fishin' and plantin' them gardens. 

Maxwell: So, he chased you out so he could have a garden, huh? 

Broomfield: Well, he already had a garden. But he just wanted me to move away from over there. So after he got remarried, he told me I had to move. So I just moved. 

Maxwell: Oh, he got remarried? 

Broomfield: Yes. But the other wife died, too. So he ain't got nobody now, but hisself over there. He stays by hisself, too. 

Maxwell: What was his other wife's name? 

Broomfield: Wait a minute, I'll think of it. (pause) Hosey [phonetic spelling]. 

Maxwell: Hosey? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, that was the other wife's name. 

Maxwell: That was her last name? 

Broomfield: Well, her last name was Williams, by him. 

Maxwell: Hosey was her first name? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. She was an older White. She was a White before he and her got married. 

Maxwell: Related to Mr. White? He just passed on about a year ago? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. That was her brother. (long pause) 

Maxwell: What else went on back then? 

Broomfield: (inaudible) Everybody just got along out there, everybody moved out here. Whereas we all came out here, more people started movin' in here then. They find out about <Flagstaff>, so everybody start movin' out here. Everybody got jobs. Most of 'em started buildin' homes and things around out here then. Stuff was cheap then. 

Maxwell: Still cheap? 

Broomfield: No. 

Maxwell: I mean back then. 

Broomfield: Oh, it was cheap then, when all the rest of 'em started movin' in here. 

Maxwell: When did that happen? 

Broomfield: Ooo, way back in the forties. 

Maxwell: So they startin’ movin’ in back then. 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Did the Black folks who lived here before you all came, marry into the people who came new? 

Broomfield: No, they was already married when they came here. They already had families. 

Maxwell: Did their kids marry? 

Broomfield: Since they've been out here? 

Maxwell: Uh-huh. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. Yeah, they was raised up here, and then they started gettin' married here. 

Maxwell: So the old-timers' and the newcomers' families got married? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Was there any problem with that? 

Broomfield: No. Everybody got along. Nobody didn't pick at each other or nothin' around here, so everybody went to work and started buyin' homes and stuff then, buildin' andgt;em homes. (inaudible) Bert Flemons and them, they got a lot of homes, and these others got a lot of homes. I got a brother in one of them homes down there. He lost his wife. Everybody gettin' along. 

Maxwell: Who built the homes? 

Broomfield: Bert Flemons [phonetic spelling] and them. Well, the house was already built, when they started buyin' 'em. 

Maxwell: But who actually did the building on 'em? 

Broomfield: Well, Bert Flemons done built andgt;em, they worked on 'em theyself. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? 

Broomfield: Yeah, they don't hire nobody to do their work. They do it their ownself. See, they're brothers. One brother own a church, down at Riverside Church. 

Maxwell: Which one's the one with all the sons, Jan and Robert and.... Is that Bert? Lives up in Old Town by the tracks? 

Broomfield: Oh, you're talkin' about Lucky. 

Maxwell: Okay, that's a different one, huh? 

Broomfield: They daddy live in <Winslow>. All of the sons and daddy over there. They daddy lived there in <Winslow>. That’s the one I'm talkin' about, their mama passed away. 

Maxwell: Yeah. 

Broomfield: Yeah, in <Winslow>. 

Maxwell: Oh, okay, so that's a different one than the one that.... 

Broomfield: Well, they all can. 

Maxwell: Isn’t one of the Flemons a preacher? 

Broomfield: All of 'em Flemons are preachers. 

Maxwell: All of 'em? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Oh, I didn't know that. 

Broomfield: One of 'em got a church right down here on Riverside. That's Raymond Flemons [phonetic spelling]. And the other one, Louis Flemons, own these houses up there on the hill. He own that house right there where Walter White was stayin' there. 

Maxwell: Is he a preacher, too -Louis? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Is Lucky a preacher? 

Broomfield: No, Lucky ain't nothin' but a streetman. 

Maxwell: Oh, is that why his kids get in so much trouble? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: His wife was a good woman, though, wasn't she? 

Broomfield: Yeah, she was real before she passed away. 

Maxwell: People spoke highly of her. 

Broomfield: Yeah, she was a good worker. She worked at that motel by herself. Didn’t like nobody work with her. But they said that woman could make some beds up! 

Maxwell: Really? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. It didn't take her all day, either. Unt-uh. She was a good woman. 

Maxwell: How'd she end up marrying Lucky then? 

Broomfield: I don't know, they was married when they came here. 

Maxwell: Oh, when did they come? 

Broomfield: Ooo, Lucky and them was out here when I came out here. 

Maxwell: Oh, really? Long time, then. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: Were there many people out here who were street men? 

Broomfield: Well, wasn't too many people here then, unt-uh. See, Lucky burnt up some children some of his own kids. 

Maxwell: Yeah, with a motor, wasn't it? He was cleaning a motor in the bathtub or something? 

Broomfield: In the house. 

Maxwell: He had like a car motor or something? 

Broomfield: Yeah. That's what he was workin' on. 

Maxwell: Tell me about that. 

Broomfield: I don't know. They tell me he burnt some kids up in <Louisiana> before he come here. Then he burned up one here. So I don't know what was wrong with him, workin' on a motor in the house, pourin' gas and stuff on it. That's just like a guy over there, standin' over there tellin' my dad, a Mexican guy, and he was pourin' gas on the gas stove, tryin' to clean the stove with gas! I said, "Now that was the stupidest thing I ever heard! Pourin' gas on the stove with gas. Knowd that was gonna explode!@ He caught on fire. My dad was out there in the yard. He jumped the fence and gonna burn it up. The lil’ baby got burnt up. She was standin' behind the refrigerator, couldn't move. Burned her up right there in the house. 

Maxwell: Oh, gee. 

Broomfield: I said, ALord, mercy.@ My dad said, "Man, you ought to fire him." And that same day, during the Fourth of July, guy pourin' gas in his garage, cleanin' the garage out, set it a-fire. I said, "What's wrong with these people pourin' this gas around here?" I don't fool with gas. I don't even like the smell of gas. Unt-uh. Now, my wife used to love the smell of gas. I said, "Baby, you wanna smell that stuff? I said, A I don't, unt-uh, no siree." I don't like to smell no gas, unt-uh. Yeah, a man was out there cleanin' his garage out, was pourin' gas in there, cleanin' his garage out. Now, that was the stupidest thing I ever heard. Pourin' gas on that! Unt-uh! I don't play with gas -not like that! The only time I put gas is puttin' it in my vehicle. And I don't like nobody around there smokin' with no cigarette. Unt-uh, 'cause that can catch a-fire. Sure will. Burn you up right there, explode on you. Uh-huh. (aside about the weather and closing car windows) 

Maxwell: I'm not sure what else I should ask you. You have some wonderful stories -stories about the people and everything, and how people acted. 

Broomfield: There's a lot of colored people here now, where most people is rentin'. A lot of people got homes now, you know. And so.... I'm glad I got me a home, which I'm payin' for it, but I don't mind. Long as I'm payin' for it, it's mine. 

Maxwell: You said you might go back home to <Mississippi>. 

Broomfield: I ain't goin' back there to live. 

Maxwell: Oh, just to visit? 

Broomfield: Just to visit. 

Maxwell: Does this feel like home -<Flagstaff>? 

Broomfield: Yeah, I've been here practically all my life. 

Maxwell: I would think it would feel like home. 

Broomfield: Yeah, since 1946, and I'm seventy-four. 

Maxwell: Are you glad you came? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: What do you think about <Flagstaff>? 

Broomfield: <Flagstaff> is all right. It ain't <Flagstaff>, it's the people that's in it, some of the peoples that's in it. 

Maxwell: I've heard some people tell me that they thought the government was pretty corrupt here, and they're worried about it. Does it bother you at all? 

Broomfield: Don't nothin' bother me. As long as they don't bother me, I ain't botherin' them. Ain't nothin' you can do about it noway. You can't stop the government. 

Maxwell: Was it like that long ago? 

Broomfield: Well, when I was comin' up, you couldn't do what you really want to do -I don't care if you own your own property or what. See, in them days, the white people had everything goin' their way. So we had to do what they say to do, see. 

Maxwell: What kind of stuff? 

Broomfield: Well, just like workin' for them and all that kind of stuff, you know, [in their fields and things. And so they own ya', back in them days when I was comin' up. They owned people, you know. 

Maxwell: Here, or.... 

Broomfield: No, back home in <Louisiana> and <Mississippi> and places -all back through that-a-way. So they owned Black folks. 

Maxwell: Because they owned all the land and business and stuff? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh, see, you're standin' on their property anyway, so you have to do what they say to do. 

Maxwell: How about when you came out here? 

Broomfield: It wasn't that-a-way when you come out here, unt-uh. It wasn't really that-a-way. 

Maxwell: How'd it feel when you came out here? 

Broomfield: It felt good. 

Maxwell: What made it different? 

Broomfield: Well, a lot of difference in the world back there. 

Maxwell: How was it different? What was it that made it feel different? 

Broomfield: Well, everybody got along, and got used to each other. 

Maxwell: (aside about locked car) To me that sounds like it would be pretty wonderful. 

Broomfield: Yeah, I loved it when I first came out here. Everybody got along so. All the white people got along with us, and we got along with them, so we didn't try to fight and clown each other, and callin' each other names and things. Unt-uh. I know your name and you know mine, so.... And that was it. We run together, and all that. Nobody didn't bother us. 

Maxwell: So when you went out, you might go out with guys on the crew who weren’t Black? 

Broomfield: Yeah, we'd go out together and have a few little drinks and go back home and go to bed. And so we got along real fine, and get up Monday mornin', go to work. 

Maxwell: I guess I was thinking, to go from that feeling of being owned to getting away from that feeling. I would think that would be pretty good. 

Broomfield: Well, see, when I came out here, wasn't too many people here then. Me and my family come out here, and Lloyd came out here, and then more people started comin', you know, after they find out they could get a better job out here, makin' more money. Back in them days, stuff was cheap. But there ain't nuthin' cheap now these days. 

Maxwell: Unt-uh. 

Broomfield: Go to the store now, well, you can catch them steaks sometime on sale over there for $1.10 and twenty cents. So I just get me four or five of 'em right then while they're on sale. Wait 'til they go up, then they go up three or four dollars a steak. So I just go and get four or five of 'em and then give my sister and them, let them cook. I can't stand to see no kid hungry -nobody hungry, unt-uh. So I got some food, I'm likely to give you some of it. So I feeds 'em. I do, I get it to 'em. 

Maxwell: What about the mother of your daughter? Do you want to talk about her? 

Broomfield: She's sick. She's pretty low sick. She's not able to do nuthin' for herself now. 

Maxwell: She lives in town somewhere? 

Broomfield: Yeah, she's over there with her oldest daughter, Roseann. 

Maxwell: How'd you meet her? 

Broomfield: Well, we used to be together when we was kids in <Mississippi>. We were goin' together in <Mississippi> before I came out here. So that's when I came out here, and we still were foolin' around a little. Then Loraine come up, and so right there, that stopped me right there. 

Maxwell: Really? 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. My wife give me blue for three years. For 365 days to the year, my hair commenced gettin' whiter and whiter. (laughter) I couldn't say nuthin'. I couldn't say a word. I said, AWell, maybe she'll quit arguing one day. That went on for three years. 

Maxwell: Three years is a long time. 

Broomfield: My hair commenced gettin' whiter. Everybody said, "Daniel, why you gettin' so white-haired?!" I said, "Don't say nuthin' to me. Go on about your business and let me alone." But my wife was givin' me the blues. I mean, 365 days to the year, until finally she give up. I wouldn't argue back with her. She said, "I can't get no argument out of you." Well, I said, AYou ain’t gonna get any.@ Unt-uh, 'cause I know I done messed up. 

Maxwell: So she didn't know about this old girlfriend? 

Broomfield: Yeah, she knowd about it. And she knowd I was still foolin' around with the woman. 

Maxwell: Oh, she did?! 

Broomfield: Yes. 

Maxwell: But she didn't get mad until she had the baby? 

Broomfield: Well, she got mad at me.... Yeah, she was mad before that. Yes, sir, she was mad before then. I said, "Well, ain't nothin' I can do now. So I’ll take it and go ahead on about my business and don't say nuthin' to her." See, if I'd have said somethin', we'd probably been fightin'. 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Broomfield: Yeah, we'd have got into a fight. She'd have hurted me or either I'd have hurted her. I said, "No, I ain't gonna open my mouth. Let her argue 'til she get tired." Finally she give up one day. She said, "Now, you go and get that baby. We're gonna take her to town and buy her some clothes and shoes." I said, "Lord have mercy, she done quit!" (laughter) I started prayin' to myself, I started gettin' white-headed. I said, "Lord, my hair still kept on gettin' whiter." I said, "Well, she ain't arguin' at me now. Why is my head still gettin' white?" Lord have mercy, I laughed at me. And I cried. I done everything. But I couldn't say nothin' back to her. I said, "Well, she was right. I'm messin' around on her, and she was right about that." So I quit. So the woman over there now is pretty low sick. She's takin' that, what do you call it, dial.... 

Maxwell: Dialysis? 

Broomfield: Yeah, about three times a week. 

Maxwell: What's her name? 

Broomfield: Auntie T. [phonetic spelling] Smith. 

Maxwell: Is she related to Patrick Smith? 

Broomfield: Patrick Smith? No. 

Maxwell: She's not up there across from.... Oh, I'm trying to think of Mrs. Joyce's sister's name. Mrs. Joyce's sister. Starts with a "C." 

Broomfield: Who that? Auntie T.? You're talkin' about Louise. 

Maxwell: I might be. 

Broomfield: You said Patrick? 

Maxwell: Patrick. His mother's Louise? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: Okay, so Auntie T. is different. 

Broomfield: Yeah. See, Auntie T. used to live right there by Patrick and them's house, right there in Brownley Home [phonetic spelling]. But her daughter live way around.... You know Robbie Joe teach school up there, high school? 

Maxwell: Oh, yeah. 

Broomfield: His wife. 

Maxwell: Okay. 

Broomfield: That's Robbie Joe's mother-in-law, Auntie T. Roseann and her, Annie T.'s oldest daughter. Now, Auntie T. got a son down there around <Yuma> somewhere down there, Robbie Joe, Robert Lee. 

Maxwell: Okay. Is Nathan Joe related to them? 

Broomfield: That's Robert's son. 

Maxwell: Yeah, Nathan Joe's the one that I've met more than any of 'em. 

Broomfield: Yeah. Then they got another boy. Robbie Joe got another boy name of Junior, the bigger boy. 

Maxwell: They've got quite a few kids? 

Broomfield: Just two. 

Maxwell: Oh, just those two? 

Broomfield: Just them two boys. 

Maxwell: Well, that's a good story. 

Broomfield: Uh-huh. 

Maxwell: I think we ought to stop now. 

Broomfield: All right. 

Maxwell: Is that okay? 

Broomfield: Okay with me, whatever you want. 

Maxwell: Can we come back and talk to you again some other time? 

Broomfield: Yeah. 

Maxwell: All right. 

Broomfield: You're welcome. 


