RUTH McGEE INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.14

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

[Preliminary chitchat not transcribed.]

This is Brad Cole [with Northern Arizona University Library, Special Collections]. We're in <San Juan New Mexico>. It's February 11, [1998], a little bit after four o'clock in the afternoon. We're here with Ruthie McGee and we're going to ask her some questions about her life, working on Navajo [Reservation] trading posts. [Also present are Elijah Blair, who was in partnership with Roscoe and Ruth in a trading post at one time; Lew Steiger, who is operating the recording equipment; and Karen Underhill, from Northern Arizona University.] 

Cole: I'm going to start by asking you when and where you were born. 

McGee: Okay, I was born in <Farmington> in 1917, February 19, 1917. When I was ten days old, my mother, in a wagon, took me to <Toadlena> in February. Isn't that something? 

Cole: That's amazing. And who were your parents? 

McGee: George and Lucy Bloomfield. 

Cole: And where did they live then? 

McGee: They lived at the trading post at <Toadlena>. 

Cole: So then you grew up at the trading post there? 

McGee: Yes. 

Cole: And how many brothers and sisters did you have? 

McGee: There were eight of us--one sister died when I was real young, three or four. All raised there at <Toadlena>, went to school there till the eighth grade. Then we had to be farmed out to go to high school and college. 

Cole: And where were you farmed out to? 

McGee: Oh, I lived with some friends that had Newcomb Trading Post, which is about fifteen miles from us. Their daughter was my best friend, and I lived with them for two years, and then I lived in <Springville Utah>, one year with an aunt, and went to Albuquerque one year, and then went to <Provo Utah>, BYU, to college--just went there one year is all, to college. 

Cole: And growing up on the trading post, what were some of your memories or remembrances of being a small girl, small child there? 

McGee: It was a great way to live, really neat. We had a real nice home, Daddy and Mother, and made a real nice home. Daddy had nice yards and had really made a lot of beautiful rock work with gardens and lawns. We lived right near the mountain, and that was fun, because we were just like a bunch of goats, runnin' up and down the mountain (chuckles) having fun, and growing up there with my brothers and sisters. What else? 

Cole: Did your mom and dad put you to work in the trading post? 

McGee: No, we didn't.... Well, my older sister, Fern, and Vernon worked in the store a lot--I didn't. I didn't work in the store. Probably my brother Vernon ________--yes, he worked in the store, too, but I don't think that us three younger girls worked in the store. Marilene might have, after she was married. But we were just kids growin' up, havin' fun. 

Cole: Did you have relationships with the Navajo children or the Navajo people? 

McGee: Oh, we went to school with them. They had the government school where most of the children went to school, but because of our school, we had to have so many, and I don't know how many that was. We had to have so many children to be able to have a county-paid teacher, and our state paid teachers. There was the minister and his family--Christian for a minister and our family. And so we recruited some of the Navajo children that lived close around to come in, so that we'd have enough children to qualify for a school. We had one teacher [who] taught all eight grades in one room. 

Cole: Did those Navajo children actually come and live at the trading post?, or were they close enough.... 

McGee: No, those children were close enough that they could just walk to school like we did. The ones at the government school boarded there. They were a boarding school. But the ones that went to our school just were our neighbors. 

Cole: Did you ever ride horses or anything like that at that age? 

McGee: Yes. In fact, my father bought me the prettiest little filly, and I rode her a lot. I think I was the only one of the children that he bought a horse for (chuckles) just because I liked to ride. 

Cole: As you were growing up, did you imagine that you would become a trader at some point, then? 

McGee: Probably never thought about that, but I was sure glad that I met a nice Indian trader. 

Cole: When did you meet your husband? Tell us a little bit about that. 

McGee: In 1936. I met him Fourth of July 1936. Married him on the thirtieth of August. When I saw a good thing.... Well, in fact, he told me--I was gonna go back to school--and he said, "Either you go back to school, or we get married." So we got married! (laughter) 

Cole: So did you meet him at your parents' trading post (

McGee: No.) 

Cole: or in town? 

McGee: I met him at a dance in <Farmington>. My sister and my brother and I and some other young people had gone from <Toadlena> up to Mesa Verde and spent the Fourth of July and then came back to <Farmington> and went to a dance there. And my kids sure look at me sort of askance when I tell 'em that there was also a bar there. (laughter)

But before this, I have to tell you--and it's in Roscoe's history here, that I have. My mother and dad were having a hard time at the trading post because Daddy had bought up a lot of sheep from all of the other Indian traders, and they trailed them to <Gallup>. They didn't haul them, they had to trail them. And when they got there--they were contracted--and when they got there, the contractor couldn't honor the contract, and so they just had the sheep and it was storming, and they just lost all the sheep. And Dad was responsible, because he'd bought up all of the other trading posts that were close. So he was in financial trouble, and so he went to work for the government, left the store for Vernon, my brother, to run. What he was doing--and again, it's [in his] history--I'll probably give you a copy of that--they were using Navajo labor, and if the Navajos--they were just working, they only got $1.50 a day--but if they had a horse and a scraper, they got $3.50, I think it was. And they were building reservoirs and that kind of work, and Daddy was the supervisor over that. And they had stopped at the Red Mesa Trading Post, because that was an area where they were working part of the time, and met my husband and Jewel, who you visited with, and they liked the young man, and Daddy told him, "Well, I've got three pretty daughters. I would like you to meet them." (laughter)

So at the dance--back to the dance--this young man came up and asked me to dance, and I said, "Oh, I can't dance with you, I don't know you." He said, "Well, I know you, so come on and dance." So we danced. (laughter) And then we had a date the next night, went to a movie. My folks had a house in <Shiprock>, a government house that they were living in, and that's where I stayed instead of going back to <Toadlena>, so I could go on this date. That's how it happened. 

Cole: And that was Roscoe? 

McGee: That was Roscoe. 

Cole: I've heard everybody refer to him as "Rock." Was that a nickname then? 

McGee: That was a nickname, Rock. Uh-huh, that's what I called him. When I met him, he was Roscoe. (laughs) 

Cole: And where was he from? 

McGee: He was born in <Fruitland>, but he went to work. Even when he was in high school, he went to work at <Lukachukai>, the first time he was in a trading post. He worked there the summer--and for Kennedy? 

Blair: Earl. 

McGee: Earl Kennedy, yeah. And then I can't tell you which year he was there--Red Rock--and worked for _____ Carlos there. It was while he was working at Red Rock that there was Shel Dustin and Bert Dustin had the old Progressive Mercantile where all the traders in this area bought their goods. And so they heard about this Red Mesa Trading Post that was for sale. An Indian man by the name of Barton owned it. So Bert Dustin and Sheldon Dustin backed Roscoe and gave him the money to buy it with, to buy <Red Mesa>. And this is the agreement and it's interesting. This is the legal document [for the] buying [of] <Red Mesa>. That was on the fourth day of October 1953. So he moved there with just one room. When they went out there, Roscoe and a friend, Rigg Cardon [phonetic spelling] went out there, and all they had for a week was oatmeal (laughter) because that's all there was there. (laughter) That was interesting.

I'd like to go now into... if you want to talk about Roscoe. 

Cole: Sure, that'd be great. (quick tape check) 

McGee: I was so glad to find that. 

Cole: I'm glad you did. _____________. I'm curious, Ruthie, do you speak Navajo? 

McGee: A little--store Navajo, not much else, not like _____. Roscoe could speak, sit down and visit with the Indians, just like a friend, you know. 

Cole: Did you learn your store Navajo as a small child? 

McGee: Partly. And some Navajo when we were growin' up. I was lazy and didn't learn their language, and I'm sorry about that, because it is a beautiful language, it's a soft language. If I was in the house, and in the store, I could tell as soon as a white man came--just the tone was different. 

Cole: So once you married Roscoe, what trading post did you move to then? 

McGee: To <Red Mesa>. He had built one room onto the store, and also a wareroom. He did add a wareroom, and a cellar that he built. It was one big room. We had kitchen, bedroom, and dining room and everything in that one room.

I’ll just read you a bit. (quoting from Roscoe's history) He said, "There was no foundation and the rocks walls of the store and lots of unwanted creatures would just come through the holes in the wall and in the floor. My brother Joe and I did not like the sandrock floors"--they had sandrock floors first--"with the mud in between the rocks, 'cause when you swept the floors, you soon had cracks between them, and you would have to keep filling the cracks with mud. We decided to put a cement floor over the rock floors, and we thought it would keep out the varmints and centipedes.

"A few months after, things were going along fairly well, and we bought about 4 two-by-fours and twelves. And we would lay one piece at a time, and we hauled...." They laid a wood floor over that. This is a little disconnected. Okay, guess I'll just have to read it like it is. "We were going along fairly well, we'd lay one piece at a time. Then we hauled rocks and gravel in our pickup, from the wash about ten miles from the store. And every time we could get a few dollars ahead, we would buy a few bags of cement and move the two-by-fours over, about four feet across the width of the room, and mix the cement with a shovel in a wheelbarrow, and pour that piece. And then after a few days, when we could get a little more money, we'd pour some more cement. And finally, after about a year or two, we had the floors all done, except for the room we lived in." I think he's talking about the store floors. "We decided to put a wood floor in this room, so we put in two-by-fours over the rock floor and leveled them, and nailed the floor of grooved lumber over them. The mud plaster walls were not straight, so in places the floor did not fit against the wall close, and we didn't worry about that much at this time.

"We always had a rifle and a shotgun loaded, leaning against the wall, because we never knew when we might need one--with the sheep and goats in our corrals and the coyotes and the lynx cats would come and kill the sheep and goats. They would come around the store at night. One evening we were sitting and reading and I looked over at the other side of the room and a rattlesnake had his head about six inches out of the space where the floor didn't fit against the wall, looking us over. No big deal to us. I just reached over, picked up the shotgun, and shot his head off. (laughter) The only bad thing about it, part of the top of the floor disappeared with the head. (laughter) This happened three or four times, so as we had not put a sub-floor in, we laid another grooved lumber floor to the wall, and then we filled the fireplace with rock and worked and plastered over them like the rest of the wall, and bought a small coal stove to use. So with the cook stove, the room was warm. And while we had snakes and other varmints under the floor, they couldn't come through and live with us."

That was a little disconnected there. I don't know if you want me to read all this. 

Cole: We can.... 

McGee: I'll just read a little bit, this little part. "Times were real hard and no work and no money in 1933 and 1934. Jewel and I lived very carefully, even to what we ate, to make a go of it. We bought lambs from the Indians as soon as they came down off the mountain in October. In 1933 we paid four cents a pound for them. We bought about 500 head, and we drove them to <Shiprock> and sold them to Bruce Bernard at <Shiprock> for 4½ cents a pound. I think they averaged about $2.50 to $3.00 a head. Jewel trapped coyotes and bobcats and foxes and badgers all winter while I ran the store to help out.

"In 1935 and 1936 and 1937, the government, under Franklin D. Roosevelt, started many public works programs. About all I knew very much about was that program that affected the Reservation and the Navajos. Navajos were given jobs with the BIA, bosses, supervision, developing springs, building reservoirs for stock water and all types of erosion control work. They would pay the Navajo $1.50 a day for hand labor, and if the Indian had a team and a scraper, they would pay them $3.50 a day." And I told you that. "And they had to buy hay and oats for their horses out of this. These programs saved the Navajos' and traders' lives. I don't think we could have made it otherwise, as sheep, goats, and cattle, and wool, and mohair were hardly worth anything. We bought a few Navajo rugs and saddle blankets, but couldn't get very much for them. The government, during these years--1934, 1935, 1936, and 1937--carried forth a great reduction program, making Navajo stockmen sell their sheep, goats, cattle, and horses for give-away prices." And I think this is interesting. "And they had to sell them or go to jail. They paid $1.00 a head for sheep and goats, $5.00 for horses, and $7.50 for cows. These were supposed to have been hauled out and butchered to be eaten or canned for food. Roads were poor and it was impossible to haul all of them off the Reservation, so thousands were shot or killed and dumped into washes or other places and left to rot." I thought that part was interesting to maybe put in this. 

Cole: You weren't married at that time? 

McGee: No, [I was] living at <Toadlena> during that time. 

Underhill: Do you remember that at your parents' trading post? 

McGee: Yes. But those were really hard times, but we didn't know it. 

Cole: Do you remember 'em actually slaughtering the animals at <Toadlena>, too? 

McGee: No, I don't remember that. I think I was probably--well, I wasn't too young. I should have known it. I was probably most of the time away at school, during that time. 

Blair: See, this is where--you know, I told you all this is what happened. I'm sure that Rock told me this, 'cause he experienced it. Other people said different things, you know, but Rock saw this, that's what happened. 

McGee: It was a hard time. And then I told you about this, about how my father and mother.... My mother always went with Dad, camped out and lived in a tent out there on the Reservation while he was doing this work. And I told you about that, so I won't read that. He said quite often they'd come by and stay with them there at the trading post. He said, "I liked them real well. I visited with them, I found out they had an unmarried teenage girl. Ruth was the older one, and so I decided I would like to meet her." (laughter) 

Cole: Did you ever suspect your dad was a matchmaker like that? 

McGee: No. I did hear Dad say once that he was a nice boy, but he swore a lot (chuckles) and sometimes told not very nice stories. (laughter) Otherwise, he liked him real well. I told about this, anyway. 

Cole: Well, once you arrived at the trading post with Rock, did you become more active in trading yourself, too? 

McGee: After a while. The Navajos didn't have much regard for the women a lot of the time. Well, I can remember they did for my mother, but when we drove up to the store after we'd gone on a little trip for a honeymoon, the Indians all came out, and they looked so glad. And I thought, "Oh, they're glad to see me!" They didn't pay any attention to me--they were glad to have Roscoe back at the store. They didn't pay much attention to me until after I'd been there at the store for a while and finally had our first baby. That was quite an experience. We took our first baby out there, and that was a long ways at that time. How long did it take to go on those roads? I forget. Seemed like it took us four or five hours on those roads at that time, to go out there. 

Blair: Sixty miles. 

McGee: From <Kirtland> to.... It was quite a trip. Anyway, out there without not knowing anything about babies. And then our old neighbor lady, Kits’iilii, Kits’iilii’s wife, we called her. She came in, she had her blanket on. She took my baby and wrapped her up in that blanket and hugged her right up to her. (laughs) I thought, "Oh, dear!" I didn't know if that was a good idea or not, but they just really loved our babies and helped us take care of them. That was a good experience. She was a good old.... 

Cole: Well, when you carried on trade, or Rock carried on trade, how did that work? 

McGee: What do you mean? 

Cole: Like, if you could, maybe tell us about what a typical experience [was like] when a Navajo would come in to get goods or whatever. 

McGee: Okay. Well, our store then wasn't like the stores now. We had what we called a counter, and they had the bull pen. We always took everything off the shelf and put it on the counter that they wanted to buy. I didn't work in the store much at first--only on the days that Roscoe would have to go to town to get merchandise, and then he'd leave me to run the store. I remember one time, I was taking care of it, and like I said, I didn't speak Navajo as well. Now diisgis means that you're kind of addlepated. And hanidziih means that you can talk. And so the Indian was tryin' to tell me that (laughs) I could talk some, and I thought he was tellin' me I was crazy. (laughter) That made me feel pretty cross about him. But I could trade. I knew enough that I could trade. It was all with no cash. They sometimes would have a goat skin or a sheep skin to sell. We'd maybe give him a dime for it, and they'd trade it right back for a bottle of pop. So about all we had in the cash drawer was dimes and nickels, and maybe a fifty-cent piece or two. That's the way we traded, that's all. 

Cole: When the Navajos would come, would they mostly come in on horses, wagons? Would they stay? 

McGee: Sometimes with wagons, but unless they lived way down by the river, they didn't stay all night. There was a hogan there, and [it] was available for them to stay in at night. It was just a business where it was credit business. We credited them until they had their wool to sell or their sheep to sell, and credit on their pawn. Which--I don't think Roscoe ever sold a piece of pawn of anybody's. Sometimes he would hang them out so they could kind of realize it, and they didn't like that--they didn't like other people to know that their pawn hadn't been redeemed. So sometimes that kind of encouraged them to come in and take their pawn out. But he didn't ever sell their pawn, he carried them along. 

Cole: Were you and Roscoe given nicknames? 

McGee: Well, he was ‘Atsii’ »ichíí’. That means "red hair," because he had red hair. And I was just ‘Amá yázhí, "little mother." (laughter) 

Cole: And how long did you stay at <Red Mesa>? 

McGee: Well, until we sold it to Brad for the first time.... It was in late 1936 when Brad Blair was working for us. And Roscoe's father was killed. Roscoe and his father had bought the Mancos Creek Trading Post together, and his father was building it, had moved it up on the highway. When they bought it, it was just down by the river, just where I don't know. I have a picture of it here. 

Blair: Ruth, ______ Brad came after the war, 1945. 

McGee: Well, we went to <Mancos Creek> when Sharon was a baby, and that was in 1937. 

Blair: So then who was at <Red Mesa>? 

McGee: I thought Brad was. Couldn't have been? 

Blair: Brad was in the Marine Corps during World War II. He was discharged in 1945, so... 

McGee: Well, we were married in 1936, and Grace was born in 1937, and Sharon was born in 1938. So I guess maybe it was about 1938, 1939. I sure thought Brad was there, running the trading post. 

Blair: Brad was born in 1921. 

McGee: Well, I'm mixed up there. I do know that we went to <Mancos Creek> ... in 1938. Might have been 1939 because Sharon wasn't crawling, she was just scooting around. Thirty-nine. You're sure of that? 

Blair: He was in the Marine Corps four years, all during the war. He went in, in 1941 and he got out in 1945. 

McGee: Well, okay, I'm mixed up on that. And I don’t know who took it. 

Blair: Just a couple of years. You could have had someone else in there, which really doesn't matter. 

McGee: Well, Roscoe was working back and forth between the two trading posts and we had to go to <Mancos Creek> because his father was killed in an automobile accident, and we had to go there and finish building that building and taking care of it. Then Roscoe worked between the two, and I don't know who was running it. I sure thought Brad was. And I thought we sold him a half-interest in the store then, right after that, at <Red Mesa>. 

Blair: You did in 1945. 

Cole: So Roscoe kept an interest in <Red Mesa> as well as <Mancos>? 

McGee: We had that till we sold it to Jewel and Lavoy. And in between that time, Jewel and Roscoe bought <Mexican Water>, and had Lij to go there. I think we sold you an interest in.... 

Blair: Not in <Mexican Water>. I stayed there four years and you sold me an interest in it. I went to <Aneth> (

McGee: Oh, that's right.) Rap Tanner [phonetic spelling], and Roscoe bought out Rap's interest, and then Roscoe and Ruth and I became partners in <Aneth>. 

McGee: That's right. 

Blair: See, there was Roscoe and Kelly and Jewel, actually, in <Mexican Water>, is that right? 

McGee: No, Kelly was over at <Sweetwater>. 

Blair: Did he have a little interest in <Mexican Water>? 

McGee: Just Jewel and Roscoe. 

Blair: Anyway, I went to <Aneth> after that. Then I became a partner with Roscoe__________. 

McGee: Roscoe had bought <Sweetwater> while Kelly was in prison in <Germany>, so that Kelly would have something to come home to. And so that's where Kelly went. 

Cole: What was the main product that you or your husband purchased to sell? Was it livestock, rugs, or all of that? 

McGee: Oh, livestock, wool, and rugs, hides-- whatever the Navajos had to sell. 

Cole: And what would Roscoe do with the livestock once he accumulated a lot of it? 

McGee: Well, first, we always trailed our sheep. As long as I was out there, we had to trail 'em to <Farmington>. And I have a good picture of that. That's a good one of that. Brought them in. That was a fun experience. 

Blair: We did at Mexican--Rock... [When we worked at the?] Rock. 

Underhill: I've never herded sheep, what's it like? 

McGee: Herdin' sheep? Well, I didn't herd sheep, the Navajos herded. Roscoe would go out every day with 'em. When we were at <Mancos Creek>, he brought sheep in. That was when the third child came along. I was in the hospital with him, and Roscoe was bringin' the sheep from <Mancos Creek>, which is the other side of <Shiprock>, to <Farmington>. He didn't come to see me the whole ten days, and I was sure mad at him (laughter) at that time. 

Cole: Did you continue to ride horses once you were married? 

McGee: We rode till Roscoe was gone, died, but he didn't ever want me to ride without him, so I just haven't ridden a horse since he left. But I don't have any desire to. What else was you gonna ask me? 

Cole: I was sort of curious about, were you and Roscoe involved in the Railroad Retirement Program, or the Railroad Worker Program? 

McGee: Yes, and that was a blessing for the Navajos and the traders, too. And like Roscoe said in [his history], it was really a blessing for them, they could go off and earn pretty good money. And since they didn't have their stock anymore, these railroad checks were really a blessing to both of us. 

Cole: What was your overall impression of the Navajo people you worked with? 

McGee: Good people. Good people. Couldn't ask for better people than they were. 

Cole: Do you feel like you learned anything from them? 

McGee: Yeah. A lot. Patience and kindness. One experience I'll just tell you how they were so good to us. We had these gas tanks that you pumped the gas up on, and there was an outlet, I guess, for the air--an air outlet is what it was. And my little kids were probably six, seven, eight--in there--and ______ went out and struck a match by this outlet. So here was this fire comin' out. I was just going, like a mother, berserk, scared to death we could all blow up. And Roscoe calmly goes in, gets the fire extinguisher. He did jump over the counter. (laughter) Put the fire out. I was sittin' down on the porch, sittin' in front of the store, just cryin' away 'cause I was so upset. And this old man that we called "Sneak," he was a great big Navajo man, wore a big hat with a high crown and everything. He came over and he put his arm around me, and he said it was all right, all right. And then he went in the store and he said, "You go out there and take care of her!" Told Roscoe to go out and take care of me. And then sometimes when I was havin' to carry coal in the house, they'd come, the old men would come and help me carry the coal in. Just kind things like that. They were caring people. 

Cole: Do you feel they learned anything from you and Rock? 

McGee: Oh, I don't know. (chuckles) I hope they learned that we were honest people--and we were. I think Roscoe was an honest Indian trader. You hear about the crooked Indian traders a lot, but I always felt like Roscoe was a good, honest.... He tried to be fair with them, and helped them where he could. 

Cole: Did you have the opportunity to be involved in many Navajo ceremonies, or did Rock? 

McGee: Not much, not like Carolyn and Brad did. I don't know why we didn't. Roscoe did go. And when I was growing up we used to go to their ceremonies--their yé’ii bicheiis and their squaw dances and things like that--but didn't really participate in them. I think Roscoe would go--I never did go to a marriage, but Roscoe did, was invited to them. I really didn't like going to their yé’ii bicheiis and things. It was interesting to me, but it was so much smoke, and I was so uncomfortable. We did go a lot. 

Cole: You mentioned your three children. How many children did you have? 

McGee: We had seven. 

Cole: And did all of them grow up at trading posts? 

McGee: Well, until.... When the oldest one was six, we tried to send her off to school, to live with my husband's mother, but we'd go and get her every weekend and she'd cry because we'd take her back. So, we’d keep her out of school. She went to school about half the time that year. So the next year, I moved to <Farmington>. From then on I was only weekends at the trading post--and summers, we spent summers. When Elijah and Clay would go on vacation, we'd go to <Mexican Water>, take care of it. 

Blair: My relief help. 

Cole: How did the children like living at the trading post? 

McGee: They liked it. It was a good way to grow up, a good place to grow up. My mother always kinda worried because we weren't exposed to all the things that the children in town and cities were exposed to, but then my Aunt ______ said, "They're not exposed to a lot of things that wouldn't be so good for them." And that's right, we weren't. We had a good life at the trading posts--secure, that's a good secure [life]. And I think my children feel the same way. When I hear them talk, they feel like it was a good, secure way to grow up. 

Cole: You sort of seem to be describing the trader sort of almost like a real servant of the community you worked in. What other kinds of services? Did you do anything with the mail, or cashing checks, or anything like that? 

McGee: Well, of course we cashed their checks, 'cause that was the only.... Roscoe would always go to the bank before their payday to be sure we had cash enough to cash their checks. My father and mother were like "doctors" to a lot of them, helped them. Came to them for advice. And I think they came to Roscoe for advice a lot, what they were to do. And when there was a death, they were always there to help out for something like that. 

Cole: Did you ever have a post office at any of your trading posts? 

McGee: Not at <Red Mesa>. There was a post office at <Toadlena>. My mother was the postmistress there. Then my sister Grace was postmistress after her. No, mail was few and far between at <Red Mesa>. (chuckles) We were lucky to get mail once a week. At first, when we first married, sometimes it'd be three months in the wintertime, between mail. (chuckles) 

Cole: How did you get your news from the outside world, then? 

McGee: We had a radio. It was run by what we called the wind charger. It charged a battery, and Roscoe would only let us have it on in the evenings, so he could listen to the news. And that's how we heard about the World War, when we declared war. And then, of course, we finally got what we called the power plant, and we had electricity and refrigerators and lights. 

Cole: What were the power plants? 

McGee: They were Delcos. Isn't that right? Seems like they were Delco. Were they diesel? 

Blair: The first one was a Delco gasoline plant, small one, and later on we went to a diesel, which was a Woody diesel. 

McGee: Oh, that's right. 

Blair: Witte. One-cylinder Witte, 10KW. That's what we all ran--<Red Mesa>, <Mexican Water>, whatever. But when I first went to <Mexican Water>, they had this little 5KW which actually was a gasoline Delco. Actually, I think it was, is what you were thinkin' about. 

McGee: They were wonderful! (laughter) It was really wonderful to have a refrigerator. (laughter) 

Blair: When we got the Witte’s--see, it ran all the time. The original ones only ran when you wanted power in the evening. The diesel ran all the time so you had power all the time. We was in Utopia ____________. 

McGee: Yeah, we really were livin' it up! (laughs) 

Cole: Did you see much impact from World War II at the trading post? 

McGee: I don't think we felt it as much as they did in towns. Of course we were rationed with our sugar and gasoline and things like that. But otherwise, I don't think we felt it that much. Roscoe did sign up for the draft, but they didn't call him up, because I guess they felt he was needed at the trading post. 

Cole: Were there any Navajos that you know of that were drafted or enlisted? 

McGee: Yes, some of them went, but I don't know whether they were drafted or volunteered, but they did go _____. Ralph Begay, from <Sweetwater>, I remember particularly. Oh, who was it from <Red Mesa>? I can't remember. 

Cole: Sort of curious, because I know that a lot of Navajos would go away to boarding school and you had the railroad man, et cetera. Did you have any part in helping families communicate to each other? 

McGee: Well, at <Red Mesa>, a lot of those children did have to go off to school. They had started to school at <Teec Nos Pos>, and then they bused them in buses to there. But mostly they didn't go to school. They sure didn't like going, being taken away from their homes, put in boarding schools. In fact, there at <Toadlena>, they'd run away, a lot of the time. They'd have to go and get 'em and bring 'em back. They liked being with their families. They didn't want to be away from home. But it was a good thing for them to become educated. But I've heard my dad tell about how there in <Shiprock> where they'd run away, and Mr. Shelton, who was the superintendent there, would tie 'em up to a post. Now, I think that was bad. That was a bad thing to do. But to try to teach 'em not to run away was what he was tryin' to do. I guess he felt like he had to be really tough with 'em, to teach 'em not to run away. That was not a good way to treat 'em. That's my feeling. 

Cole: Yeah. So do you remember much about being involved with the United Indian Traders Association, or Roscoe's involvement? 

McGee: Oh, Roscoe was involved from the very beginning with it. Very involved, in fact. (sigh) What do you call yourself? 

Blair: Director. 

McGee: He was one of the directors, very first directors, and went back with when they went back to <Washington DC> to try to bring about better relationships between the government and the Indian traders. He was one of them that went back there. He was involved up until the time he died. 

Cole: Did he have a lease for the Red Mesa Post, do you know? Or how.... 

McGee: Well, at first it was no lease, it was just like--when we first went out there, it was like you--it wasn't a lease, it was just like you owned it, we owned the store. But then (sigh) I don't know when they started putting out these.... Do you? 

Blair: BIA started issuin' annual leases and... Actually dealt with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and they sent annual leases out, and you renewed 'em every year. 

McGee: That's right. 

Blair: Until later--then the tribe--I don't know what period it started, 'cause.... 

McGee: That was about the time that we moved off the Reservation, was when the tribe started.... Well, we didn't move off, but Roscoe and I weren't out there that much after that. So he was out [there], but I wasn't. 

Blair: And the leases probably went up until 1955. That's when we got the twenty-five-year leases. That's where Roscoe was in <Washington> to do this negotiation and leases. 

McGee: Trying to get the leases longer. 

Blair: Yeah. 

McGee: Actually, those leases were a big headache, in my opinion. It sort of put the trader in a bad position. It felt like that, because he had to bribe 'em to get 'em a lot of times. True. Not supposed to say that. (pause) Oh, it's just my grandson. Tell 'em to be quiet. Or can you just cut it off for a [second]? (tape turned off and on) 

Cole: So you were talking about the leases and why you thought those were a problem. 

McGee: Well, it was probably good in the end. 

Cole: Do you remember any other issues the Association was involved in, or any of their social events? Or does anything come to mind about that? 

McGee: (whispers) They were pretty wild. 

Cole: Pretty what? 

McGee: (laughs) I shouldn't have said it! They were pretty wild. (laughter) They had a good time. They had a good time, and they also had good meetings, and I think solved a lot of problems--at the meetings. I was more interested in the social part of it. 

Cole: What was that like? 

McGee: Dinner, dance--and a lot of drinkin'--which I didn't like. (laughter) I don't think wives ever did. I don't remember you and Brad ever doing anything like that. 

Blair: We didn’t get out and drink much. May have had us a drink, but not excessive______. 

McGee: They didn't, they didn’t. Just... It's a little worldly for me. 

Cole: Your trading post in <Mancos>, was that off the Reservation? 

McGee: <Mancos Creek>? (

Cole: Yeah.) That was on the Ute Reservation. 

Cole: Did you see any difference between working at a post there, versus working at one on the Navajo Reservation? 

McGee: Not that much. The Utes were a little different people, but mostly the same. You probably had Utes at <Aneth>, too. 

Blair: The trade was a lot of Navajos, like <Mancos Creek>, 'cause it’s right on the water, see, so you'd get probably more Navajo than you'd think ______ as you did the [route?], or at least ___________. 

McGee: Well, it was mostly with Navajos, but we had a few Utes that came in and traded there. (pause) They were a little different, Utes were--to me. 

Blair: They were different. 

Underhill: How were they different? 

McGee: Not as kindly a people, really. Maybe I just felt that, I don't know. I don't know. 

Blair: ________ friendly, harder to get to know. A little bit stuff like that. Yeah, a little harder to get, to really, __________ Navajos she said was real tolerant and friendly, accepting. Utes are a little bit more reserved, I think. 

McGee: And it was a different business with them. I don't remember them having any rugs or anything like that. And most of our business was like that. I think Roscoe would sit down with his ladies who brought their rugs in, and show them how they could make them better. I really feel like he developed what we call the Red Mesa Outline. I mean, he helped the Indian ladies to bring [out] this beautiful Red Mesa Outline rug. 

Cole: Were there any particular weavers that come to mind, that you remember, that were exceptional? 

McGee: I could, but now I'm blank. 

Cole: You'll think of it in the middle of the night! (laughter) 

McGee: I know the Layman [phonetic spelling] lady, and I don't know what her first name was. I know it-- Daisy Layman I think it was, made beautiful Outline rugs. And Sneak's wives--he had two wives--Sneak's wives would make beautiful Red Mesa Outlines. In fact, it felt like they were almost the best. ________ I have one of their rugs, it's really nice. The Kits’iiliis brought in nice rugs, too. And then Roscoe liked the Two Grey Hill rugs, and so he had bought a couple from my father and took them over there and did get some of the ladies there to start making the Two Grey Hill rug in the natural colors, and I have a few of those, too. They look just like the ones that were made at Two Grey Hills and <Toadlena>. 

Cole: You mentioned that the one fellow had two wives. Was that a common thing with Navajo, do you know? 

McGee: Not real often, but he did--sisters that he was married to. The government frowned on that. (child runs up to Ruth and whispers: Grandma, ____ I got some new knee-pads!) 

Cole: And who's this? 

McGee: This is my great-grandson, Jonah, and his grandma, Reggie. 

Cole: Can you say hello, Jonah? (apparently he's too shy) 

McGee: (in low voice, to the child) Okay, you can go. Go with Reggie. That’s a good boy. 

Cole: How do you feel that trading has changed over time from when you first started, maybe until you finally got out of it? 

McGee: Oh, how can you express it? It used to be-- I would call it a friendly relationship. Now, it's commercial. I don't know how else to explain it. 

Cole: When did Roscoe and you finally sell out of the trading business? 

McGee: Well, I sold <Mexican Water>--my part of <Mexican Water>--after he died. I couldn't handle all of that. It was all I could do to just take care of this. And we had sold <Red Mesa> to Lavoy.... (shuffles papers) I thought I had that document. I'm not sure if I do or not. (shuffles papers) I'm getting nervous now. Col e: You mentioned how trading changed over time. Did you see a similar kind of change in the Navajo culture? 

McGee: Uh-huh. As they become more educated. And I think it's wonderful. 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

McGee: A lot of people say that they've become more arrogant and pushy. I don't know, but I see these young people, educated, being able to just go forward and do wonderful things. And I'm pleased to see them be able to do this, to better their lives. 

Cole: What are some of your favorite memories of being in the trading business? 

McGee: (big sigh) Well, I enjoyed the--(phone rings) I think Reggie’ll get it. I enjoyed our relationship with the Navajo people--they're good people. I enjoyed that, their friendship. And I enjoyed being at the trading post, it was a good life. I don't know just how you want me to answer that. 

Cole: Any way you'd like to. That's great, like that. 

McGee: As far as family, it certainly brought about a close family relationship, unit--I feel like. But as far as trading with the Navajo, they're our friends. 

Cole: I'm sort of curious, to backtrack a little bit, I know that you at one time hired Elijah to work for you. Maybe tell us a little bit about that, and also maybe did you hire other very young people? 

McGee: Well, Brad was pretty young when he came. We nearly always had somebody to help us. Well, not always at the store. When I married Roscoe, he had an older man working for him, Buke Moppin [phonetic spelling]. And he was quite an old character--just swore like a [hucan?]. (all chuckle) And I wasn't used to that....

What were we talking about? (laughter) You just brought that memory back. 

Underhill: Why did you and Roscoe stay in the business? 

McGee: Why did we stay in the business? Well, maybe we didn't know any better. We liked it, it was a good way to live. And then Roscoe and his brothers bought what we called the Benerd [phonetic spelling] Ranch and the Rimhall [phonetic spelling] Ranch out where Nappy [phonetic spelling] is now, and they began buying up Navajo cattle to put there. In fact, that's why they originally bought that land, was to put the Navajo cattle that we bought, to take them to. And then we just finally decided we would raise registered cattle, registered stock. That had nothing to do with trading posts, except that we did buy the stock and put it there.



