C. J. BABBITT INTERVIEW

June 13 or 18, 1949

George Babbitt C.llection, 57-2



Followed by a TV or radio interview where George Babbitt is one of three guests.

Subject: <Grand Canyon> Council of the Boy Scouts of America





[Tr.'s note: A third man is present and makes a few comments. Although he is never introduced, George Babbitt refers to him as Mr. Snow.]



[BEGIN SIDE A]



This is Monday morning, June 13, 1949. We are going to have a little interview with C. J. Babbitt, the only living member of the five original Babbitt brothers of <Flagstaff Arizona>, who in the early days came out and started a large business empire (unclear) recognized as one of the outstanding in the western <United States>.



George 



George Babbitt: When did you come out, Uncle Charlie? When did the Babbitt men come out? What year was that? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: (unclear) father? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: Well, when you came out, did you come out with Uncle Dave or Uncle Will? Who was it came out together? 



C. J.: They come out first. 



George: Who was that, Uncle Dave and Uncle Will? 



C. J.: There were five brothers all together, come out in February. 



George: That was in '86 [1886] was it? 



C. J.: (unclear) '86. 



George: What did they do then? Did they start a cow outfit? Or did each one of the brothers go into a different line of business? 



C. J.: They bought a thousand head of cattle (unclear). 



Snow: You came from <Cincinnati>, didn't you? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: You were five brothers? 



C. J.: Yeah, (unclear). 



George: Uncle Dave started a hardware store, wasn't it? 



C. J.: Well, he got married right after he come out here. He went back East and got married, and then he kind of quit the ranch, started a little store right out there. 



George: Was that right on the same corner this building now occupies? 



C. J.: No, not on the corner. It was between the corner. 



George: Oh yeah, it's where the hardware department is now, in that area? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: And then you and Uncle Billy were cowboys, wasn't that it? 



C. J.: Oh, yeah, we were cowboys. 



George: What did my father do? 



C. J.: Oh, he did lots of things. 



George: He ran a restaurant (unclear). 



C. J.: (unclear) up there with Brannen, you know. 



George: Oh, the Brannen Store on the front street there. 



C. J.: Yeah. Then he had a restaurant. I don't know, I haven't [thought?] about him. I guess you could get it out of a paper (unclear). 



George: (unclear). What about Uncle Ed? He came out later on, didn't he, Uncle Charlie? Didn't Uncle Ed come out later? 



C. J.: Yeah. He come out later and then went back. 



George: Didn't Uncle Dave go out on this <Navajo Reservation> on an expedition right after he got here? I think he told me that was about the first thing he did when he came to <Flagstaff>. 



C. J.: Yeah, he went out down here (unclear) Apache (unclear). 



George: Oh, was that it? Well, they had a guard, didn't they?--something similar to the National Guard? 



C. J.: Not that I know of. (unclear) rain down there. Everywhere (unclear) Tewksbury, and them fellahs had that war. 



George: Yeah. 



C. J.: Well, they were down there then. 



George: You were out on the <Navajo Reservation> lots yourself, were you not? 



C. J.: Quite a little. We had stores out there. They set up the reservation before we came out, but (unclear). That was part of the <Arizona> Territory then. 



George: They had no trouble particularly with the Indians, did they, by the time you came out here? Did they ever go on a rampage of any sort? 



C. J.: Oh, they used to graze their sheep over on white men's land some. (unclear) 



George: Was John Francis the sheriff? 



C. J.: Yeah. Then they had a killin' down here, you know, in (unclear). (unclear) is one of 'em. He's here in town. 



George: I might talk to Dan about it. You mean they killed some Indians, or the Indians killed a white man? 



C. J.: Both. They killed a white man or two, and they killed an Indian or two. The Indians were down there (unclear) Navajos. 



George: They never came in town in force or ever threatened the community in any way? 



C.J.: No. 



George: Was Sandy Donahue, that famous saloon man down here, he was here then wasn't he? 



C. J.: Sure, he'd been here for years and years. 



George: Was he here before you came or after you came? 



C. J.: He was here. Dave said he come here, he saw Sandy, said he was throwin' nickels in the street there, and the kids were grabbin' for 'em. About the first thing he saw when he got off the train--there was Sandy. 



George: The railroad at that time just about came as far as <Flagstaff>, didn't it? 



C. J.: (unclear) two, three years. 



Snow: It came through three years later. 



(several talking at same time, none discernable) 



George: Well, <Flagstaff> was pretty, I guess, much of a frontier town then, wasn't it? 



C. J.: Oh, pretty much. 



Snow: (unclear) Do you remember seeing the flag staff, the tree that was (unclear). 



C. J.: No. (unclear) Ralph Cameron was here, and we went up there, and he showed us the stump of the tree. 



George: Was that where the city park.... 



Snow: That was right up here in Old Town, near the spring on Clark's ranch, up that way. 



Snow: Was that on Clark's ranch at that time? 



C. J.: Well, no, it wasn't Clark's ranch at all. It was right up here along the railroad, where the spring comes out. 



Snow: Another spring up there, huh? 



George: Charlie Clark told me the other day down in <Phoenix>, that the original flagpole was up by the old Clark Ranch. He said it was a pitchy tree, and that [Johnny Love?] cut it down, and he helped burn up the wood from it. He said later on there were other flag poles, but he said the original was up there. Do you believe that story? 



C. J.: No. I believe it was up here at this spring, Old Town Spring. 



Snow: There was only one (unclear). 



C. J.: (unclear) would be camped up around that water. 



Snow: Didn't they camp up on Clark's Ranch at another spring up there? 



C. J.: Well, there's (unclear). 



George: Do you want to sit down, Uncle Charlie? Are you getting uncomfortable up there? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: You say that Switzer, where'd he think it was, the original? 



C. J.: Right out here along the railroad. 



George: Well, that's where George Hochderffer claimed it was, too, isn't it? 



C. J.: I don't know about George Hochderffer. Ralph Cameron (unclear) spring up there. John (unclear), I have a letter from him that I turned over to Dr. C.leman [phonetic] (unclear) P. J. Brannen. He was one of the early men here. He said it was up at Old Town Spring. 



Snow: (unclear) 



George: Who came out with you, Uncle Charlie, when you came out, just the Babbitt boys alone? 



C. J.: Nobody come with me. 



George: You mentioned John Lind. You did bring some of the men out later, didn't you? 



C. J.: Well, John Lind was here workin' for Brannen when we come. 



George: Oh, he was here before you came? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: You bought out Brannen later on, didn't you? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: (unclear) Santa Fe (unclear). 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: Did you buy out the A-1 Cattle Company? 



C. J.: We bought the [remnant?]. 



George: That was a big outfit in early times. 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: What was the largest number of cattle you had? (unclear) big time (unclear). 



C. J.: Oh, we had 'em scattered around. Herb says we did 40,000 one year. 



George: Forty thousand cattle? 



C. J.: Yes. 



George: That was along when, about 1915, somewhere along in there? 



C. J.: Oh, I forget. He could tell you about that. 



George: Well, you had a lot of sheep, too. 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: Did you ship those back to <Kansas City>? 



C. J.: Cattle? 



Snow: Yeah. 



C. J.: Oh, we generally sold 'em here. We did ship some to <Kansas City>, but then Asher and those fellahs (unclear) get hardly anything out of 'em. 



George: You had a 100,000 or so head of sheep too, didn't you? 



C. J.: Oh, I think they had about 60,000. 



George: You had a lot of land, too, at one time. 



C. J.: Oh, yes, we had lots of land. 



George: I heard a figure around a million acres. Do you think the outfit ever had that many? 



C. J.: Oh, I don't know, I guess probably it did. 



George: Wasn't there some sort of a contest between the Babbitt brothers and the Pollock interests here in the early days? Pollock would try to cut the Babbitt ranges off, and then they'd have to buy a lot of land? Was there something to that story? 



C. J.: Oh, there wasn't much of a contest. There was just some land that some of us had leased, and I think Pollock bought it. 



Snow: Is he still around, or the family, Pollocks? Is that family still around? 



C. J.: Yes. (unclear) this young Pollock, but I don't suppose he'd know much about it. 



George: Well, when the Babbitts started a bank here, I understand Babbitts and Riordans, they started a bank, I understand he said he was gonna put him on the shelf. (unclear) lumber business? 



C. J.: Well, he might have said that, but I don't know. It's hard to say what he said. 



Snow: Charlie, what's the story about the railway coming through here? How did it happen that they put that line up to <Grand Canyon> from <Williams> instead of <Flagstaff>? 



C. J.: Bucky O'Neill had some copper claims out there. (unclear) those mines. Later on (unclear) close to it (unclear). 



Snow: Oh, they came up from that direction because it was closer to the copper mines? 



C. J.: Yeah. (unclear) 



George: At one time, <Flagstaff> had a delegation to meet with the Santa Fe, in an endeavor to get it to leave out of <Flagstaff>. 



C. J.: Oh, they tried it, yes. Santa Fe, I guess, thought it would cost too much money to run down through here. It was shorter from <Williams>. 



George: I heard that some interests here opposed the road leaving <Flagstaff> because the fact they thought there might be a mill put in by the Santa Fe themselves, make their own ties. 



C. J.: I never heard that. 



Snow: They were also talking about running a line down through <Phoenix> at one time, from here, weren't they? 



C. J.: Well, they run a line out, just where they run it out past <Mormon Lake>. You know? Where were they goin' then? 



George: That was to <Globe>. 



C. J.: D. M. Riordan, I think, was the head of that. 



George: Well, they ran out of money, didn't they? 



C. J.: I don't know why, but they quit it. They quit it on goin' south, I know that. 



George: Well, I've heard that they said they couldn't get over the <Mogollon Rim>. But that doesn't sound feasible, they wouldn't have.... 



Snow: (unclear) they'd have known it before they started. 



George: I would think so, yeah. 



Snow: Did they ever survey for the line from here to <Grand Canyon>? 



C. J.: I think so. 



George: Yes, I think I have some data on that. 



Snow: And they gave it up in favor of <Williams>, huh? 



C. J.: Yeah. Yeah, the town here sure wanted it, if they could have got it. 



George: I guess Clark, the attorney, headed the delegation that met with some Santa Fe official. I also heard that the Santa Fe thought that <Flagstaff> opposed it. They held that against <Flagstaff> for a good many years. 



C. J.: I don't think they'd oppose the (unclear). 



George: From <Flagstaff> to <Grand Canyon>, I was referring to. 



Snow: (unclear) They said that <Flagstaff> people, prominent citizens, opposed putting a line through here in the early days. (unclear) town, and wouldn't see the value of having a railway. 



C. J.: I think if they'd have raised the money here--part of it--I think they'd have built the road from here. 



Snow: Was that partly on local subscriptions? You mean the <Flagstaff> people (unclear) themselves? 



C. J.: I think they did talk here, wanted the citizens to raise some money, but I don't think they could raise enough, or something. 



George: Well, my dad, I heard him say that the old-timers that had been here, felt that when the railroad came through, it was gonna ruin the town, wreck the place. It used to be a wide-open town, (unclear) guns, and then the railroad came along. They felt it hurt the town. Did you ever hear 'em talk about that in the old days? 



C.J.: No. 



George: They had a lot gambling down around these saloons, didn't they? 



C. J.: Oh, sure, lots of 'em. The Hawks boys, you know, were killed. 



George: Oh, they hanged one of those boys, or shot him? 



C. J.: Two of 'em, they shot 'em. Took 'em out of jail one night (unclear). 



Snow: One of your brothers was sheriff here, wasn't he (unclear)? 



C. J.: Let's see, Ed was a probate judge during the early days. 



George: I know my father was a [county] supervisor at one time. I believe county treasurer at one time also. 



C. J.: Yes, he was. 



Snow: When did your father come out? 



George: I don't know, I'd have to ask Uncle Charlie. When did he come out, George Babbitt [Sr.]? 



C. J.: It wasn't long after we come. I don't know just exactly how long. 



George: Did he come out with Uncle Bill? 



C. J.: No, Uncle Dave come with Uncle Bill. 



George: They came first, and then you came, and then my dad, and then Uncle Ed, is that it? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: You started in the cattle business, Uncle Dave went into the hardware business I understand, and my father was in the restaurant business, is that it? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: And they branched out to different kinds of activity later? 



C. J.: Uh-huh. 



George: That's the story. 



Snow: Well, you know, (unclear) here must account for a very large percentage of the total economy of this town. 



C. J.: Oh, we spread out pretty well. 



Snow: (unclear) 20-30 percent? 



C. J.: Oh, I wouldn't... 



George: It's not a fraction of what it used to be, Mr. Snow. 



Snow: (unclear) 



George: Well, they used to own all these ranches, cattle and sheep out there. 



C. J.: There's quite a write-up in some of these old papers, if you want to read them. 



Snow: I read one accounting of your son, (unclear) '39, I believe it was. Well, we've got several of them. 



George: That was the anniversary edition. 



Snow: (unclear). 



C. J.: Your dad had something to do with the Normal, didn't he? 



George: Yes, he was on the board (unclear). 



Snow: (unclear) change it from a reformatory into a school, is that right? 



George: Yes, that's a story all in itself. I'm aware of that very interesting episode. 



Snow: Reform school into.... 



(several speaking, none discernable) 



George: (tape slips) Uncle Charlie? 



C. J.: (unclear) papers, you know. 



George: You've taken these notes out of the various newspapers from time to time, is that it? 



C. J.: I got 'em out of... 



George: Are these your notes in your handwriting here? 



C.J.: Yeah. 



George: So is this sort of a diary of the early days? 



C. J.: Oh, no, just (unclear). 



George: Oh, I see, yeah. The old-time newspaper comment. (unclear) back in the 1880s. 



Snow: I was just going to ask you one thing. It seems in the past this town developed chiefly because of the cattle business, and then the lumber industry became the chief (unclear). Lumber is probably not going to be a constant factor (unclear) just cut so much. So you think that'll guarantee the prosperity of this town? 



C. J.: The Forest Service claims they've got it all worked out, I guess. 



George: There's still some considerable stock activity in this area. 



Snow: There's a little piece in here. I don't know whether that'll give you any news or not. 



George: Yeah, you bet. That's about you, isn't it, Uncle Charlie? Arizona Stock. Maybe you'd like to read that, too, Mr. Snow, later on.



On these cattle outfits, what would you do, take these men in as partners, as I understand it: men like Les Hart, Lew Charlie Boyd [phonetic], and different ones. Isn't that the way you worked it? 



C. J.: Yes. John Hennessy. 



George: Who were some of the other old-timers who were in business here? I know I see names in books (unclear) you never hear (unclear), like Luthersback [phonetic]? 



C. J.: John Luthersback. 



George: Mud Tanks or Mud Lake outfit? How many outfits did the Babbitt family have at one time, do you remember? (unclear) 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: (unclear) Well, Rube said they banded 40,000 (unclear) at least that many, if not more. 



C.J.: Yeah. 



George: Charlie Clark mentioned the name of some fellah that used to steal a few Babbitt beef. I've forgotten what his name was now. Did you have much (unclear) rustlers? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: Well, that's an interesting thing. How did you get that C.O Bar [C.] brand? 



C. J.: We named it after <Cincinnati Ohio>. 



George: Put a bar under it, is that it? That's because you were from there. (laughs) You were what they call a tenderfoot in those days, weren't you? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: How old are you now, Uncle Charlie? You're in your eighties? 



C. J.: Eighty-three. 



Snow: (unclear) 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: He has two sons in the business here now: John and Paul Babbitt. (unclear) 



Snow: (unclear) How many grandchildren do you have? 



C. J.: Grandchildren? Well, how many we got? (unclear)'s got five boys. 



George: There's supposed to be about seventy Babbitts--! mean, in the family. Some of them have changed their name now, got married, some of the women. But in the original first two, three generations, the three generations, there's seventy of 'em. They're quite a prolific family. 



Snow: Weren't Mormon either. (unclear) Had a little help from two other generations. 



George: That's right. 



C. J.: Three Babbitts married three sisters in <Cincinnati Ohio>: Verkamps. 



George: Three Babbitt men married three Verkamp women? 



C. J.: Yes. 



Snow: Was your wife a Verkamp? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



Snow: You married a <Flagstaff> girl? 



C. J.: No, I married a Verkamp. 



Snow: She came out here and joined you? 



C. J.: I married about five years after I come out here. 



Snow: Did all of your brothers stay here in the town? 



C. J.: Yes, except Billy. He went to <Kansas> once for three or four years. (unclear) cattle there (unclear). He settled out here in <Kansas>. 



George: You hear about the Babbitt Opera House. Was that in this building? 



C. J.: Yes. 



George: Right around here (unclear). 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: That was the only playhouse in town then, wasn't it? That was around about '80, '82, '83, I imagine. 



C. J.: I guess so. 



George: What'd they do, have dances up there? 



C. J.: It must have been after that, because we didn't come here 'til '86. 



George: Oh, I mean '92, probably. 



C. J.: They used to hold court out there, too. 



George: They had no courthouse? 



C. J.: No. 



George: What'd they do, have plays and shows and operas? 



C. J.: Oh, yeah. They had political meetings there, one thing and another. 



George: I heard they had some pretty hot meetings, too. 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: There was a lot of whiskey around, wasn't there? 



Snow: Pretty (unclear) Democratic town, isn't it? (unclear) 



C. J.: Just smoked cigars (unclear). 



George: Can you think of the names of some of the old-timers around here when you came here? Was Dan Hogan here then? 



C. J.: Yeah, (unclear) He mighta come a little while after. 



Snow: Billy Switzer was here. 



George: Billy Switzer was here. 



Snow: (unclear) (several talking, unclear) 



C. J.: Well, he is the son of the original. He was a little fellah, (unclear). They had a dairy. Billy used to carry the milk around. 



George: Do you remember seein', was there much gunplay and shooting? Boys would get drunk and take a shot at each other? Was there much of that? 



C. J.: (unclear) This Hawks business was the worst, I think. Took those boys out of jail and shot 'em. 



George: You had no water system or sewer system at all. That's kind of tough on the women when they came out from the East, wasn't it? 



C. J.: Yeah, sure. 



George: C.min' to this primitive life. They were pretty much pioneers themselves, weren't they? 



C. J.: I sure say they were. 



George: Well, when you went out on the reservation, did you go out alone? What did you do, go out on horseback? 



C. J.: We went out in a buckboard. 



George: Were you out looking for locations for trading posts? 



C. J.: No, we'd just go out visiting. Sam Bittenhoffer [phonetic] was killed out there at Red Lake, you know, in the early days. (unclear) Use to go out there (unclear). 



Snow: When did people begin homesteading around here? Did you claim your land during the territorial period? 



C. J.: I think you could homestead anytime since we've been here. 



Snow: (unclear) 



George: Well, you bought most of the land, though, didn't you? Did you buy up these different cattle outfits? 



C. J.: (unclear) railroad (unclear). 



George: Do you know what you had to pay for it, per acre? 



C. J.: Well, we paid from 750 I think, to $1.25. (unclear) worth now (unclear). During the Depression we sold lots of land for $1.25. Couldn't buy it for that now. About $3.00, I guess, now. 



George: There are certain (unclear) available at a dollar an acre even today, that are probably not worth anything. They probably have loco. They're not any good for stock-raising purposes, and you can't farm on it, so there isn't much sense in buying it. 



Snow: Did you have any holdings down in <Oak Creek Canyon> at that time? 



C. J.: No, we didn't have any down there. Could hardly get in there (unclear). We didn't have any roads then. (unclear) up north (unclear). I've been down there horseback, but there was never any road or anything down there. The only way to get in was to pack in. 



George: My father bought a ranch down in <Oak Creek Canyon>, the one we still have. 



Snow: (unclear) was between there and the canyon, up that way. (unclear) 



George: Well, that went on to <Winslow> and <Holbrook>, too, didn't it, down there, and then on south to <Mormon Lake>? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: They had cattle outfits, too. (unclear) California (unclear). 



C. J.: Madera. 



George: Madera? You were scattered all over the country there at one time. 



C. J.: Hoof and mouth disease there. Had to kill off about 3,000 head of cattle. 



Snow: In that district. You must have had a lot of cow hands working for you down here at the (unclear) Ranch. How many men did it take to look after 40,000 head of cattle? (unclear) 



George: The biggest outfit was the C. wasn't it? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: I understand they had about 10,000 head of cattle. Isn't that about right? 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: How many men would it take to run that spread? 



C. J.: Oh, it wouldn't take very many--fifteen or twenty, I guess. 



George: You keep hearing about these rustlers from these old-timers. How would they steal cattle? They wouldn't just go off and rope a calf and brand it, 'cause they'd get in trouble. 



C. J.: Stealin' more beef than anything else. 



George: Oh, they'd sell the beef? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: Sell it to local people, or ship it off? 



C. J.: Yeah, probably. 



Snow: (unclear) 



George: He owned practically the entire town at one time, I understand, when he first came here--or most of it. 



C. J.: He owned several of the lots on the front street. 



Snow: Is he still around? I mean, is the family? 



George: Are there any of his descendants around? 



C. J.: (unclear) I think they moved back to <New York>. They were around here for a while, but they went back. I guess they're all dead by now. 



George: Well, did they have any fires like they did in <Prescott>? I understand <Prescott> burned down two or three times. <Flagstaff> ever have any big fires like that? 



C. J.: Burned out once after we come here. 



George: The whole town burned down? 



C. J.: Yeah. (unclear) 



George: I heard too, one time there was a faction wanted a town up by the Old Town Spring, and another faction wanted it down in here. Brannen came out of the new group. Do you know anything about that discussion? 



C. J.: No, I never did. 



Snow: (unclear) Ralph Cameron (unclear). 



C. J.: Ralph Cameron? Bert's here, he's a good one to talk to. 



Snow: (unclear) 



C. J.: He's interested in this old stuff, (unclear) 



Snow: Up on the rim there, I guess, of the canyon. Well, did he have that copper mine at that time? 



C. J.: Yeah, (unclear) copper mine (unclear) canyon, (unclear) Then I think the government took it away from (unclear). 



Snow: [Hearst?] had a ranch up there, didn't he? 



C. J.: Well, he didn't have any ranch. He had these claims on the canyon and in the canyon. And he (unclear) homestead. (unclear) homestead (unclear). 



Snow: Pete Berry? 



C. J.: B-E-R-R-Y. 



George: You know, I was interested in another phase. I understand that the credit situation was entirely different in the old days than now. You used to give credit for a year or two at a time, didn't you, a lot of time, to the stockmen? 



C. J.: Sure. If you'd send 'em a bill, they'd say, "What'd you send me that dun for?" (laughter) 



George: (unclear) year or two old. (laughs) 



C. J.: "Quit sendin' those duns!" 



George: Get insulted, huh? How long would they owe you? 



C. J.: Oh, year (unclear) sell their stock. 



George: A year at a time? C. I: Oh, yeah. 



George: You didn't lose so much fat, did you? 



C. J.: (unclear) <Holbrook>. He said, "You know, (unclear) sometime." (laughter) 



George: (unclear) 



C. J.: (unclear) <Holbrook>. 



George: One year (unclear). 



C. J.: No, it wasn't one of our men. (unclear) store there. 



George: (unclear) maybe, huh. Where would you get your financing? Did you have the money to carry these fellahs? 



C. J.: Oh, you bet. We carried 'em (unclear). 



Snow: You must have had a fair-sized fortune when you came out here? 



C. J.: Oh, yeah, we had about $20,000. (unclear) grocery store. Bought a thousand head of cattle. 



Snow: For $20,000? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: Well, then you grew to a concern with, I've heard, about fifty corporations. Isn't that about right? 



C. J.: We got a lot of money from our father (unclear). 



George: But you had about fifty corporations? At one time didn't it go up over $10 million, $12 million, the assets of the Babbitt family? 



C. J.: Oh, I don't know. (unclear) 



Snow: (unclear) family (unclear). 



C. J.: Verkamp, V-E-R-K-A-M-P. 



Snow: Are they still here? 



C. J.: Yes. (unclear) The boys are still there. The old folks are dead. 



George: Uncle Bill married a woman who worked here (unclear). Her name was Mrs. Roach, wasn't it? 



C. J.: Yes. 



George: And father married Philomena Wessell. 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: That's another girl. 



Snow: I understand you've always banked in <Los Angeles>, is that right? 



C. J.: Yes. 



Snow: Didn't have a bank here? 



C. J.: Yeah, we did (unclear). 



Snow: Was that the Arizona Bank then? 



C. J.: No, it was.... 



George: First National? 



?: (unclear) 



George: No, this is the Bank of Arizona. 



Snow: What was that over on the corner there? 



C. J.: First National (unclear). 



Snow: Why'd you bank in <Los Angeles>? (unclear) 



[END TAPE 57-2, SIDE A; BEGIN SIDE B] 



?: (unclear) 



George: (unclear) responsible for half this town, (unclear). So I was working. I (unclear). Then the hard times came along, and (unclear) was a pretty good banker for the Babbitts, wasn't he, in the hard-time days? 



C. J.: Yeah, he was. 



Snow: (unclear) 



George: Goodness knows they had some (unclear). 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: I say the Babbitts had some hard times there for a while, too. 



C. J.: (unclear) 



George: You sold that Laguna Ranch there at a terrific loss. You could have gotten more for it a little later, couldn't you? 



C. J.: Oh, yes. 



George: Wasn't that the largest cash real estate deal up to that time, when you sold that? I heard that it was, the Laguna Ranch in <Los Angeles>. How much did you get for that in cash, a million-and-a-half? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: What ranch was that? 



George: The Laguna Ranch. Up to the time they sold that, it was the biggest cash deal that had ever been (unclear). 



Snow: (unclear) 



George: I heard that. I suppose you probably would have been better off had you overlooked some of your cattle outfits and kept your land, like that school block in <Phoenix>. That's probably worth a million or two now, that you let go. The real estate holdings would have run into enormous value, had you retain 'em.... (blank tape for about a minute) 



George: (unclear) Tell me again how you happened to come out. Was it some kind of man who talked you into.... 



C. J.: Jim Beasley, yes-pretty good talker. 



George: You were in business in <Cincinnati> then? 



C. J.: Yes. 



George: In what business, the grocery business? 



C. J.: Yeah. He'd come around the store in the evening. After we'd close up, you know, we'd go in there and sit around. He'd begin telling us about the cow business out West. (laughter) 



Snow: (unclear) sit around (unclear). 



C. J.: No radio then. 



George: You say you had an auction? 



C. J.: Had an auction, sold off the building and the store and everything else. Headed for the West. 



George: And you took the money you realized from that sale--that was the $20,000 that you had? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: Were your parents living at that time? 



C. J.: No, my mother died just a little while before that, and my sister. That kind of upset us, I think, too. 



George: The five brothers were all equally [interested?]? 



C. J.: Yeah, sure. 



George: Was Uncle Ed in the business then? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: And you were twenty-one when you came out? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



George: You must have started in business when you were awfully young then, didn't you? 



C. J.: Oh, I used to solicit (unclear) back there in <Cincinnati>, on [prize sale?], where we had the store. 



George: That was a grocery store, wasn't it? 



C. J.: Yeah. 



Snow: Did you ride a horse out here, out to <Flagstaff>? 



C. J.: We come out on the train. 



Snow: Oh, that's right, the train was out here, wasn't it. 



C. J.: Come out on the train. 



George: That's something I've never known, just exactly how you happened to come out. Somebody was telling me that they sold you some range up here on the side of the mountain too high for cattle. The cattle wouldn't range up there, is that right? When you first came here, up toward Jack Smith Spring? 



C. J.: We took 'em up here to Jack Smith Spring, and the spring had dried up. It would run in the spring, way down. Then in the fall it began dryin' up. And you finally had to go way up there in that park, and the cattle didn't like that. They drifted back to where we had 'em first, to the pumphouse. 



George: Oh, down south of town here. 



C. J.: Billy and I used to have a wagon about halfway, and we'd sleep in there, and then in the morning we'd take their tracks and follow 'em as far as they went, and drive 'em back. We took 'em into town here, get lunch, and drive the cattle back. 



George: They never had such a thing as a drift fence or a forest range in that day. 



C. J.: No. 



George: Did they have any Forest Service officials? 



C. J.: Didn't have any Forest at first, you know, for years. 



George: How would you settle your range rights? 



C. J.: Oh, prior--whoever used it first. 



George: Wouldn't there be a little controversy--some man claimed this area was his? 



C. J.: Well (unclear), of course Daggs and them sheepmen down in <Tonto Basin>, around (unclear), but they got along pretty well here. 



George: Well, the sheepmen weren't in here when you came? 



C. J.: Well, some sheepmen. [Dashur?] and all these fellahs had sheep first. 



George: Was there any.... 



C. J.: Dashurs could tell you all that. 



George: Was there quite a little friction between the sheepmen and the cattlemen, over the range? 



C. J.: Oh, at times there was some, but they got along pretty well. 



George: Never came to open warfare too much?--except that Tonto Basin Feud. 



C. J.: Tewksbury/Daggs outfit. 



Snow: You never had any trouble with the Indians, huh? 



C. J.: No, as I say, they went out and brought 'em in, you know. 



Snow: They would take pot shots at you (unclear). 



C. J.: When this killin' down here in The C.dars, Dan Houghton [phonetic] was one of the deputy sheriffs. Get in touch with [Sandy?], he can tell you all about it. 



George: That certainly is interesting, and I sure appreciate you giving us your time, Uncle Charlie. 



C. J.: Well, if it'll do you any good. 



Snow: (unclear) record, it's history. 



(recording turned off and on) 



Unidentified woman: (unclear) 



George: Did you go to school and study mathematics in school, Julia? 



Unidentified woman: (unclear) But you're better at it, you're the best of the bunch. 



Unidentified woman: (unclear) adding machine. 



George: (unclear) 



Unidentified woman: (unclear) 



(recording turned off and on) 



Radio or TV 



Announcer: Operation of the Peaks District of the Boy Scouts of America. Present in the studio this evening are Mr. George Babbitt, president of the Grand Canyon Council of the Boy Scouts of America; Mr. Sturgeon Cromer [phonetic], Peaks District chairman; and Dr. M. G. Fronske, finance chairman. Mr. Babbitt, what is the Grand Canyon Council? 



George Babbitt: Well, in order to explain briefly the Grand Canyon Council, it might be well to go into the national situation. The national Boy Scout group has divided the <United States> into twelve regions, of which <Arizona> is Region 12. Now, Region 12 apprises the five western states of <Utah>, <Nevada>, California, <New Mexico>, and <Arizona>, as well as the Hawaiian Islands. Now, in these five western states we have fifty-four councils. The Grand Canyon Council is one of these fifty-four councils. However, the Grand Canyon Council is again divided into eight districts. For instance, we have the Old Capital District, which comprises the <Prescott> area. We have the Verde District, which comprises the Clarkdale, Jerome, <Verde Valley> area. And we also have the Peaks District in <Flagstaff> here, of which Sturgeon Cromer is the district chairman. These eight districts in the council, as I say, comprise a very, very large area, and they extend from almost over to [Lepton?] on the east, to Seligman on the west, and north to Tuba City and the <Grand Canyon>, and south, below <Prescott>, into the <Verde Valley>, the lower end of <Verde Valley>, comprising <Mayer> and <Humboldt>. And in through there down to <Yarnell Hill>. That's quite a large area, and as they say, we have these eight districts, and Sturgeon Cromer is the chairman for the Peaks District. We're fortunate in having him here with us tonight. 



Announcer: Mr. Cromer, will you give us some information concerning the Peaks District and its activities? 



Cromer: Thank you Mr. [Dard?] We have six actual troops in the Peaks District. These are sponsored, by and large, by the churches in this area. However, we have two troops, the Elks troop that is sponsored by the Elks organization; and the colored Elks on the south side of town has a very active and fine troop. St. Anthony's church also sponsors a troop. Another troop is the LDS, Latter-day Saints, group. Another is the Federated Church. And the last one is the (unclear) folks on the South Side. In these six troops, then, there is (unclear) at the present time by some 170 boys. They meet regularly, once each week, with their scout master and assistant scout master, and take up those activities that are peculiar or of the nature of scouting. We feel that this program actually reaches right down into the grass roots, and does a great job as far as the boys are concerned. I think we have very ample evidence of the fine job that scouting is doing in this area by the fact that during the past year, we had two boys that made the rank of Eagle Scout. I think that's the highest honor that any lad can receive in scouting.



We have two other youngsters--I might go back and regress just a minute-- those two boys were Young Mackey and Marshall Knowles [phonetic spellings].



We have two other lads coming up during the coming year that we feel are about ready for their Eagle badges, and we certainly wish them well. I think this is a great tribute to the fine work that's being done by the scoutmasters. And I think it's of interest to this entire community that those men that actually get there each week and do the scout work are the ones to be given the pat on the back. I would like to say in passing that there is a great need for adult leadership in this community. It's true, as you'll be told later in the program, we need your money, but we also very definitely [need] adult leadership, and we also need sponsorship for troops in this community. I think as will also be told to you later on, we're reaching about 25 percent of the boys of scout age in this community. We also have four Courts of Honor each year, at which time those youngsters that have succeeded and have achieved are awarded, in the presence of their parents, those honors that come with scouting. Mr. Redmond [phonetic] is our district advancement chairman, he's doing a fine job. I think also that we had a very representative group at summer camp this year at White Horse Lake. It's a very beautiful spot. I think that those boys that went out there had an experience that they will never forget. 





Announcer: Dr. Fronske, what is the purpose of the present drive, and what are the goals? 



Fronske: The purpose of our present campaign is to raise the Peaks District allotment of funds. The amount we are trying to collect this year is $5,000. The businessmen and residents of <Flagstaff> have shown that they appreciate the value of scouting to this community by their hearty response in previous years. And I am certain that they are more enthusiastic as the years pass. I know that they will again measure up to their record of subscribing their quota this year. The week of July 11-18 are the dates set aside for this drive. The Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce has given the finance committee its sanction and clearance. 



Announcer: Well, that's fine, doctor. Mr. Babbitt, will you enumerate some of the local needs of the Boy Scouts? 



George Babbitt: Well, Ralph, in speaking of the local needs, I feel that we also are expressing the needs of the council, because our local needs are also council needs. The first thing scouters need is a broad perspective and a spirit of cooperation and understanding. Any local problem is a problem of the entire council. Now, Mr. Cromer mentioned a moment ago that one thing that was greatly needed was adult leadership. And I wish to concur very, very heartily in that statement. We have a potential of approximately 5,000 boys in the Grand Canyon Council, of which we have enrolled in our ranks approximately 1,250. Now, 75 percent of our potential is not engaged in scouting, and it should be. And this could be worked out, were we in a position to have the adult leadership, and also sponsoring groups. For instance, one scoutmaster tells me that he has almost 200 youngsters in his district locally here whom he cannot contact or take care of because he does not have the proper adult help and leadership.



Now, it was mentioned that scoutmasters were the keystone of scouting, and that certainly is true. Were it not for the fine efforts of scoutmasters locally, such as Hill Redmond [phonetic] and others, (unclear) who gave a fine program at the various civic clubs not long ago, with his boys, on first aid work, and others whose names I will not mention at this time. But if we had more scoutmasters like these gentlemen I just mentioned, why, scouting would be advanced very, very considerably. And that is one of the outstanding needs of the local situation--also of the Grand Canyon Council.



Now, it was also mentioned that the Camporee at White Horse Lake was very effective. Should the people of <Flagstaff> and of the Grand Canyon Council attend the Camporee some evening, I'm sure that they would certainly be converted to scouting. Because there you see scouting in action, and (unclear) and exemplification of Americanization of our youngsters. It was a very pleasant and very happy experience, and I'm certain that if you folks who were not engaged in scouting work could see that, that you too would become intensely interested.



Now, as I say, we have 5,000 youngsters in our council, and we're only contacting 25 percent of them [i.e., the scouting-age boys in the area], which leaves a void of 75 percent. And as president of the Grand Canyon Council, I wish to invite anyone who might be interested in the development of our youth, and the furthering of Boy Scouting, to join in this fine movement. All it would take would be a few minutes of your time, perhaps weekly. And as far as enrolling or joining any activity, the only expenditure would be in your personal time. You can see any scoutmaster or any executive of the Grand Canyon Council, or anyone whom you know might be interested in scouting, in order to obtain information as to how you might become a part of this fine movement, (unclear) your local district chairman or Sturgeon Cromer would be very happy to cooperate with you. Dr. Fronske, who is now sponsoring this drive, and doing a grand job of this, as I may tell you, and many others, anybody who is interesting in scouting, would be very happy to cooperate with you if you desire to help in this movement.



Now, on a council-wide basis, and almost on a national setup, the cost of scouting, per boy, per annum, is $12 (unclear). All this money that's raised in <Flagstaff> and in the Grand Canyon Council, is spent in the area in which it is raised. It does not go to some foreign state or out of the city, out-of-state city, but is spent in Northern <Arizona>, so that you are not contributing to some movement that spends its money elsewhere. Now, the cost of $12 per boy per annum, as I say, is on the national basis and on a council-wide basis. When you consider the great distances in the Grand Canyon Council, you can readily understand that the necessity for contacting the sponsoring groups, to see the scoutmasters, to arrange the programs, to help with the C.mporee, to see that merit badges are properly presented, and that the youngsters are registered with national scouting in order that they may receive proper credit, and ultimately we hope many of our.... (tape goes dead, remainder of this side of tape is blank) 



