CHARLIE STEMMER INTERVIEW



George Babbitt Collection, 57-35



[BEGIN SIDE A]



Babbitt:  Let's see, Charlie, today's July 20, 1949, isn't it?

Stemmer:  That's right.

Babbitt:  Charlie Stemmer is working with me this afternoon.  Charlie is one of the old-timers.  When did you come to <Flagstaff> and Northern <Arizona>, Charlie?

Stemmer:  1885

Babbitt:  And where did you come at that time?

Stemmer:  Old Town Spring up here, early <Flagstaff>.

Babbitt:  <Flagstaff> wasn't much of a city in those days, was it?

Stemmer:  No, just a bunch of frame shacks and tent houses.

Babbitt:  What did you do when you came here, Charlie?

Stemmer:  Well, I was so little that I didn't do very much.

Babbitt:  How old are you now, Charlie?

Stemmer:  Sixty-six.

Babbitt:  Let's see, you were how old when you came then?

Stemmer:  I was about two years old.

Babbitt:  Two years old, you wouldn't remember [much].

Stemmer:  I remember my father, and he burned to death a few months after we got here.

Babbitt:  Was his name Stemmer?

Stemmer:  Yeah.  My stepfather's name was Dykes.

Babbitt:  When you got a little older, you went on down into the <Oak Creek> region, didn't you?

Stemmer:  (unclear) when I was sixteen, and we went down to live in the <Verde Valley>.  We lived there eighteen months and came back.

Babbitt:  One time you were settled down there at <Sedona>, too, weren't you?

Stemmer:  I went down there in 1912 and left there in 1916.

Babbitt:  There were hardly any people in <Sedona> when you were there, were there?

Stemmer:  Just a few ranchers, scattered up and down the creek.

Babbitt:  How did you get your produce up to <Flagstaff>?

Stemmer:  By way of Schnebly Hill, thirty-five miles to town there.  Started before daybreak, and got into <Flagstaff> about four o'clock in the afternoon.

Babbitt:  That road was pretty rough, wasn't it?

Stemmer:  It certainly was.

Babbitt:  But before that, wasn't there a longer a way around, by the Sherman Settlement?

Stemmer:  Well, all those people used Schnebly Hill at that time, but prior to that, they went up what they called the Old Beaverhead route, up by way of Beaverhead, Rattlesnake Tanks, and Woods Park, <Munds Park>, and into <Flagstaff>.

Babbitt:  It was about sixty-five miles, wasn't it?

Stemmer:  That's about sixty-five miles.

Babbitt:  Could you make that in a day?

Stemmer:  No.  Had to make it in two days.

Babbitt:  What shape would your peaches and your fruit be in after bumping over the roads?

Stemmer:  (unclear) be marmalade.

Babbitt:  It would?  What would you do, try to bring fruit into <Flagstaff> for sale?

Stemmer:  Well, I wasn't in the game at that time, but the Casners and a lot of old-timers down there used to haul fruit in over that road.  Some peddled, and some sold to the local merchants, but they had less when they come in.

Babbitt:  Just about two, three farmers down there, then, weren't there?  (unclear)

Stemmer:  Well, the Casners, the principal (unclear) to haul fruit in here.  Most of those people down there were engaged in the cattle business.

Babbitt:  That was Casner, had a big outfit?

Stemmer:  That's right.  You see, the farmers in the <Verde Valley> at that time, marketed most of their produce in <Jerome> and Prescott.  That's why so few wagons came up this way.

Babbitt:  Well, Casner, I've heard rumors that he used to bury money, wouldn't put it in a bank or anyplace.

Stemmer:  Well, I believe they're pretty well-founded.  He had no confidence in banks, and very little in humanity in general.

Babbitt:  Is it true that they tortured the fellow to try and get him to tell where he'd buried it once?

Stemmer:  Yes, they burned his feet and did various other things to him, but they could never get him to tell.

Babbitt:  How much do you estimate that he had buried?

Stemmer:  Well, there's been different estimates -anywhere from $35,000 to $50,000.

Babbitt:  Has any of it ever been found, insofar as you know?

Stemmer:  No.  They claim there has been, but there's nothing authentic about that.

Babbitt:  What was it, probably in the form of gold?

Stemmer:  In the form of gold.  I'd like to give you a little incident here.  He sold out a bunch of cattle and got about $15,000-$20,000 for the sale, and he buried it.  And when he went out to get it later on, it was missing.  So he also had sheep, and he thought one of the sheepherders had seen him bury it, so he strung the sheepherder up to a tree, and threatened him with hanging if he didn't divulge where he put the money, or that he got it.  He pulled him up twice, and the herder stoutly denied that he had his money.  And the third time he pulled him up, lightning struck the tree.  Didn't hurt either Casner or the Mexican, but scared the devil out of both of 'em, and Casner turned the Mexican loose, and he said, "By God, he guessed he had the wrong (unclear)."

Babbitt:  Which Casner was that, was that Mose?

Stemmer:  Mose Casner.

Babbitt:  Was he the Casner who got a little group together to go out and take the Indians out of <Indian Gardens> in <Oak Creek> Canyon because they'd been stealing his cattle?

Stemmer:  That's the guy.

Babbitt:  When did he come to <Arizona>?

Stemmer:  He came to <Arizona> in the early eighties [i.e., 1880s].

Babbitt:  You mentioned cow outfits.  Were there some others in there that you remember?

Stemmer:  Well, right offhand to me [Fields?] were very prominent in the <Verde Valley> in the cattle business.  And the Mundses were prominent in the <Verde Valley> and on the mountain.

Babbitt:  Munds Park is....

Stemmer:  Named after them.

Babbitt:  <Munds Canyon>?

Stemmer:  And <Munds Canyon>.  And there was [Marbers?], they were big cattlemen in the valley at that time.  And then there was also the Bristows.  They had a bunch of cattle.  What afterwards became the Coconino Cattle Company started along about that time down in the redrock.

Babbitt:  Who started that?

Stemmer:  Matt Black.

Babbitt:  Old Man Black?

Stemmer:  Matt Black.

Babbitt:  Do you remember any of the old brands?

Stemmer:  No, right off of the bat.  I'd have to think awhile.

Babbitt:  Did they have any trouble with rustlers?

Stemmer:  Quite a bit.

Babbitt:  What would the rustlers do, fake brands?

Stemmer:  No, the rustlers would overbrand some and they also made a desperate effort to get them before they were branded, so they wouldn't have to go to the trouble of branding over or bending a brand.

Babbitt:  Of course that was a little dangerous if the calf happened to be running with its mother, wasn't it?

Stemmer:  That's right.  In the meantime, a good many of them were shot and nobody never knew why they were shot, except probably the fellah that shot him [and the rest of himself?].

Babbitt:  The man was shot, you mean?

Stemmer:  That's right.

Babbitt:  Down in the <Verde Valley> that took place?

Stemmer:  There's been several shot down there for appropriatin' cattle.

Babbitt:  That was a [statutory?] punishment then, that probably deterred others from stealing cattle.

Stemmer:  Oh yes.  That was the time then when they used to string 'em up for horse stealin' up here in the northern part of the state.

Babbitt:  Do you remember the names of any of those that were strung up, up here?

Stemmer:  No, I don't.  I think George Hochderffer could give you the names of a few.  They had five or six on a tree at one time.

Babbitt:  I heard the Hawks boys.

Stemmer:  Well, I don't know about that.  The Hawks boys were rather tough characters, all right, but I don't think they ever mixed up in any cattle stealing.

Babbitt:  You know, I'd never heard of that, five or six on one tree at one time.  Was that around <Flagstaff> here?

Stemmer:  That was right out here near where Colonel Hochderffer's present residence is.  He says the pine tree is still standing.  Got a big limb out there, and there was several hung to it, five or six, I believe, at one time.  I didn't see this.

Babbitt:  About when was that?

Stemmer:  That was way back in the early eighties.

Babbitt:  There was no sheriff appointed at that time, was there?

Stemmer:  Well, the sheriff lived down in -this was all <Yavapai County> at that time -and the sheriff of <Yavapai County> had deputies scattered around, but they were few and far between.

Babbitt:  That is interesting.

Stemmer:  I believe at the time that most of this was taking place, I think Hughie Malvenin [phonetic] was the sheriff of <Yavapai County>, which covers a lot of territory.

Babbitt:  Did he have a deputy up in here?

Stemmer:  Yes, he did.  In fact, my stepfather was the deputy for a while, but that was after these hangings took place.

Babbitt:  Did your stepfather have much trouble with the early-day boys?

Stemmer:  Not too much.  Seems like most of the wildness had taken place.  They had difficulties along -you know, some fellah'd shoot somebody out in the woods somewhere, get in an argument, something like that.

Babbitt:  Well, now they have stories about Peg Leg, the last bandit.  Do you remember him?

Stemmer:  Well, I never saw him, but I heard a great deal about him.  Some people claim that he was innocent and that he was wrongfully shot.  And then there's claim that he was all that he was reputed to be.

Babbitt:  A cattle thief and bandit?

Stemmer:  That's right.  Go into people's houses when they weren't home, and take their valuables, take what he wanted.

Babbitt:  He's supposed to have been the last bandit in this country.

Stemmer:  He was supposed to be the last bandit, supposed to have a hideout somewhere in what they call Dragoon Fork of the Sycamore.  That's south of Volunteer Mountain, down towards the dam.

Babbitt:  Tell me, you were talking about the bandits and cattle rustlers:  did they ever have any trouble with the Indians, that you can remember?

Stemmer:  No.  They had an Indian scare, something happened out on the reservation there, and at that time they only had about 8,000-9,000 Navajos, and the town of <Flagstaff> felt that if these Indians came in there, that there'd be a wholesale massacre.  Now, there was some event, some paleface had caused some trouble out there, and stirred all these people up.  They come rushin' in here and said, "The Indians are gonna come in and wipe the town out."  I believe that was along about 1887 or 1888, along in there sometime.  I know there was quite a scare.

Babbitt:  That was before you came back in to <Flagstaff>?

Stemmer:  No, I was living here then.

Babbitt:  What do you remember about the old days here?  <Flagstaff>, when you can remember, was what, about 500 (unclear) people?

Stemmer:  I imagine that <Flagstaff> had about 300 when I first came.

Babbitt:  Do you remember any of the old characters?

Stemmer:  Well, I remember the [Roses?] and the Yancys.  Rosie was the first milkman in <Flagstaff>.  He lived up above the Old Town Spring.  And the Yancys, they lived over there near [the older type?].

Babbitt:  Did he run the Yancy Dairy over near the Old Town Springs?

Stemmer:  Yes, that's right.

Babbitt:  What did the Yancys do?

Stemmer:  Yancy made his living gambling.  He was quite a philanthropist.  They could go to him for money for any cause and get it a whole lot quicker than they could from the church fraternity.  Yancy died in the Pioneers Home here a few years ago.  Roses moved clear out of the country.

Babbitt:  Are the families living here?

Stemmer:  No, neither one.  Then there was the Gibsons, the Hills.  The Gibsons lived at Old Town.  Old Lady Gibson used to run a boarding house up there and boarded (unclear) and worked for the [Ad-Ad?] Lumber Company, years ago.

Babbitt:  That was over near the Old Town Springs?

Stemmer:  Yeah, they had a boarding house up there.  You see, the first town of <Flagstaff> was situated around Old Town Springs, and all there was down in this present-day <Flagstaff> was a station down there where the old red sandstone depot stands, they would [let?] people off.  And they had a couple of tracts there, and a house tract.  Then they subdivided a part of town there that comprises the main part of <Flagstaff> now, and the town commenced to grow.

Babbitt:  Was there a little controversy about the old town and the new town?  I've heard there were two factions:  one wanted the town to build and remain where the old town was originally located, and the other one to move it on down where it now is.

Stemmer:  Well, there was a Mrs. Gonzales, who owned the property across the track from the Old Town Spring.  Old Town Spring is situated on the north side of the railroad, and her property was on the south side.  She incited some of 'em up there to fight against anything going on down in the new townsite, but it didn't avail her anything.

Babbitt:  Was she the only one interested in retaining (unclear).

Stemmer:  No, she had some others that threw in with her.  No, I don't think the Beals had anything to do with that -you know, the two Beal families, they're old-timers.  There was the family of Frank Beal and the family of Marv Beal.  Mrs. Nellie Francis is a survivor of the Marv Beal family, and Irene Meyers, her sister, are the two sole survivors of that family.

Babbitt:  What did they do?

Stemmer:  Well, Marv Beal, in early days he had a few cattle, and also did a little ranching.  Frank Beal was a carpenter.  He was the first box factory foreman in <Flagstaff>.

Babbitt:  That was the old (unclear).

Stemmer:  That's right.  It was taken over by D. M. Riordan.  That's the older brother of the Riordans.

Babbitt:  Well, now Charlie Park was telling me that his father and uncle and the McMillans were some of the earlier folks, and Hochderffers and that group came in later on.

Stemmer:  Hochderffers did come in, but not much later.  Old Man McMillan was one of the first ones to settle out there where the McMillan homestead is now.  And the Clarks came in very early, too -Asa Clark and John Clark.  And John Clark took up that ground there where the Clark Homes are now.  They were twin brothers.

Babbitt:  Well, McMillan ran sheep, did he now?

Stemmer:  Yes, he was one of the first sheepmen.  He was ahead of the [Campbells?] or the Francises or any of that bunch.

Babbitt:  And Clark then was also a sheepman?

Stemmer:  No, John Clark, I think, didn't get in the sheep business, but he had a ranch right off of the bat out there.  They farmed about ninety acres out there, and built a two-story house, just out there beside the high school.

Babbitt:  Well, then the Hochderffers, you say, came in shortly thereafter?

Stemmer:  Yeah, not very long after.  See, up on the San Francisco Mountains at that time, Gus Dilman [phonetic] had some; Peter Knickerbaugh [phonetic] had settled up there; and the Butlers.

Babbitt:  About what year was that?

Stemmer:  Well, that was along about 1886 or '87.

Babbitt:  Hochderffers, old George, I've heard that he's head of this Arizona Guard -or what was it now?

Stemmer:  Well he was Colonel.

Babbitt:  Was he a bona fide colonel?

Stemmer:  Well, I don't think that he's ever been a bona fide colonel.  I think that's more or less of an honorary title.  But he used to be captain of the first company (unclear).  It was organized in <Flagstaff>.

Babbitt:  Somebody said that they went out and fought Indians.  Arizona Rangers, I believe.  Isn't that what they called them?

Stemmer:  Well, no, Arizona Rangers was a different organization.  That was in territorial days.  We haven't had any rangers since we become a state.

Babbitt:  Hochderffer was the head of some group that was supposed to protect the folks here and go out and fight Indians?

Stemmer:  Well, I don't know about that, because we had what we called Company "I" of the National Guard here, and there's never been an occasion for 'em to go out and do any fighting of the Indians.  We had an Indian scare, as I said, but I don't think the National Guard ever had anything to do with it, because Indians never came in.

Babbitt:  I've heard that there's quite a little bit of controversy from time to time as to where the original <Flagstaff> tree was located.  What do you think about that, Charlie?

Stemmer:  Well, I think the original <Flagstaff> tree was located about 300-400 yards northeast of the present Old Town Springs.

Babbitt:  You don't have any recollection of that?

Stemmer:  I do have a recollection of seein' that tree when I was a kid.  That stood for a good many years after this new town of <Flagstaff> was organized.

Babbitt:  In other words, that would be up toward the old Clark Ranch there?

Stemmer:  No, that'd be from Old Town Springs, up, oh, probably 200 yards northeast of the Old Town Spring.  Do you know where the Old Town Spring is situated?

Babbitt:  Yes, I do.

Stemmer:  Well, you just take a northeasterly direction, about 200 yards, and that'll be about where that tree stood.

Babbitt:  Charlie Clark said it was over in that direction, all right.  I understood from him he thought it was over in that flat (unclear).

Stemmer:  Well, you see, the soldiers were camped there, because there was water there, and that was the closest tree that was available to suit their purpose to run up a flag.  By the tree, you know, they lopped off the limbs up to pretty close to the top.  I can remember that tree myself, stood there for a number of years.

Babbitt:  Was it on the flat ground or on the side of the hill?

Stemmer:  On the slope.

Babbitt:  On the slope.  Not very far up, though?

Stemmer:  That's right.

Babbitt:  Charlie said that Johnny Love cut that tree down.

Stemmer:  I don't know about that.  It stood there several years, I know.

Babbitt:  Do you remember anything about the Babbitts when they came in, or were you too young then?

Stemmer:  Well, I can't give you the exact year they came in here, but I believe that Billy Babbitt and Charlie Babbitt were the first two in here, as I recall it.  And your Uncle Charlie had a nickname:  they called him Butch.  They told me in the early days when he first came in here that he had a butcher shop and also operated a restaurant; and that your father, when he first came in here, affiliated with his brother, Dave, in the general merchandise business.  But 'til the business got a start, he was head bookkeeper for C. J. Brannen, in that store across from the Old Jim Vail Saloon, that Mrs. Syler's [phonetic] operating now.

Babbitt:  Do you remember anything about the gambling and the drinking and carousing and goings-on here?

Stemmer:  Well, there was plenty of it.  There was a killing almost every night.  They had about eight saloons in the town that kept the boys liquored up, and some of 'em weren't any too humane about the way they handled the situation.  These lumberjacks would come in, and they'd give 'em some kind of knockout drops, overload 'em and take their wallets, and come back the next morning and ask for fifty cents (unclear), they'd get thrown out on their head.  I remember seeing a lot of that.

Babbitt:  That was the saloonkeepers?

Stemmer:  That was the saloonkeepers.

Babbitt:  Sandy Donahue was a famous character, and he's also supposed to be quite generous.

Stemmer:  Sandy Donahue was.  Sandy Donahue was fire chief here for several years, in the days when being a fire chief wasn't any fun -everything was built out of lumber, and whenever a fire got started, they had no water supply, it had to be a bucket brigade (unclear, coughing).  The fire engine that they had was one of those old-fashioned affairs that they pumped like a handcar in the early days.  Six men got on each side and they'd run a nozzle down into a cistern or a water barrel or whatever was available, and when that was gone, they had to find another barrel or let the fire burn itself out.  I can see that just like yesterday.

Babbitt:  Was there a volunteer fire company?

Stemmer:  Yeah.  In the meantime, they had a hook-and-ladder company here.  They used to have long ropes and grappling hooks with long (unclear) on 'em, and they couldn't control the fire, because they had no motor, so they'd go to tearing down buildings between where the fire was, and ahead -like they make fire breaks in the forest now.  They'd dynamite some of 'em.

Babbitt:  That must have been a pretty dangerous operation.

Stemmer:  Well, it was, but that beat all of 'em burning down.

Babbitt:  In other words, you'd just blow up a building?

Stemmer:  Yes, they'd blow up a building, or two or three, if it was necessary.

Babbitt:  I think that would scatter the embers farther.

Babbitt:  Well, they'd dynamite the buildings that weren't afire.

Babbitt:  Oh! those that weren't afire.  Were any of those old firemen killed in fighting these fires?

Stemmer:  I never knew of anybody to be killed.  I've known some of 'em to get hurt.

Babbitt:  Well, Sandy Donahue was quite a scrapper, too, wasn't he?

Stemmer:  Yes, he was.  He was quite a scrapper.

Babbitt:  Did you ever see him in any fights?

Stemmer:  Well, I saw him in a fight one time when he was out to a fire.  He got after some fellah for gettin' in the way of something, and the fellah made a pass at him, and Mr. Sandy Donahue laid him out.  You know, he came here from <Buffalo New York>, and he'd been fire chief there in that big city.  He had a brother here for a while, you know, Florence Donahue.

Babbitt:  Well, he had a saloon and gambling hall -I have a picture of that.

Stemmer:  Yeah, it was next door to the Jim Vail property -right next door.  The two saloons were right side-by-side.

Babbitt:  Didn't he used to clean out that saloon once in a while -it was necessary for him to get on the rampage?

Stemmer:  He did his own bouncing, to be plain about it.

Babbitt:  They say he was really a two-fisted hombre.

Stemmer:  Yes, he was.  Sandy Donahue would have been a wonderful citizen if he hadn't of drank too much, and let liquor get the best of him.

Babbitt:  Well, he did make a lot of money, didn't he?

Stemmer:  Yes, and he lost a lot of money.  He didn't manage....  He'd get drunk and pull a lot of boners that'd set him back.  And then he was quite a ladies' man.  You know, a lady could tickle him under the chin and wink at him, and he'd part with everything he had.

Babbitt:  Do you remember any of those early-day ladies?

Stemmer:  Well, I remember one Spanish woman in particular.  I believe she really liked him.

Babbitt:  Was her name Scarface Annie?

Stemmer:  No.

Babbitt:  I got a deed -we were clearing (unclear) Sandy owned at one time.  There was some woman by the name of Scarface Annie and several other women involved.

Stemmer:  That might have been over there on the South Side for a while there.  But this woman came from a high-class Spanish outfit, and I believe she really thought a lot of Sandy, but she never could straighten him out.  She really didn't (unclear).

Babbitt:  Sandy never married?

Stemmer:  Yes, he married her legitimately.  I don't know about the other women, but he sure married her.

Babbitt:  Well, I understand at one time a lot of these men and women lived together without being [legally married].

Stemmer:  Oh yes, there was quite a little of that.

Babbitt:  Of course it was recognized, common law marriage.

Stemmer:  Common law marriages.

Babbitt:  I don't suppose there were many ministers here, though.

Stemmer:  Well, there was a long time here they had a Catholic priest and a Methodist minister.  They had a cowboy minister, a guy who used to ride the range here.  His name was Pierce, and he was a minister.  Became ordained and he came here and preached in the old Methodist church where the bank now stands.  I think he was here four years before they transferred him.

Babbitt:  Who was the Catholic priest?

Stemmer:  Well, the first Catholic priest that I remember here was Father Dulje.

Babbitt:  Father Gibatosi? [phonetic]

Stemmer:  I don't remember him, but I remember Father Dulje.  My stepfather and Father Dulje were great friends.  He used to bring him over to Sunday dinner once in a while.

Babbitt:  How do you spell that?

Stemmer:  D-U-L-J-E.  You never heard of him, did you?

Babbitt:  Had the old church been built by that time?

Stemmer:  That's right.  I think it was Father Dulje, and then I think there was one priest, but I don't remember his name between that and Father Connolly [phonetic], because Father Connolly had this church over here for a long time.

Babbitt:  Well, Father Vabre was in there.

Stemmer:  Well, Father Vabre was an [after matter?].  Father Connolly was here a long time before Vabre was.

Babbitt:  I've heard my mother speak of Father Gibatosi and Father Ferrari.

Stemmer:  Yeah, Father Ferrari was in here.  Father Ferrari was transferred in here from Prescott.  But Father Connolly was the first Catholic priest that I remember hearing about that church.  Whether he was the first one or not, I don't know, but he's the first one that I recall.

Babbitt:  Now, Sandy Donahue, as I've heard so many stories about him, one was that they got him to kick a silk hat that had a rock in it, and broke his foot.  Do you ever remember hearin' that story?

Stemmer:  Yes, that happened.

Babbitt:  What was the circumstance there?

Stemmer:  Well, Sandy Donahue was a fellow that paid less attention than other people.  This is sort of a comeback.  You would think that a man that came from <Buffalo New York>, would have more sense than to kick a silk hat on the sidewalk, because that was a popular gag back East, you know, among the kids.

Babbitt:  Well, how did they work it?  How did they set the stage for....

Stemmer:  Well, they set the hat -the hat was right out there in front of his place of business, if I remember rightly.  A fellah, when he wasn't lookin' there, just put a brick under the hat.  It was a half brick, and put the silk hat over it.  Old Sandy just walked up and give it a kick, and then he jumped around there holdin' his foot.  (laughter)  He did use a little language that wouldn't go very well in church.

Babbitt:  Al Beasley claimed that it broke his foot or sprained his ankle or something.

Stemmer:  It damaged enough so that he was laid up for a couple of weeks with it, but he couldn't walk.  But he was always playing tricks on other people.

Babbitt:  Well, Charlie, what do you remember about my father, George Babbitt?

Stemmer:  Well, sir, I remember this about your father:  I think I remember about the time that the Babbitt Brothers firm grew to such an extent that they commenced to kind of departmentalize.  Billy, he looked after the range; and C. J. looked after the city business, all the meat packing and that sort of thing; and Dave seemed to be sort of the head of the whole outfit.  And George looked more after the big store than anybody else -that was your father.

Babbitt:  About what year would that be?

Stemmer:  Well, let me see.

Babbitt:  In 1900, somewhere along in there?

Stemmer:  Well, it was further back than that, because I worked for him in 1898.

Babbitt:  For my father?

Stemmer:  I worked in the store there, and your father was runnin' the shebang there then.  He had charge of the grocery department and he seemed particularly to be interested in the grocery department at that time.

Babbitt:  He had a lot of friends, didn't he?

Stemmer:  He had plenty of 'em.  He had a counter boss, and he had a manager, Tom Rickle, and he had Frank Stein as a counter boss, and then the rest of us were counter monkeys and so on.

Babbitt:  I understand the Indians, even the Navajos, had a name for him and liked him.

Stemmer:  Yeah, but I don't remember what that was.  I never knew anybody that disliked George Babbitt.  I don't think that the state has ever produced his equal.  Now, he wasn't a bit egotistic.  He wasn't in any way, because of his influence or his connections, it didn't bother him a bit.  He met all types of people, and he was impartial in every respect.  I don't think that the state has ever produced a man that would equal George Babbitt.  I'm not sayin' that to flatter anybody, because I thought more of him than anybody I knew, practically, at that time.  He was a good friend to me as I was comin' up -not only me, but plenty of others.

Babbitt:  Well, I'm awfully glad to hear how highly you regarded him.  I've heard many comments along similar lines.

Stemmer:  George Babbitt has helped more people in the state of <Arizona> than I guess anybody else has, and he got less thanks for it in some ways.  He'd extend this, and do that, and one thing and another.  The beautiful part of that was that the people who failed to come up, if he loaned any money, and they wanted to collect it, he didn't go to any straits, he never sued anybody that I ever heard of.  Certain people that he helped, if he wanted his money, then he turned out to be sort of bad, but it was the Babbitt Brothers that got the blame then, not George.

Babbitt:  My father was pretty easy-going (unclear).

Stemmer:  Yes.

Babbitt:  Didn't you help him build a big home up on the hill?

Stemmer:  Well, I'll tell you what I did.  He contracted to have the big home built.  But he didn't contract to have the landscaping done.  The first that I did at the big home up there was to replace the double-strength glass that he thought, according to contract, was plate glass.  And when he found out it wasn't, he had me take all that out and put in regular plate glass.  Then he had me go on and landscape the grounds there.

Babbitt:  Do you remember about what year that was, Charlie?

Stemmer:  It was in 1910.

Babbitt:  That he was landscaping that big house?  In other words, he must have started building that about 1908 or 1909, right?

Stemmer:  About 1908.  In the meantime, we had several teams hauling dirt up there.  We hauled good rich earth to fill in up there in front of the house, you know.  And we put that driveway around in there, and we measured that all off, and we planted some stuff.  At that time then, they didn't have the....  I don't know, there was some stuff we planted there that never grew.  Of course the lawn did all right.

Babbitt:  How many men did you have working?

Stemmer:  I had eighteen men working there for three weeks.  That's hauling the stuff up there, some loading the wagons.  And then they come up here and had dump boys who would dump it up there.  You know, there was a teamster and a couple of guys to load it, the wagon being loaded.  We hauled dirt from the bottom of the hill.  When you did that, clear on up to the building, you understand.  We curbed it along with rock, to mark the roadway.

Babbitt:  Well, you did a good job, Charlie.  That's still a beautiful circle up there in front of the big house.

Stemmer:  Well, thanks for the compliment.  We always tried to do what we did, right.

Babbitt:  Well, you sure did.  It needs a little care now, of course.  Since Mother and Dad are both gone, it's been neglected to a certain extent.

Stemmer:  That's the way those things go.

Babbitt:  Who helped build that house?  Who was in charge of the operation?

Stemmer:  Well, if I remember correctly, Fred Hennessy [phonetic] was the contractor.  Now, I won't swear to that, but I'm pretty sure that Fred Hennessy had that contract.  Do you remember Fred Hennessy?

Babbitt:  Yes, I do.

Stemmer:  He married the Widow Aubineau.

Babbitt:  Uh-huh.  And then they had somebody specially building those big fireplaces.  I know those big beautiful chimneys were built by somebody (unclear).

Stemmer:  Well, I don't know whether they got Mr. Harding from <Oak Creek> to do that or not.  He was a mason, you know -I mean a stonemason -and he built many fireplaces and a good many buildings in the early days here in <Flagstaff>.  O. P. Harding.

Babbitt:  Yes.

Stemmer:  The man whose place you now have.

Babbitt:  Yeah, my father bought that at a sheriff's sale years and years ago.

Stemmer:  Yeah.  O. P. Harding was the man, I'm pretty sure, that did those fireplaces, and he did a lot of 'em around here, specialized.

Babbitt:  Didn't Mother and Dad plan that house themselves, pretty much?

Stemmer:  Well, they planned it, but then they had an architect to carry out their ideas.  What I mean is, they had their own ideas, and their own drawings, but it was supplemented, you know, carried out, on papers, to scale, by architects.

Babbitt:  Didn't people think they were a little foolish, going so far out of town at that time?

Stemmer:  Well, to be honest about it, they said your dad was nuts to build way out there.  (laughter)

Babbitt:  He had a little more imagination, I guess.

Stemmer:  Yeah.  In the meantime, I said the town'll ever go out that far.  He was practically a mile from the nearest residence when that was built.  I don't know whether you know that or not, but I'll tell you, when you left the courthouse there, outside of goin' out that road....



