FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Billie and Ernest Yost

Interview number NAU.OH.28.45

 

Mrs. Billie Yost, former clerk of the Superior Court of <Coconino County> and author of the book “Break Upon the Sands,” and Mr. Ernest Yost, a <Flagstaff> native. Interview conducted by Susan L. Rogers on November 21, 1975, Transcriber: Susan Deaver Olberding.

 

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

 

Tape 1, Side 1

 

Billie Yost, born in <Winslow>, February 27, 1907

Red Lake Trading Post started by her parents

Billie’s parents

Mother taught at Polacca Day School in 1895

Daily life on Navajo Reservation

Cattle drives

School in <Winslow>

Played girls basketball, were champions in 1924

Parents stayed at trading post during winter while girls were in school in <Winslow>

“Bread Upon the Sands,” discussed

Charlie Hubbell

How got into newspaper business

Giragi brothers

Came to <Flagstaff> in 1935, met husband Ernest

Houses in Coconino Estates

Writing for newspaper

Helen Dolan’s wedding

World War II ending celebration

Weather, snowfalls, 1948 and 1967

Different murder trials

Singleton, Walkup murder

<Flagstaff> paper moved to Santa Fe Ave.

Decision to run for clerk of Superior Court

 

Tape 1, Side 2

Day at newspaper, work performed

Different <Flagstaff> entertainment during 1930’s-1040’s

Bridge games

Dancing at Monte Vista

Skiing and sledding

Ernest Yost’s early childhood (short bio)

Different adventures and problems as deputy sheriff

Chinese people in area

Harvey houses in <Winslow> and <Williams>

Billie interviewed Charles Lindbergh in <Winslow>, 1928

President Kennedy and breakfast at <Flagstaff> armory

Interview with Eleanor Roosevelt in <Winslow>

Ernest’s teachers at school

Emerson School, discussed

Different <Flagstaff> celebrations

Ernest’s parents history

Flu epidemic of 1918

Brother John Yost died, football trophy at NAU

Ernest almost died

 

Tape 2, Side 1

Water from Old Town Spring

City sold water for 25 cents a barrel

Grand Canyon Street, area described

Ernest Yost’s brothers and sisters

Childhood days

Halloween pranks

Playing football

Babbitt’s Livery Stable

Picnics at Lake Mary

Trips to <Oak Creek> in fall to buy fruit

Trips to <Grand Canyon>

Riordan’s house

Parties and weddings

Arizona Lumber and Timber Company

Mill whistle, used by people to set their clocks

Logging pond

Emerson School activities

Baseball champions

Switzer family hardware store

Commercial Hotel, mentioned

Weatherford Hotel, mentioned

Road to <San Francisco Peaks> (Weatherford Road)

Bear story

Hunting and fishing

Pool rooms and bootleggers

 

Tape 2, Side 2

Bank Hotel, dance hall

Deputy sheriff’s experiences at <Mormon Lake>

Handcuffing men to trees who made disturbances

Daily chores

Milking cows and chopping wood

Judge Doe, mentioned

Greenlaw sisters

Indians

Stage line to <Grand Canyon>

Travel to trading post in <Winslow>

Snake dances at Hopi

Took Riordan’s guests during summer

Story about grapefruit on car fuel pump

Greenlaw family, mentioned again 

Dr. Fronske

 

SUSAN ROGERS: This is an interview with Mrs. Billie Yost and her husband, Mr. Ernest Yost. Mrs. Yost was the former Clerk of the Superior Court of <Coconino County> and was also the author of the book Bread Upon the Sands. This interview is being conducted in their home at 801 N. Leroux on November 21, 1975. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers representing the Flagstaff City Coconino County Public Library.

 

SUSAN ROGERS: Mrs. Yost, when and where were you born?

 

BILLIE YOST: I was born in <Winslow> on February 27, 1907 and <Winslow> is 60 miles east of <Flagstaff>. I was raised in <Winslow> to the age of 7, then my parents started the Red Lake Trading Post about 45 miles northwest of <Winslow>. And we had a couple of teachers come out to the trading post just to teach my sister, Esther, and myself. And then we came back into <Winslow>, always in the wintertime to go to school and high school, but all of our summers were spent at the Trading Post.

 

SUSAN ROGERS: Can you give me a little information on your parents and what they did and their child-rearing philosophy?

 

BILLIE YOST: Well, my father, William Franklin Williams, was born in <California> and he came to <Arizona> at the age of 12 in 1882. And his father, Jonathon Patterson Williams, established a trading post at Blue Canyon in 1882 and my father remained there until he was a young man when he went to the Keams Canyon Trading Post. He operated that post for T.V. (?) Keams, for whom that canyon is named. And I would assume that <Keam's Canyon> is something like 80 miles northeast of <Winslow>. My mother was born in <London England>. She came to the <United States> when she was 9 years old and she thought she was an orphan. She was adopted by some people in <Watertown New York> who gave her the name of Gertrude Laird. Her own name she later found out before I was born, was Rose Annie Mander. She was raised in <Oregon> by some relatives of these people from <Watertown New York>. And then she came to <Arizona> in 1895 to teach at the first day school on the Polacca Indian Reservation. The name of the town is <Polacca> and that's the Hopi Day School. She met my father, who was running the Keams Canyon Trading Post, and after they had a courtship of two years they were married. Then they came into <Winslow> to live because that's where his mother was living.



SUSAN ROGERS: Would you just tell me a little bit about your daily life on the reservation?

 

BILLIE YOST: Well, if you live at an isolated trading post, the thing that you do the most is trade or barter with the Indians. But in those days, they used to permit the Indian trader to buy cattle and sheep during the summer months from the Indians. And then in the fall of the year you would either drive the sheep to market which would be in <Winslow> 45 miles away, and drive the cattle. And I did take part in a cattle drive one time with my father when I was 13 years old and we drove them to <Winslow> and they were shipped from the stockyard. They no longer have cattle drives, they're transported in cattle trucks, but most of our lives were devoted to herding the sheep and herding the cattle, cooking, and trading with the Indians at the trading post because no one lived there except our family. I had two brothers and my sister and myself and my parents. Since the Navajos at that time didn't talk very much English, we children had to learn to talk enough Navajo to trade with them, to barter with the Indians. So that was our summer life, because during the wintertime we did return to <Winslow> to go to school. I did graduate with my sister in 1924 from Winslow High School. She and I were both on the basketball team of Winslow High School and we were proclaimed northern <Arizona> champions in 1924 when we played here at the Normal School, which is now NAU. We had eliminated everyone in the north by beating all the teams. I think we played something like 21 games.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any special family celebrations or traditions that you had on the Reservation? Maybe how you celebrated Christmas, 4th of July?

 

BILLIE YOST: Well, the Indians used to always call Christmas "Kismus" so when they'd come to the trading post on that day we'd always try to give them stick candy, cans of tomatoes and peaches, things like that as a gift from the trader. We didn't have any outstanding celebrations there. At one time, there was no bridges across the <Little Colorado River> and we used to have a difficult time freighting our produce to the trading post because it was done by big freight wagons and sometimes it would take 2 or 3 days for them to make that trip.



SUSAN ROGERS: When you were going to school in <Winslow>, how often did you get to go home and visit your family? Or did the whole family move into <Winslow>?



BILLIE YOST: No, my father and mother usually stayed at the trading post and my two brothers usually helped my father out there. Then my mother would get somebody that she knew in <Winslow> to stay with my sister and I until when we were in high school, then we stayed by ourselves. And they tried to come in to see us. We finally got a Model T Ford, and they would try to come in as often as they could ford the <Little Colorado River>. They would come in to visit us. We tried not to go out there in wintertime, because you didn't always know whether you could get back. We did go out there for one Christmas, and we did have to come back in a big freight wagon drawn by the horses because the snow was pretty deep and we couldn't make it in the Model T Ford.



SUSAN ROGERS: You said in the questionnaire about some of the teachers you had. You had Dr. Grady Gammage for awhile?



BILLIE YOST: Dr. Grady Gammage taught me social science when I was in high school in <Winslow>. He was my teacher for the full four years of high school, 1921-24. Then later he was sent here to be the president of the Normal School. Then later he went to <Tempe>. Of course, he passed away in <Tempe> several years ago. But he was president of this college. I thought it was interesting to know that G.E. Cornelius, who was president of the Normal School around 1918 did sign my 1st grade report card, 'cuz he was the Superintendent of Schools in <Winslow> at that time. So I did have association with two of the presidents of NAU!



SUSAN ROGERS: How about any other teachers that stand out in your mind or episodes in high school?



BILLIE YOST: Well, I still have two teachers living in <Winslow>. She is Mrs. C.A. Hanson now, but she was Dora Thomas. She was my basketball coach when we were acclaimed champions in 1924. She still lives there. And my kindergarten teacher is still living in <Winslow>, also. Her name is Marjorie Styles, and her maiden name was Marjorie Blair and both of them made quite an impression on me because it seemed to me they were very kind and seemed to understand the problems of young people.



SUSAN ROGERS: Let's talk about your books as that was mainly about the Indian Reservation. How did that come about, your writing?



BILLIE YOST: Well, I went to the Snake Dance one year with a couple of people who had come from <Ohio>. And a friend of mine in <Winslow> wondered if I could go to the Snake Dance with these people. They took me. And I mentioned about all the things that had happened to us at the trading post and so this man said to me "why don't you write a book about your life on the Navajo Reservation?" And I said, "well, it's been done so many times, maybe they wouldn't want this one." But he said if you can tell the things that actually happened to you, they might be. So, I let that rest for a long time and then finally I got it all together and my husband and I drove to <Caldwell Idaho> and my book was accepted the first time I presented it to the publishers, which is unusual. But I rewrote it many times - I think I rewrote it seven times before I presented it.



SUSAN ROGERS: How many years did that take you?



BILLIE YOST: Oh, about three years, because, see, I was working all the time. I just worked on it at nights and Saturdays and Sundays. Any free time, I'd try to work on it.



SUSAN ROGERS: Whatever happened to Tall Girl in the book?



BILLIE YOST: I really don't know because after I left the Reservation- you don't keep in touch with those people because many of the Indians at that time, and they still don't, read or write or understand English. It's only those who've attended school.



SUSAN ROGERS: She didn't get married while you were there, or anything?



BILLIE YOST: No, not while I was still at the trading post.



SUSAN ROGERS: What about Charlie Hubbell? What do you remember about the man?



BILLIE YOST: Now, Charlie Hubbell was a brother of Don Lorenzo Hubbell who established the <Ganado Trading Post>, which is now a National Monument. And, he just lived 10 miles across the valley from our trading post, although his post was in <Coconino County>, ours was in <Navajo County>. So that when he was killed- a couple of young Navajo men came to his home one night and killed him and burned his trading post down on him after they had robbed the store. They robbed all the silver that was in the pawn; they used to keep them in an old trunk. Of course, that's recorded here at <Coconino County>, because my father was the interpreter for the trial. He spoke Navajo as good as he did English. And, Mr. F.M. Gold, who was the father of Lawrence Gold, was the County attorney at that time. And if I remember right, this happened about 1918.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember Charles Hubbell? Did he ever come to your trading post?



BILLIE YOST: No, but we went to his trading post once to see him. He was a very small man, he must have been 65 years of age at that time, and he lived alone. In that day and age, it does seem that the Indians, occasionally, if they found a trader living alone, did kill them and rob the post. But this is the actual incident that I really know about.



SUSAN ROGERS: OK. You were telling me before we started how you got into the newspaper business. You want to relate that again?



BILLIE YOST: Well, after I graduated from high school I went to <Los Angeles> to go to a Business College and I didn't stay over there too long and when I came back, I went back out to the trading post to be with my father and mother. And while I was there, my brother Roy came out one day and said they needed a bookkeeper at the Winslow Mail in <Winslow>. I had really specialized in bookkeeping in high school and then I had been a bookkeeper for the Halstead Lumber Company in <Winslow> for a few months. So the Winslow Mail thought maybe I could do their bookkeeping, but I had never been in a newspaper office in my life until I went there. So, they had to teach me how to write news and how to do all the things. But I did know how to keep books. And the reason I was selected - the girl, who had been keeping the books and writing their society and news, suffered a nervous breakdown and I was just to take the job until she recovered. Well, then she decided to leave there after that, so they kept me on and I started there in 1927 and I was with the Winslow Mail until 1935 when I came to <Flagstaff>.



SUSAN ROGERS: Okay. And how did that happen?



BILLIE YOST: Well, the Giragi brothers owned the Winslow Mail in <Winslow>, and Holbrook Tribune in <Holbrook>, and then they bought the Coconino Sun in <Flagstaff>. They sent me up here to be the bookkeeper and to write news and society. The reason they sent me up here--the man who was managing the Sun they didn't seem to think was honest and they thought I could sort of watch over the income and cash and outflow of cash. And I was always proud of the fact that I worked for them from 1927 until they sold the Coconino Sun in 1946, and I was never under bond. I mean they had that much faith in my honesty and I always tried to be very honest about any of the dealings. And I did handle a great deal of money, because I did all the bookkeeping and all the payroll and that sort of thing.



SUSAN ROGERS: Were you married when you arrived in <Flagstaff>?



BILLIE YOST: No, I was single. I came to <Flagstaff> in April 1935 and I met my husband. He was a deputy sheriff in the Sheriff's office at that time. He used to play a great deal of softball and he'd come get me and I'd go to the softball games with him. You played first base, didn't you?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was that in the City Park area?



BILLIE YOST: It was in the City Park area. And we went together for two years and we were married in April 1937. We built this house in 1939 and we've lived here ever since.



SUSAN ROGERS: You said this was on the outskirts of town at that time, right?



BILLIE YOST: There was only one other house in this block, clear at the end of the street there, when we first moved in. Isn't that right?



ERNEST YOST: No, there was Wagner's house. Sat back there; Branson's had it.



BILLIE YOST: But wasn't that the only house? All these others have been built since we came. So this was really quite a ways out.



ERNEST YOST: On this side of the street.



BILLIE YOST: There were others across the street. But this was the only house until the one next door was built, maybe twenty years ago. Mr. Sauer owns the two houses beyond there and they were built, I don't think twenty years ago. I don't think they're that old. But we were the only house here on the corner except that one little house that was in the back. And this was built in 1939. And in fact, none of this area which is called Coconino Estates. And we used to call this Mortgage Flats; none of that was there. And none of the Greenlaw areas had been established at that time or the Grandview area - none of those. This was really quite a ways out. Across the street from us, all those were vacant lots. You see, when I first came to <Flagstaff> in 1935, I think we only had about 3800 people in the town. And then when they took the census about 1940, I think we only had about 4000. If my memory serves me right. See we have better than 30,000 people--is it 31,500 now? And when I first came here, because I worked at the paper, I used to call everybody I could think of for news. We used to run a solid page of Personals--of people going and coming--and through that manner I did get to know almost everybody in town on a first name basis. But, of course, I don't know very many people now.



SUSAN ROGERS: When you did start working on the newspaper, can you remember any special incidents that happened with the paper in <Flagstaff>?



BILLIE YOST: Well, everybody in <Flagstaff>, it seemed to me, were very nice to me and I distinctly remember Mrs. Joe R. Babbitt, Sr.--Viola Babbitt--who was an outstanding artist and has a great deal to do with the Art Barn here. She was always very nice to me. And Mrs. J.C. Dolan whose husband died a few years ago, and they are very wealthy people. And the first big wedding that I wrote for the <Flagstaff> Sun was Mrs. Dolan's oldest daughter, Helen. She was the mother of Joe Riordan who has the Flagstaff Country Club and Michael Riordan, who is the president of the Arizona Bank in <Flagstaff>. Mrs. Dolan was very nice to me and I shall always remember that wedding as being the first big wedding-



SUSAN ROGERS: Where did it take place?



BILLIE YOST: In the Church of the Nativity, the Catholic Church. It was a beautiful wedding. And her two sisters were her bridesmaids. She had another sister who had become a nun and she wasn't in the wedding party.



SUSAN ROGERS: Where was the reception?



BILLIE YOST: The reception was held at the Dolan home which is over there on - is that Riordan Rd. now?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of, while working at the newspaper, any historic events or natural disasters that affected <Flagstaff> in particular? The worldwide events - the Wars, the Depression - or any big floods or blizzards that you can recall?



BILLIE YOST: The most outstanding thing in my memory was when World War 2 ended in August, 1945 when the Japs surrendered. It seems to me that this town just simply went wild. There were people riding up and down the streets with cowbells, they were so elated to think that it had come to an end. The stores all closed - they were so pleased to think that peace had finally come. And that to me was an outstanding thing. And then another thing that I remember distinctly was the winter of 1948 and 49. We had 10 feet of snowfall in <Flagstaff> from the first of January till the 30th of January. And the mounds of snow in the center of the street were so high that you couldn't see a car going on that side, and if you were on that side you couldn't see a car- And my husband worked for the Arizona State Highway department out here and he worked something like twelve or fourteen hours a day for three straight months to keep the equipment running to keep the roads clear. I would say he lost 30 pounds in that time because he didn't get very much rest. He had to get up on top of our house and shovel the snow off the house because they were afraid that roofs might collapse under the weight of the snow. And then the next big snow I remember was the winter of 1967. We had seven feet fall in seven days. That was quite a snow. I don't seem to remember too many disasters. There was a shooting out at Navajo Ordinance Depot on May 16, 1943 when four men were killed - the Blevins brothers - I mean one was wounded and three were killed and that provided quite a murder trial in <Coconino County>. I remember that.



SUSAN ROGERS: Tell me more about that.



BILLIE YOST: Well, I can't remember the name of the man. Do you remember the name of the man that did the shooting?



ERNEST YOST: Singleton.



BILLIE YOST: Yes, a Mr. Singleton. These Blevins boys came to his house and they were going to enter his house and take his daughter-in-law out or something and he was abiding by the fact that his house was his castle and these people had no right. And apparently they were coming there with guns, so when they ran from his house he had a shotgun and shot and killed three of them and wounded the fourth one. Isn't that right?



ERNEST YOST: I think that's right.



BILLIE YOST: The man that was wounded was taken to the hospital, of course, and he recovered. And they had a trial. Mr. Gold was still practicing law and I think he defended Mr. Singleton and he was able to prove that these men were going in to this house and had no right to, and so Singleton was exonerated. But this caused a lot of talk, you know, if you shoot- and all three of these men according to the testimony were shot in the back, so apparently they were running from the house.



SUSAN ROGERS: Where was this house again?



BILLIE YOST: It was at the Navajo Ordinance Depot.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you know if it's still standing?



BILLIE YOST: I don't know, would it still be standing, Ernie - the house?



ERNEST YOST: No, I think they tore out most of those houses and moved them out of there.



BILLIE YOST: I don't imagine it's still there. And, of course, Mr. Singleton is dead; the man who was exonerated. I'm quite sure that he is. Another thing that happened here--we had a man by the name of Walkup who was a member of the Board of Supervisors. And he and his wife and four children lived on North Leroux here, just about two blocks down the street and he had gone to <Phoenix>-



SUSAN ROGERS: What was his first name?



BILLIE YOST: -while he had gone to <Phoenix>, I don't know- his wife must have decided she had a right to do this. She killed her four children and then she took the car and drove out to where the Flag Country Club is now and used his rifle and killed herself. And some people coming in--they had been out on that road--found her. And then they decided to go to the house, and when they went into the house, she had left a note for the milkman not to leave anymore milk there, and they found two of the children in an upstairs bedroom, dead, and two downstairs. And she had- didn't it say she had killed them with an ice pick?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: What year was that?



BILLIE YOST: Well that’s been at least 25 years ago, hasn't it? At least that long ago. And it happened- the Coconino Sun as a weekly would go to press on Thursday night so that we'd have the paper ready for Friday morning. So we had to destroy the front page of the paper and we had to do it all over and I can remember we had these huge headlines about mother killing her four children. Of course, that wouldn't be such news now, but in those day that was really something to have happen.



SUSAN ROGERS: How long did you work at the Coconino Sun?



BILLIE YOST: From 1935 to 1966.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you see a lot of changes, in that time, in the office?



BILLIE YOST: Yes. You see the old Coconino Sun used to be where the Health Spa is now across the street from Hotel Monte Vista. And that's where I worked. And then they moved it from there to its present location on Santa Fe about 1950, would you say, Ernie?



ERNEST YOST: I think so.



BILLIE YOST: Or '45. But I spent all my time- See I left the Sun for a while. I worked in the Publicity office at the College for a short time and then I went back to the Sun. And then I left the Sun for a short time and worked at the City Hall and then went back to the Sun. So I was really gone from the Sun for maybe three years in all. But I went back to the Sun office in 1960 and stayed there until I ran for Clerk of the Superior Court in 1966.



SUSAN ROGERS: Now, how did you decide to run?



BILLIE YOST: Well, you know how newspaper people are--if somebody beats you to a story--you want to have the exclusive on a story. And this had been drilled into me for so many years that- I used to have to go to the courthouse every morning from the Sun office and cover the news that took place in Superior Court, suits that had been filed, and I had had to write about six obituaries that morning before I went. So I was really in a hurry when I got over there. So I went in and asked if they had any news and the Clerk of the Court said "no, they didn't have any news." So I went back to the office and the next morning on the front-page of the Republic a suit had been filed the day before in that court suing Flagstaff Hospital for one million dollars. And that was really a good story. So, my boss called me and wanted to know why I didn't get that story. I said I went up there and they told me no suits had been filed. So he proceeded to call up the Clerk of the Court and really ream her out because what she did; the minute I left up there, she called the man who was reporting the news to the Republic and gave him the story. She just didn't want me to have it. I could have had it in our afternoon-





BILLIE YOST: My boss and I got our heads together and he said if you'd run against her you'd beat her. So that's how- of course, I did it to better myself because the salary was much more as Clerk of the Court. I really ran to better myself. But that's the thing that triggered it. I had been turned down on an exclusive story that I could have had first. And this makes newspaper people pretty mad!



SUSAN ROGERS: When you first started working for the newspaper office in <Flagstaff>--can you kind of give me an ordinary day of what you did?



BILLIE YOST: Well, I used to go in around 8:30 in the morning and I used to call people for news and get- we used to cover all the bridge parties, social events, dinner parties, and all the local happenings. I'd get as much news as I could. We had a job printing plant where we printed all the letterhead; envelopes, bills, everything, and I used to read proof on all of that job printing, too. So I would charge out the job printing and then when the paper came out on Friday, I had to measure all the ads and charge those out. So I not only wrote news and read proof on all the job printing, but I also kept the books, did the payroll, did all the banking--so it took your whole day if you did everything. Sometimes I worked many more hours than 8 hours a day, particularly when the War was on, we couldn't get anybody to cover news so I wrote news, and kept the books, and read proof on the job training, and did everything.



SUSAN ROGERS: How big a staff was there at that time?



BILLIE YOST: Well, we had about 5 people in back shop, 3 of them were linotype operators. They set all the type by hot metal at that time on a linotype machine. Now they have offset. And there were only two of us out in the front office, one person to sell ads and do all the bookkeeping and write all the news. So you can see, even if it was a weekly paper, it took a lot of time.



SUSAN ROGERS: When did it switch from a weekly to a daily?



BILLIE YOST: On August 6, 1946 it became a daily paper.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you remember some of the big social events that occurred maybe in the 30s and 40s here? What did the people do for entertainment?



BILLIE YOST: Well, they used to play a lot of bridge and they had a lot of bridge clubs and we did a lot of dancing. There used to be quite a nice dance hall at the Monte Vista dining room. And we used to have what they called the President's Ball. When Franklin Delano Roosevelt was president of the <United States>, they gave a dance every January to raise funds for polio. They used to have a lot of social dances here--they had them up at the Armory and Elks Club had dances; the Elks Club always had a big New Years Eve ball. People danced a lot, played a lot of bridge, and then people would give dinner parties in their homes, or the Hotel Monte Vista was THE place at that time and then Flagstaff Country Club--there were lots of dances out there. Lots of dinner parties out there. It seems to me that people would always have plenty of entertainment long before television.



SUSAN ROGERS: What about winter sports? What kind of winter sports were popular?



BILLIE YOST: Skiing was quite popular--even then. And then children used to use their sleds a lot on these streets, on the hills, and up on Lowell Observatory Hill. There was lots of sleighing. See, his folks lived on Grand Canyon, which is in the area where the Old Town Spring is, and your house was the first house in that area, wasn't it?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Is that where you were born?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you tell me a little bit about your early childhood here?



ERNEST YOST: I went to school up to the 8th grade, over here at the Emerson School. Then I went up to the Normal School which is now the Northern Arizona University, for two years, then I quit and went to work for the AL and T - that was a lumber company here; at that time belonged to the Riordan family. 2 brothers, I worked for them up till '33 - somewheres along in there - then I quit. There I was in charge of all the equipment at the AL and T. And then I went into the Sheriff's office in 1933 and stayed there until 1940, it was just seven years. I left there, went out and organized the _____ force. I didn’t have no (?) Ordinance Depot and then when the War was over with, I left there on account of all these servicemen coming back and they had to place them. I wasn't in the service. And then I went to work for the Highway Department as a mechanic for twenty years and retired in 1970.



BILLIE YOST: Tell her about some of your experiences when you were a Deputy Sheriff. How about the time you went to <Mormon Lake>? _______ ______.



ERNEST YOST: Well, that stuff would be too hard to remember about. Except that we had so many cases that they'd get mixed up.



BILLIE YOST: But, see, they didn't used to wear a uniform and he went out there one time and this man was holed up in a cabin and he had a- what kind of a gun trained on you?



ERNEST YOST: Oh-



BILLIE YOST: But anyway, Ernie went in and brought him out almost single handedly and he did have very many experiences. Lots of times he'd pick up someone who'd been smoking marijuana even in that day and they'd tear his clothes off. He's come home many a time with his shirts torn off of him. He used to answer all of the night calls; even in town lots of times he was called; family fights and that sort of thing.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any racial type episodes between the Chinese, Mexicans, or Indians in this town?



ERNEST YOST: Not so much with the Mexicans, but the colored people they stayed over there on the south side of the track every night. They didn't give the white people on this side of the track much trouble at all. Most of their trouble was among themselves--getting intoxicated and fighting among themselves over one thing or another. And once in a while drifters would come in here and stay over and cause some trouble; but outside of that, the Mexicans and all always got along pretty well. Of course, people disliked colored people at that time, and they didn't give us much trouble at all.



SUSAN ROGERS: Where did the Chinese mainly live? There was quite a Chinese population, wasn't there?



ERNEST YOST: They lived on the south side of the tracks. It was only about 2 or 3 families. Of course, they used to have some Chinese restaurants here in the early days and they used to sleep in quarters fixed in their own restaurant. They didn't have homes at all, their homes were right there in the restaurant.



SUSAN ROGERS: Were these restaurants well patronized by the whites? Or the people that came through on the trains, maybe?



BILLIE YOST: Trains didn't stop here for food, did they, Ernie?



ERNEST YOST: No, they'd stop at <Winslow>, at the Harvey House down there. And they had a Harvey House up there in <Williams>. And between the two, they never would stop here to have anything to eat.



BILLIE YOST: They had a Harvey House at <Needles> and the trains used to stop long enough for the people to eat and then go on. But I'm sure the trains didn't stop in <Flagstaff> for food, did they?



ERNEST YOST: No.



BILLIE YOST: In fact, <Winslow> had an airport as early as 1928 and <Flagstaff> only got their airport, what, maybe 25 years ago because I interviewed Colonel Charles Lindbergh at the Winslow Airport that long ago, because he came there to dedicate the Winslow Airport.



SUSAN ROGERS: How about any famous people that came to <Flagstaff>? Did you interview anybody?



BILLIE YOST: Well, I got to go to the Continental Breakfast that they had for John F. Kennedy at our Armory. Remember when he ran- did he run in 1962 and took office in-?



SUSAN ROGERS: '60, I think it was.



BILLIE YOST: Well, I got to talk to him because he was here, you know, running for president. And I also, when I was living in <Winslow>, I interviewed Mrs. Franklin Delano Roosevelt. She was my very first VIP that I ever interviewed and I was scared to death. Actually she did the interview because I was so green. But I did write a very good story afterwards.



SUSAN ROGERS: What was your impression of her?



BILLIE YOST: She was the homeliest woman I ever saw in my life and the nicest. And after you talked to her for a while, you lost all sight of her homeliness. She was very gracious, brilliant, and she could answer any question that you could ask her about anything, it seemed to me. They were flying those old Ford Volkker planes through the country. She had come from <Albuquerque> and landed in <Winslow> in this old Ford Volkker plane. They made so much noise that when you got off one of those; you could hardly hear yourself think. So when she got off the plane in <Winslow> I went to the airport to meet her there, and she couldn't hardly hear me from the noise of those Ford planes. They were really something.



SUSAN ROGERS: Let's go back to your days at Emerson School. Do you remember anything exciting happening there - or unusual - or any special teachers?



ERNEST YOST: My first teacher that I had there was Lura Kinsey. She lived right across the street from us, and she passed away. Then I had Mrs. Raudebaugh; that was her name after she got married. Before she married her name was Francis, from a well-known sheep outfit here in northern <Arizona>--the Francis Sheep Company. Then when I went to the Normal School up there, I had- one of them was Abauer (?) and I can't think of the other name-



BILLIE YOST: Was it Dr. Blume?



ERNEST YOST: No, Mr. McMullen was the president.



BILLIE YOST: And, another teacher that you had, her name was Miss Pancake, and didn't she marry Dr. Mackey? And they live in <Camp Verde> now. And, Ernie is a tease, you wouldn't think it, but he's very much of a tease, so he would walk into Emerson School in the morning and go by Miss Pancake's room and say, "good morning, Miss Flapjack" and then he'd really run!



SUSAN ROGERS: How big a school was Emerson at that time?



ERNEST YOST: Wasn't big at all; only went up to the 8th grade. See the population here in town was around 3500 so there wasn't too many children here.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was there one grade per classroom?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: So how many teachers would you say?



ERNEST YOST: I'd say about 6 or 8. Some of them would have two classes; probably have other classes just a couple hours a day and then go back to their 5th or 6th grade, or whatever they were doing before.



BILLIE YOST: The building they tore down over here by Flagstaff High School. I played basketball in that auditorium in 1924 and what, they tore it down about two years ago?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



BILLIE YOST: But they didn't have that until 1924 that was when it first opened where they could have an indoor basketball court. Many a time when we played basketball, if we went to <Jerome> or <Clarkdale>, we played on an outdoor court.



SUSAN ROGERS: In the wintertime, even?



BILLIE YOST: In the wintertime.



SUSAN ROGERS: Cold! What kind of traditions or celebrations do you remember <Flagstaff> having? Either way back in your childhood like the 4th of July, or in the 20s and 30s?



ERNEST YOST: Well, in my younger years they used to have horse racing over where the University's got their football stadium. They used to have a grandstand there and they played baseball and have horse races; mostly horse races. Everybody here in town, all the old-timers, had horses, and take them out there and have these horse races. That's about the only entertainment they'd have outside the 4th of July. 4th of July they'd have a parade and go out there and watch a horse race or a baseball game and when I was going to the grammar school, we had a football team and that was the only place we could play. Where the college has their football field now.



BILLIE YOST: And you didn't used to have defensive and offensive teams; didn't you play in the whole game?



ERNEST YOST: Oh yea, we only had about 2 or 3 subs and if 3 of them got hurt, well, they'd just have to play without them.



SUSAN ROGERS: What did your father do?



ERNEST YOST: He was a yard foreman for the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was he born here?



ERNEST YOST: No, he was born in <Austria>. My mother and he both were born in <Austria> and my older sister was born over there and they came to the <United States> when she was only a year old.



BILLIE YOST: That'd be about 80 years ago, wouldn't it?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, longer than that.



SUSAN ROGERS: And how did they end up in <Flagstaff>?



ERNEST YOST: They were going through here, going to <Los Angeles>, to <California> - not <Los Angeles>, but <California> - and I guess they noticed the sawmill over here so they decided to stop. My Dad went over there and got a job there and worked himself up to be the yard foreman. They were here ever since.



BILLIE YOST: Ernie didn't your grandmother and an uncle come-



ERNEST YOST: First. They came over first and that was what brought my dad and mother over, because my grandmother and uncle before that-



SUSAN ROGERS: And what was your father's name?



ERNEST YOST: John. John Yost.



SUSAN ROGERS: And what was your uncle's name?



ERNEST YOST: Matt.



BILLIE YOST: And then his grandmother was what they called a nurse and she raised many of the children in this area, I mean that are 75, 80s now. And during the flu epidemic of 1918 she saved many lives. She seemed to have a particular way about her of helping people who were ill.



SUSAN ROGERS: Mr. Yost, what do you remember about that flu epidemic?



ERNEST YOST: My brother was in World War I and he was going to the Normal School up here and he and Jim Gray were both going to school up there and they were the first ones to enlist in the Army. And when the flu epidemic came up, well he caught it. He was a Sergeant at the time and he was taking recruits from all these Army camps back to <New York> to ship them across the sea. When he got to <Kansas City>, he caught the flu and he passed away.



BILLIE YOST: And he's the one that this John Yost football trophy is given every year. Ernie's younger brother, Howard Yost, gives this in memory of John Yost. What position did he play in football?



ERNEST YOST: He was the End.



BILLIE YOST: So they give this award every year to the outstanding football player in memory of Ernie's oldest brother, John. Was he only 18 when he enlisted?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: So, were you at Emerson School at this time?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did a lot of little kids get sick?



ERNEST YOST: Oh yeah. They closed the school.



SUSAN ROGERS: They did?



BILLIE YOST: They closed it in <Winslow>, too.



ERNEST YOST: They closed them, and a friend of mine I used to run around with - Pete Michelbach - his folks had a ranch up there in Hart Prairie, so they sent him and I up there at the ranch to stay while this flu epidemic was going on. They came and told us that they thought it was all over with. We came in to town and we both grabbed our bicycles and rode up town to--we were kind of hungry for candy and ice cream--so we caught the flu. The second day that we were in town, we caught the flu, my grandmother saved my life, the doctors had already gave me up. My grandmother stayed right with me and she's the one that brought me out of it.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember what doctors treated you? Do you remember Dr. Fronske?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yes. There was a Dr. Shermann and Dr. Manning in those days. Dr. Manning and his brother were physicians here and they're the ones that come up and give me medication and one thing or another, and finally they just told my folks that they'd gone as far as they could. So, my grandmother pitched in and said, "when they're still alive, there's still hope." So she stayed with me and I come right out of it.



BILLIE YOST: Dr. A.H. Shermann, those were his initials, and was it Dr. George F., G.F., Manning, Ernie? They were here.



ERNEST YOST: And Tom Manning and his brother.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you have anything else about prominent citizens, or special people you had met when you were little?



ERNEST YOST: Well, we knew everybody in town in those days, because the population was only about 3,000 - 3,500 and we knew everybody. Everybody knew everybody else. We didn't have any trouble. If somebody new came in here and settled, within a day or two we'd know who they were.



BILLIE YOST: I think the people you remember the most are like I.B. Koch, wasn't he the mayor of <Flagstaff>?



ERNEST YOST: Oh yea. He was the mayor. He was the manager of the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company.



BILLIE YOST: And then, like M.J. Riordan-



ERNEST YOST: And T.A. Riordan. They were brothers. They owned the sawmill.





SUSAN ROGERS: -okay, want to start?



ERNEST YOST: We used to take buckets with us and go up to get water. But then they used to go around and deliver water in barrels, and they used to sell a barrel of water for 25 cents. They didn't have automobiles in those days, they used horses and wagons and they'd put these barrels on the back of the wagon and fill them up wherever they could get the water. They'd sometimes get the water up there at the Old Town Spring, and they had some wells over here at what they called the Clark Ranch where the high school is now. That used to be the Clark Ranch and they had a couple of wells on it. They used to go over there and fill those barrels up; in other words, they'd fill the barrels up wherever they'd get the water. Have 2 or 3 wells at different places - they'd fill the barrels up and go around and sell them for 25 cents a barrel.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was this a regular business or just individual people doing it?



ERNEST YOST: Seemed like to me that there was a City--they had wagon, horses at that time--that's how they maintained the city streets with the horses _____ horses. If I can remember, it seemed like to me they got the revenue off the water.



BILLIE YOST: The streets weren't paved then, were they, Ernie?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, no - just dirt streets.



SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, you were born on Grand Canyon Avenue. You want to tell me a little bit of the geography around you? How many houses?



ERNEST YOST: Well, there was a Mexican settlement in there and I'd say on that one street there--Grand Canyon--there was about a dozen houses. There were 3 or 4 Mexican families that lived on Grand Canyon at that time; they were working at the sawmill.



SUSAN ROGERS: Is your house still there?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: What's the address?



ERNEST YOST: 50 West Grand Canyon Avenue. It's a white, two-story house. My brother and two sisters still live there. Both of my sisters' husbands died and my older sister, who was born in <Austria> and her husband lived over in <California> until he got sick. They came over here, sold their home and stuff over in <Burbank California>, came over here. He passed away and she's been here ever since, staying with my other sister and brother.



SUSAN ROGERS: And what are their names?



ERNEST YOST: Josephine Hays. My older sister is Mrs. George Falter (?). And my other sister is Josephine Hays. And my brother's name is Howard, Howard Yost.



SUSAN ROGERS: Give me an ordinary day when you were a kid in <Flagstaff>. What kind of things did you and your friends do?



ERNEST YOST: I guess the biggest mischief we were in was on Halloween. They used to have these outhouses--that's all they had--they didn't have any sewers. They had these outhouses and we'd go around and turn them over. Lots of times with people in them!



SUSAN ROGERS: People in them oh dear! Did you used to ever go down and hang around the railroad depot or anything?



ERNEST YOST: No, I never did fool around the depot very much.



BILLIE YOST: Remember when you used to play pool in the bottom of the Weatherford Hotel?



ERNEST YOST: Oh yea, but I didn't play pool until I was 21. They wouldn't allow you to smoke or go into a poolroom until you were 21.



BILLIE YOST: You played a lot of baseball, basketball, and football. Didn't you have a record at one time at the Normal School for the longest punt?



ERNEST YOST: Oh yea, I kicked the ball on the kick-off over the goalpost and there weren't very many who could do that in those days.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any special family celebrations or traditions you used to have?



ERNEST YOST: In those days, everybody knew each other and they'd have picnics. Babbitt's had a livery stable and we used to go down there and rent a buggy and a horse and go out there real early some Sunday morning and have a picnic, and get back that evening. They wouldn't allow you to keep the horses out overnight. We used to go out real early in the morning about daylight and get back about dark. Have our picnic.



SUSAN ROGERS: Where did you usually go for the picnics?



ERNEST YOST: Along the banks of Lake Mary.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to go to <Oak Creek> at all when you were little?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yes, we went to <Oak Creek>.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was that a hard trip?



ERNEST YOST: Well, it was in those days. They had real sharp switchbacks. In other words, when the Model T's came out, we used to go down there in a Model T, and you'd try to get around that curve and you'd have to back up to get around that curve, that's how sharp they were. You couldn't just drive around those switchbacks you'd have to back up on pert' near every one of them.



SUSAN ROGERS: Were there any special guest ranches down there or houses?



ERNEST YOST: They had- Matt Mayhew (?) who used to serve chicken and chicken dinners and stuff like that. Art Vandevier, he used to have that Lolomai Lodge down there and he used to cater to serving chicken and dinners. Course, they had a few cabins down there. That's about all we did at <Oak Creek>. We'd go down there in the fall of the year and buy fruit, stuff like that.



SUSAN ROGERS: How about the <Grand Canyon>? Did you go up there very often?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yes. We used to drive up there all the time.



SUSAN ROGERS: You never took the train--you always went by car?



ERNEST YOST: We went by car. They had a stage going up there in the early days before automobiles. Used to run out through Fort Valley and up through Hart Prairie and up to Cedar Ranch and on into the Canyon. Cedar Ranch is where their stock holding headquarters were. Stopped there and eat, then go onto, into the Canyon the next day.



BILLIE YOST: Was that a two-day trip, Ernie?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



BILLIE YOST: You'd go up one day and come back the next?



ERNEST YOST: Well, you could go up there and back in one day, but the roads were awful bad--washboardy and rough, so we'd always go up there and stay overnight and come back the next day.



SUSAN ROGERS: Now, you were telling me something about the Riordans and their house. Would you tell me that again?



BILLIE YOST: Ernie knows more about the Riordans and their big houses over there.



ERNEST YOST: They'd entertain their friends and stuff, you know. They'd just have these friends, real good friends of theirs, of course invite other people and have their parties and stuff right up there in their home. They had a big hallway there where they had a couple of pool tables and stuff, and they'd move the pool tables off to one side and dance and have a merry old time.



BILLIE YOST: It's quite a good size, see it connects the two big houses. And the thing I remember that I went to there a long time ago, was when M.J. Riordan's oldest granddaughter, Helen--her name is Mrs. McPherson now--was married and they had the big reception in that big- to me it was a big dance hall- and they had the big reception there. They served chicken, salad, rolls and it was more like a luncheon for everybody who had attended that wedding. And it was a big wedding because they had two priests from <Phoenix> and one came from <Los Angeles> and then the priest that was here. There were four priests that took part in the service. It was a big wedding and they used to invite almost everybody. I would say there were 2 or 300 people at the wedding and also invited to the luncheon over there.



ERNEST YOST: You see the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company, it stood right there where the Holiday Inn is.



SUSAN ROGERS: Is that where your father worked?



ERNEST YOST: Yes, that's when the Riordan brothers owned the sawmill and they operated it from--I might not have the right date--but I think it was 1881 up until they sold it to this Southwest Lumber Company. They moved from there over to this Lumber Co. that they operate now.



BILLIE YOST: It's on the other side of I-40. But they had a big old, what kind of pool did they call it? Where they floated the logs up there where Holiday Inn is?



ERNEST YOST: They just called it the log pond.



BILLIE YOST: A great, big pond, you know, where the logs floated.



ERNEST YOST: They'd keep it steam-heated and stuff and then they'd run those logs up the chain up to where they'd cut the logs up into boards and stuff and take them out into the yard and stack it up until they dried out, and then they sold them.



BILLIE YOST: The thing that I remember, Ernie, is the mill whistle that everybody set their clock by. You remember--every morning--and there is a story in the Sun the day that whistle quit blowing. It was a front-page story and it could have been in the daily because it was after '46 that they- but I remember writing a story about the last blowing of the whistle, 'cuz everybody set their clocks, didn't they, by the mill whistle. It blew at a certain time--like in the morning and in the evening and at noon too, didn't it?



ERNEST YOST: Yes, they blew the whistle 4 times a day, I guess. A half-hour before work time, so it kind of be an alarm clock for the people who slept a little late to get up and get to work!



SUSAN ROGERS: Did your father tell you any particular or interesting stories about working there?



BILLIE YOST: About working at the mill - did your Daddy tell you any interesting stories about working at the mill?



ERNEST YOST: No, it was just work 10 hours a day. They had a couple of fires there that didn't amount to much.



BILLIE YOST: He was an expert on lumber, wasn't he?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yea.



BILLIE YOST: He really knew his lumber.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember any particular accidents happening there, disasters?



ERNEST YOST: No.



BILLIE YOST: Anybody getting killed?



ERNEST YOST: No, not that I recall.



SUSAN ROGERS: What were the hours you went to school at Emerson?



ERNEST YOST: 9 o'clock, and got off at 4 o'clock.



SUSAN ROGERS: Were there extra school activities that you participated in at Emerson?



ERNEST YOST: No, they didn't have much. The girls used to put on plays and one thing or another, but the boys weren't that much involved.



BILLIE YOST: Ernie, how about that baseball team that you kids were on? Weren't you champions?



ERNEST YOST: Yes, we was champions of northern <Arizona>. We beat all these high schools and came out champions.



BILLIE YOST: And that was the Emerson School team. And Mr. J.P. McVey, who died just very recently at the age of 81 or 82, was their baseball coach.



ERNEST YOST: He was a manual training teacher. He used to take that on along with coaching stuff. We'd go to the manual training every day for an hour, and course, he'd have every class during the school hours and so he was busy at that manual training.

andlt;/p

BILLIE YOST: See, he married one of the Switzer girls. Now the Switzer family, the W.H. Switzer Hardware store downtown, that's a longtime family in <Flagstaff> and he married Reba Switzer- (tape says Reba, but it was Nellie, Reba was a daughter)



ERNEST YOST: Yes, the Switzers are old-timers here, he passed away here a couple of years ago. He was 90 years old when he passed away; very old. You've probably heard of Switzer's Hardware, well, that belonged to him. He operated that for years and years. I was just a little old kid!



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to go in there?



ERNEST YOST: We used to shop in there. My Mother or Dad sent me down for something in hardware business, I used to go down there and buy stuff.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember anything about the Commercial Hotel or the Weatherford; anything special?



ERNEST YOST: No. Outside of the old ______, where Mr. Prochnow operated it for years and years and then the Weatherford Hotel. Why, Mr. Weatherford operated it and he's the one that built that road up to the <San Francisco Peaks> while he still operated the Weatherford Hotel.



SUSAN ROGERS: When was that, about?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, way back in the early days, I can't recall. Must have been in the early '20s, somewhere's along in there when he built that road.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to go up to the Peaks a lot?



ERNEST YOST: Not a whole lot, no. I've been up there several times; I'd say 12, 15 times. I've been fed too much about wrecking and then road wasn't fit for an automobile until they got it completed and leveled off and after they got it where you could go up in an automobile I went up there several times.



BILLIE YOST: I went up with him once on the Weatherford Road, and we ran into snow and we had to back-up I don't know how many miles, and you know it's only wide enough for one car, till finally we could get to a place where we could turn around and come down. I was really frightened because it's very narrow. You remember that?



ERNEST YOST: Yes. And I went up there one time and there was a little old black bear. I guess he was about half-grown, right in the middle of the road, and the road was real narrow. We stayed right behind, we wanted to see what he'd do, and he just got off to the side of the road. And we drove up and turned to look over to see where it was, and he was up there and he had his head down between his hind legs and he just rolled like a ball down that bunch of quaken’ aspen. And every once in a while, he'd hit one of those ____ quaken’ aspen and bounce off it and keep going.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to do any hunting?



ERNEST YOST: I used to live for summer and fall to go hunting and fishing; I used to go fishing lots of times. I got stoved up with arthritis and rheumatism working out there on that cement floor, I guess that's what caused it, and I haven't hunted or fished for ten years.



BILLIE YOST: But every single fall of the year he always got a deer and he never- he has a beautiful rack of horns out in the garage that he had mounted and he always got turkeys. And he was a very, very good shot.



SUSAN ROGERS: When did you first go hunting? How old were you?



ERNEST YOST: I was about 16, I guess. In those days unless you got your mother's or folks permission and one thing or another to go hunting, you would have to wait until you were- like smoking, you had to wait until you were 21 years old. I was about 14 or 15 years old when I first started to hunt.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you feel there was a lot more wild life then?



ERNEST YOST: Oh yes. Now if you go out hunting and go fishing you have to take a rock to stand on, there's no room and they're all taken---the same way with hunting. Every place you go there's already somebody camped there- And I give it up for that reason, too many people out in the woods.



BILLIE YOST: Before we were married in 1937, he came by the old Sun office one evening and he said, "I'm going to run out and see if I can see any deer." He was gone one half-hour and he came back with a deer; out on Barney Pasture Road. He was gone a half-hour-



ERNEST YOST: In those days, you'd pert' near always knew where to find a deer.



BILLIE YOST: I can remember riding down to the top of <Oak Creek> and you'd see like 17 on this side of the road and 18- it'd be nothing for us to count 100 deer between town and the top of <Oak Creek Canyon>, and that's only been what, 15 years ago- It’s not that way anymore.



SUSAN ROGERS: You keep talking about you couldn't go into the saloons until you were 21. Did you try to go in before you were?



ERNEST YOST: No, there weren't any saloons in those days. Whenever us kids would throw a party, we always knew where there was moonshine and we used to go buy whiskey and ____ these moonshiners.



SUSAN ROGERS: There were a lot of them in <Flagstaff>?



ERNEST YOST: They had their share of them for what population there was.



SUSAN ROGERS: But you never went into the bars along what's now Highway 66, or Santa Fe?



ERNEST YOST: No, they-





ERNEST YOST: -on Front Street, on Santa Fe, and Weatherford Hotel had a pool room but we never did go in there 'til we's 21. We'd sneak down an alley or under the Del Rio railroad tracks to smoke cigarettes.



BILLIE YOST: The River?



ERNEST YOST: Yes. We'd get somebody to buy us a pack of cigarettes that we knew real well. He'd go and buy us a pack of cigarettes, look around like we's about to steal something before he'd hand them to us--he didn't want nobody to see him giving us the cigarettes. He's afraid he'd get caught and they'd fine him or something. In those days, you go for a week or two weeks and just leave your house open. And when you'd come back, why if the neighbors wanted anything, they'd always come over and get it then leave you a note telling you what they'd got, and when you got back they'd repay it.



BILLIE YOST: We didn't used to have to lock the doors at all.



ERNEST YOST: Nowadays you don't do that. You have to look your doors and they break in anyway.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember anything about the Bank Hotel? Anything special.



ERNEST YOST: It was just about like it is now and just low class people live there because it's cheap. Rooms wasn't much, just about the same, nothing every happened down there that I know of.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was it just a hotel, or can you remember it when it was a bank?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, do you mean what they called the Bank Hotel? Oh, I thought you meant the Ideal Hotel.



SUSAN ROGERS: Oh no, the Bank.



ERNEST YOST: Oh, the Bank. They had a dance hall there, downstairs, and they used to have quite a few parties down there and used to hold quite a bit- and then it turned into a theater for a while. Then they moved the theater down there where Babbitt's Men Shop is. Then after that, they moved it down where the Orpheum Theater is now. We didn't have any drive-in theaters or nothing like that.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did you used to go to any of those dances?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yeah.



SUSAN ROGERS: What were they like?



ERNEST YOST: Well, pretty rough at times. Older people- they'd fool around with somebody else's wife, then a big fight would be on. I never did witness any killings or nothing like that. 'Bout the only killings I know of, at a dance hall, was out there at <Mormon Lake>. Pete Owens (?) - George Bracht (?) killed him, it was over a woman, same as- 'bout every time there was a dance something like that happens, it was always over a woman. When I was in the Sheriff's office, I used to police <Mormon Lake> and had to go out there every Saturday night. No place to take them other than the jail in <Flagstaff>. So we used to take 4 or 5 sets of handcuffs and when one of them'd get too unruly and we couldn't handle him much, we'd handcuff him to a pine tree. We'd put their hands around a pine tree and tie them up. I remember one time I was out there at <Long Valley>, and one guy there was awful drunk and he kept causing a disturbance, and took him out there and handcuffed him to a pine tree. And it started to rain and he cried "you go in there and tell those Deputy Sheriffs that if they come and turn me loose that I promise I won't cause any more disturbance." So we went out there and we unhooked him and told him "we were just going to handcuff you to the pine tree and forget about you." He come in there and he never caused a disturbance the rest of the night. Yea, they were the good old days.



BILLIE YOST: They're not like that nowadays. Things are quite different.



ERNEST YOST: Somebody asked me a while back about the way the world's gone and one thing or another, and they me asked me how I felt about it. And I told them I'm glad I'm the age that I am and won't have to listen or look at it too much longer. Won't have to put up with it too much.



BILLIE YOST: When the town was small and you knew everybody and people sort of made their own entertainment and they didn't have as many things to make labor light - you know we didn't used to have washing machines and dryers and all that sort of thing. You had to wash your clothes on a washboard and boil them in a boiler and then wash them again and hang them out-



ERNEST YOST: And pert' near everybody in town had a milk cow in their backyard - have a real nice Jersey cow. You'd have homemade butter and we used to churn the butter and whenever you'd go in the pantry to get a pitcher of milk or a glass of milk, why you'd have to take a spoon and rake off about that much of that real fresh cream.



BILLIE YOST: ‘Cuz their folks had a cow, I guess, until they passed an ordinance where you couldn't have them anymore?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



BILLIE YOST: Did you ever milk it, or did your mother do the milking?



ERNEST YOST: My mother did most of the milking. I had other chores to do--I used to go get tap water and get all the wood and stuff in.



BILLIE YOST: That's before they had gas here. Everybody burned pinewood and wooden coal, didn't you?



ERNEST YOST: Used potbelly stoves, is what they called them, to heat their living room. And used to have a kitchen range to do all your cooking on.



BILLIE YOST: And that took more time--to chop wood- I think that a wood pile- when they removed the wood pile they removed one thing that helped people go out there and vent their- get their emotions worked off. Don't you think? When you went out and chopped wood you could work off a headache or you could work off a lot of emotion.



SUSAN ROGERS: Can you think of anything else you want to add?



BILLIE YOST: No-



ERNEST YOST: A person forgets a lot of stuff, like myself, I'm awful bad at not remembering names. I'll meet people and I don't- and there'll be something there maybe in a day or two I'll think of something else that happened in those old days and one thing or another. You just don't think about them, you can't remember. It comes and goes.



SUSAN ROGERS: Let me ask a question. Do you happen to remember Judge Doe?



ERNEST YOST: Yes.



SUSAN ROGERS: What do you know about him, what do you remember?



ERNEST YOST: Well, he was a judge and a real heavy drinker, but you couldn't tell it. He'd hold his liquor awful well. His home was that white house just as you go down the street--Beaver. Right next to the Church down there, Episcopalian Church, that was his home.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did he build that house?



ERNEST YOST: Yes, he lived there right up till the time he passed away.



SUSAN ROGERS: Did he die in that house?



ERNEST YOST: I don't remember whether he did or not, he could have but I don't remember if he was still in <Flagstaff> when he passed away or not. Come to think about it, I think he was a judge right up to his death, so I imagine he passed away here.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember his wife?



ERNEST YOST: I've seen her but I don't know anything about her.



SUSAN ROGERS: Was he pretty much a respected lawyer, or were people a little leery of him?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yes-



SUSAN ROGERS: - he was respected.



ERNEST YOST: He got elected judge every time he was running, so people must have felt good, he must have had quite a few friends.



SUSAN ROGERS: And his wife was very quiet?



ERNEST YOST: As I say, I didn't know her. I've seen her several times, but I don't know anything about her.



SUSAN ROGERS: They didn't have any children-



ERNEST YOST: Not that I know of.



SUSAN ROGERS: Well, can you think of anything else? Any people you want to mention or anything?



BILLIE YOST: I'll tell you somebody- I'll mention two people who could give you a lot of information - Mrs. Mary Draine, she's listed in the phone book as D.W. Draine.



SUSAN ROGERS: I just talked to her today. I have an interview with her Monday.



BILLIE YOST: Did you? And her twin sister is Louise Beamer.



SUSAN ROGERS: Right. I have that name, too.



BILLIE YOST: See, they were the original Greenlaw family-



ERNEST YOST: I tell you, the best way to get information about the old time and one thing or another is go to the Museum--they have books that go back in the 1800s, or along in there. And you can get information out of them or go up here to the College and do the same thing.



BILLIE YOST: She's doing this for the College, aren't you?



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember Hochderffer? 'Cuz he wrote that book Flagstaff Whoa. I've read that.



BILLIE YOST: But those two Greenlaw girls, Mrs. Beamer and Mrs. Draine - now Mrs. Draine is living in the house she was born in, right here on Leroux, isn't it 309 N. Leroux? It's a big white house and she lives in the house she was born in. And see her father and mother came here- well, Louise and Mary must be 78, and they were born here. In fact, I've heard them tell that they were the first twins, I believe, born in this area. And Mary and Louise both can remember-



ERNEST YOST: See, Mary Draine's father owned that Greenlaw estate. All that land out there.



BILLIE YOST: Didn't he have the Greenlaw mill, too?



ERNEST YOST: Yes, it was out there this side of Camp Townsend.



BILLIE YOST: And see, they came, I would assume, now I don't know this is so, but I would assume the town was very small and Mary said, she was telling me this the other day, now Allen, her brother, I believe has passed away. But her mother was wheeling him in a buggy in a house up there where Mrs. Dolan lives, in that area, and she was afraid to go from downtown <Flagstaff> across that flat. There was nothing in there then, and wheel him, because she said one day she was going along there and an Indian came along. Now he didn't hurt her or anything, she was just afraid. She said one time she didn't have any blinds up to the window and an Indian came up and looked in the window. It was just because they couldn't speak English and they didn't know what to do. But Mary has so many vivid memories of early days and Louise Beamer, she was Deputy Chief Clerk in the Superior Court for something like 25 years, so she might remember a lot of outstanding-



ERNEST YOST: They can give you more information than I can, because most everything that I've seen around here I've forgot about.



BILLIE YOST: … but Mary and Louise have lived here so many years and all that Greenlaw property out there belonged to their father and mother.



ERNEST YOST: You know Dr. Hildebrand? He was trying to get all the information about the stage coach from here to the <Grand Canyon>, so he talked to me on it and I told him what I knew about it, and then I told him… And Frances Decker, he told me, "Ernie," he says, "I was out there at the Museum and they give me the article on the book ____." So I told Dr. Hildebrand about it - so he went out to the Museum and they found those books that I told him about. He told me one day, "Ernie". He said, "it didn't do me much good to go out to the Museum--you gave it to me!" “Oh,” I said,” didn’t you get any information?” He said, “You gave it to me, you told me just exactly what the book said.”



SUSAN ROGERS: What do you remember about that stagecoach? Did you ever take it?



ERNEST YOST: No, I never did. I was too little.



SUSAN ROGERS: Do you remember seeing it?



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yeah, they used to come out from Babbitt's stables down here - when Babbitt's had the stables where the post office is now, the livery stable. They used to have headquarters down there and stop and feed or water the horses and stuff, you know. Then out toward the Canyon, they made the headquarters at Cedar Ranch. Course, it was all dirt road in those days, but I remember them going over to Hart Prairie and right on down the road there, just like it is now. It might not be exactly the way the paved road is, it might be off to one side, but I remember they used to go to Cedar Ranch and put up there and go on into the Canyon the next day.



BILLIE YOST: I can remember going to the trading post. The first time we went out there we went after school closed in May and we left in the evening because in the daytime it was pretty hot. See, that's a lot lower elevation down there, in fact, I think <Winslow>'s elevation is what, 4800. And it took us… now remember it was only 45 miles actually, but the way you had to go… we left in the evening and we didn't get there until the next morning after the sun came up in a horse and buggy and my father drove all night long. So, 45 miles and it took all night.



ERNEST YOST: When I was working for the AL and T, I used to take Mr. Riordan and his guests in a big Cadillac. I used to take them to the Snake Dance every August, every summer. And in those days, why they'd have these washes and they'd have rains, or one thing or another, and those washes would be up high and there'd be an Indian there with a couple of horses to hook on to the car and take them across. We waited until nighttime and I got out and raised the hood and loosened the fan belt so the fan wouldn't throw water back into the motor. So I told T.A., I said, "Well, get in, let's go." He said, "well, wait till the Indian comes up and hooks on to the car--we can't get across there." I said, "Oh yea, we'll make it all right." I never told him what I did. So I went right on across--crossed it because the fan wasn't throwing water and stuff and got on the other side and I got out and raised the hood and when I got back in, I told him what I did--disconnected the fan belt so the water wouldn't drown his motor out and he couldn't believe it. So every time we'd go out here and those washes would be up, I'd just take the fan belt out and the others couldn't make it. They'd get halfway across and quit.



SUSAN ROGERS: I bet the Indians weren't too happy about that.



ERNEST YOST: Well, they didn't say nothing. I imagine they…



BILLIE YOST: I notice this year they don't let the people come to the Snake Dance anymore.



SUSAN ROGERS: Too many people taking pictures, not respecting…



ERNEST YOST: They take advantage of everything when they get there and they do as they please. In the days we used to go to the Snake Dance, why you had to do just exactly what those Indians tell you to do--you couldn't take a camera and you couldn't get so close to them and this and that. Nowadays why these people that go out there, they just crowd in there, and pert' near take it over. That's the reason they quit letting them come--they just got to where they'd take over. Another time… I remember the first time I drove to <Los Angeles>, I had a Dodge sedan at that time. And going across that desert on my way coming back home, my fuel pump kept vapor locking and I drove about five or six miles before it died out. I had some water with me and I dumped some water on the fuel pump and got in there and started up and drove another five or ten miles. And finally I made it to a little old service station, wasn't much of a service station, so there was some old lady about 80 years old, all by herself running that service station. So, I told her "my fuel pump keeps vapor locking," and I said, "I'm plum out of water, I used all the water I've got." She said, "the water's awful scarce, I got to go a long ways to get it." She said, "Wait a minute." She went into the house and she came back with a half of grapefruit. She told me, "now just put that half a grapefruit down on the fuel pump and tie a rag around it so you won't lose it." And I did that and I came all the way into <Flagstaff>. The moisture… And I thought that was pretty good for a woman 80 years old, I guess she had found that out by experience. As I was traveling along, why you learn a lot of things that you really don’t know.



BILLIE YOST: But I really think Mary Draine and Louise could give you…



ERNEST YOST: Oh yea. If you get Mary Draine and her sister together - they could tell you everything that happened in <Flagstaff> from the time they were big enough to know what it was all about.



BILLIE YOST: Let's see their father and mother celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary, I think, in that house where Mary lives.



ERNEST YOST: Her mother… I don't know, but I know she was over 90 years old when she passed away. And she was just as active as any woman you've ever seen.



BILLIE YOST: Milked the cows and made the cheese and the butter and made a living for the kids. The father died when the kids were little didn't he, Ernie?



ERNEST YOST: Yes, he passed away… I bet he was around 60 or 70 years old.



BILLIE YOST: So she was finished raising the children, I think there were five in the family, I'm not sure… I took a ride around the Peaks with Mary not too long ago, to see the aspens as they were turning and she was telling us so many things that happened so many years ago. She's real interesting, and if Louise was with her, what one wouldn't remember, the other would.



ERNEST YOST: You know, there's just very few old timers left. Mary and her sister are about the oldest ones left.



SUSAN ROGERS: And Dr. Fronske.



ERNEST YOST: Oh, yes.



BILLIE YOST: He's 90, isn't he?



SUSAN ROGERS: He's 92, I just talked to him on Wednesday. He's very interesting.



BILLIE YOST: His mind is good, isn't it; his mind is real sharp. He's been here a long time.



ERNEST YOST: He walks down the street here. When he was going to the College up there, he used to never miss coming by here every morning. He never drove, he likes to walk.



BILLIE YOST: But see those girls were born and raised here and I really think they could remember.



SUSAN ROGERS: Okay, do you have anything to add or…?



BILLIE YOST: I don't think so.

 


