JACK MANNING INTERIVEW

NAU.OH.75.2

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE 1]

This is Brad Cole from Northern Arizona University. It's March 12, 1998. We're in the home of Jack Manning in <Kirtland New Mexico>. Also present in the room is Lew Steiger, who is running the sound and camera equipment. We're here to do an oral [history] interview with Jack on behalf of the United Indian Traders Association Oral History Project.

Cole: Jack, could you tell us when and where you were born?

Manning: I was born in <Farmington New Mexico>, 1931, March 2.

Cole: So you went to school, grew up in <Farmington>?

Manning: No, sir, I was just born there. I moved to <Shiprock>. It was the only hospital in the area. I was raised in <Shiprock> 'til I was about eighteen. Then we moved to <Kirtland>. So I went to school in <Shiprock> 'til the eighth grade--one-room schoolhouse and one teacher taught all eight grades. When I was in about the sixth grade, they moved it up to two teachers and two rooms. We learned to read and write, and sometimes that's all that counts.

Cole: Was that a BIA school?

Manning: No, it was a public school. There was about, oh, I don't think there was ever twenty of us in school. There was probably three Navajo children that attended, and about fourteen, fifteen Anglos. The BIA schools, they had two schools there: they had one for the grade school and then they also had a high school that were BIA operated.

Cole: What did your parents do in <Shiprock>?

Manning: My dad worked for Bruce Barnard Trading Company. He started to work there in about probably 1927, 1928, and worked there basically all of his life.

Cole: Tell us a little bit about the Bruce Barnard Trading Company. Who was the owner?

Manning: The owner was Bruce Barnard. He was a gentleman that'd come out here from back East, back in <Kentucky>, and liked it. If I remember right, he'd kind of received an inheritance and he bought this trading post at that time. For that area of the reservation, it was probably one of the larger trading posts. He built it up. He did an awful lot for the Navajo people in regards to their sheep. He raised Rambouillets, and they had so much trouble with the Rambouillet rams, of their horns being so close to their head, that they would get worms in their head, and they would lose them. Over a period of years, he bred them to where the horns were three and four inches away from their head. And he had some beautiful, beautiful sheep. If they couldn't afford to buy one, he would just loan 'em rams. It certainly improved the wool off the Navajo sheep in that area of the reservation.

Of course the trading post, he just operated it like any other--bought livestock. Until after World War II, there wasn't hardly any money, everything was the barter system. In the spring you bought the wool and they paid their bills, and in the fall they brought their lambs and calves and paid the bills again. I can remember my dad telling about one month, I think it was the month of February, the whole month they did less than $100 cash business. In today's world, that's a little strange.

Cole: Did your dad ever become a part owner of the trading company?

Manning: Yes, Dad owned 25 percent of it. After Mr. Barnard passed away, and then his son also passed away, it reverted to kind of a trust, and we tried to buy it. My brother and my dad went down to <El Paso> to have the deal all made. My dad already owned 25 percent of it, and we were going to pay for another 25 percent, and then they would carry a mortgage on it. The lawyer said he wanted a mortgage on my dad's house. (break for a phone call) Their attorney wanted a mortgage on my dad's house, and my brother, he went right through the roof and said, "No way!" and that was the end of the deal. And we came back to <Shiprock> and bought another trading post. That was how we kind of got in it for ourselves. Then my dad wouldn't quit. He stayed at Barnard's for still about six years after that.

Cole: Was Barnard's when your dad ran a bull pen type store?

Manning: It started, uh-huh. Yes, it was, I don't know the exact date, but it was probably into the later sixties before they went to self-service. And it was a large store. I can remember working in there, and they'd walk you to death. Everything was behind the counter, and first they'd want something that was on the north side, and then they'd want something on the south side. All they had to do was walk back and forth across the bull pen. The trader, he had to walk all the way around. And it was kind of a joke with a lot of 'em. They'd walk your legs off. But Navajo people have a sense of humor.

In the early fifties, there still wasn't a whole lot of money, and [we] didn't have natural gas and those kind of things plumbed around in <Shiprock> that they have today. Used to have a big pot-bellied stove that sat out in the middle of the bull ring, and in the wintertime that thing would get just white hot. A lot of the Navajo people that lived close around there, they'd come and just spend the day there, sitting around the stove and staying warm and spittin' tobacco juice on it. It was different.

Cole: When did you first become involved in trading?

Manning: I started working there in 1953 when I got back from <Korea>, and I've been involved in it ever since.

Cole: Was that at Barnard's?

Manning: At Barnard's. I worked at Barnard's 'til 1970.

Cole: Did you ever have a chance to work in a store when you were a kid?

Manning: Yeah, I worked in it as a kid, oh, from 1942, 1943, 1944. Everybody was drafted and in the war, and there wasn't any help. I stocked shelves and counted ration stamps and all those kind of things.

Cole: How did the rationing work in the trading post, do you remember?

Manning: Just like it did anywhere else. You had to have your coupons to get sugar, and so many for canned goods. As far as the way the rationing worked, it was there, same as it would have been in <New York City>, I guess.

Cole: Did the Navajos have to get coupons?

Manning: Yes, they had to have coupons, too.

Cole: How did they do that?

Manning: It was just distributed there, and they had an office there in <Shiprock> and they would go there and get 'em. Back at that time, their diet was pretty much mutton, fry bread, and coffee. Your trading post didn't have the fifteen different varieties of the same item, you know. They had one kind of tomatoes and one kind of peaches and one kind of flour, and that was about it.

Cole: Where did the supplies come from for the trading post _____?

Manning: Got 'em from Farmington Merc. [Mercantile] and from Gallup Merc., those two mercantile companies. They pretty much supplied us from the time that I was there. Prior to that, I think they bought a lot from what they called Progressive Merc. that was here in <Fruitland>. The time that I was trading, started, it came from <Farmington> and <Gallup>.

Cole: When you were a kid working in the store, how big was <Shiprock> then?

Manning: Oh, <Shiprock> was very small. The safest place in the world. Probably not any more place in the world safer than <Shiprock> as I grew up. I can remember my folks would let us--down by the BIA high school they had a lot of concrete sidewalks and lawns, and it was nice. We'd go down there rollerskating ten, eleven o'clock at night, and be perfectly safe. But it's certainly changed today. There was probably, let's see, maybe ten or twelve BIA homes. And other than the trading posts, there was Shiprock Trade, and Barnard's, and Bond and Bond. That was the extent of the businesses. And [O. S. Sevens?], one garage--there was one garage, one place to buy gas.

Cole: Did the Navajos at that time, what was their transportation situation?

Manning: As a kid, most of their transportation was horse and wagon. In October, when they'd have the Northern Navajo Fair, Navajo people would come from as far away as, oh, gracious, probably <Mexican Water>; south as far as <Newcomb> or <Naschitti>, and it was a six, seven-day trip to get there and attend the fair. And then it was a six, seven-day trip home. I remember the whole area of <Shiprock> would just be covered with smoke in the evening where they were building their campfires and cooking their supper, and the same way with breakfast. Hundreds of wagons. They'd be lined up to go back over to the yé’ii bicheii. The heads of one team would be almost in the back end of the other wagon as they journeyed that way. Of course there was no paved roads--roads from <Shiprock> to <Farmington> was nothing but gravel. We didn't go to <Farmington> very much--nobody did. It was an all-day trip, and two flat tires, and not a whole lot of fun.

Cars didn't come in until after World War II, and it was taking a while for them to get there. If I can remember right, I think Dick Atso [phonetic spelling] was the only Navajo man that I knew that owned an automobile in the early forties. So if you couldn't get there on a horse and wagon, you didn't get there-- you walked.

I can remember one time a tourist lady come in from back East. They didn't keep the trading posts like they keep 'em now. I mean, I guess you'd say they were kinda dirty. The Navajo people didn't have the opportunity to bathe like they [do now], and she made a comment about it. My dad told her, "Lady, if you had to haul your water twenty-five miles to have a drink or whatever, you wouldn't worry too much about bathing either." She got offended and left. But you think about it, they came to the river to get water. And where you only got a team and a wagon, maybe you could get four barrels at the best, and then you headed back. So you respected water pretty much. As in our home, the only water we had was a cistern under the house, and it probably held maybe 6,000 gallons, and you filled it in the first of October, and you had no water until maybe the middle of April. And you didn't waste any water. When you bathed in the old number three bathtub, you put a little, and then the next one bathed and added a little bit of warm water, and that's the way you did it. Water, as far as being into your homes, was very little bit of it.

Cole: Did you have electricity and those kind of conveniences in the early forties?

Manning: Let's see, maybe I was nine, ten, when we first had electricity, so that would be the early forties, yeah, 1941. But prior to that we had kerosene lamps and Coleman lanterns, and that type. The Barnard's Store there, they had a generator that they run. They had like one little meat box, and then some lights, and they run that off of that gas generator. But in our homes, no. We had coal stoves and kerosene lights.

Cole: Tell us maybe a little bit more about the fair.

Manning: The fair was the highlight of the year. The Navajo people, they liked to visit and enjoy it. And of course it had a religious significance to 'em, with the yé’ii bicheii. They would come, and if the weather was good, they were happy and they really enjoyed themselves. But it used to rain more here in the forties and fifties than it does now, and sometimes the first of October it'd be just rainin' ugly. Then they were kinda grouchy. The mud was up to the hubs on the wagons, and it just wasn't a fun time. They'd come and the trading post would be just crammed with people coming to get in out of the rain because they were just camped in their wagons and used a tarp to protect 'em from it. But they did enjoy the fair. They'd have a little livestock. Basically, it was a social event then. It wasn't so much as it is now with livestock displays and produce and vendors and all of that. It was more or less of a social thing. They would get to visit with each other. Business was good during that week that they were there, because they would.... Barnard's and Bond's and Shiprock Trade carried a lot more merchandise, they carried a lot of dry goods that some of the trading posts farther out didn't carry near as much of. And they'd buy pants and coats and shoes. [We] bought an awful lot of rugs at that time. It'd be just a process of trading. Lots of what they called trade slips. Probably in today's world it's illegal as heck, you know. They'd bring a rug in that was worth $35. Well, they'd get maybe $3 cash or $5 cash, and then a trade slip for the remainder. And trading out a trade slip was always fun. In twenty minutes you could trade out the $25, and then they were down to the last $3, and you'd take twice that time to get the last $3 spent, because each one of the kids would want a lollipop or a bottle of pop or something like that, and it took a lot of time to get the last $2 or $3 off a trade slip.

Cole: Did you remember much jewelry coming in at that time, too?

Manning: Barnard's did a lot of pawn. They didn't have jewelry like they have today. Back then they'd have maybe a good belt and a good string of beads and a bracelet and that would be about it. Today they've got four or five belts and six strings of beads, and all kinds of bracelets. They still kind of like to put their money in jewelry. They like turquoise and silver, and many of the Navajo people are like I am-- they can't hold onto a dollar, it's just fun to spend. So if they put it into jewelry, well then they could always go pawn it.

There at Barnard's they used to buy an awful lot of alfalfa hay that was raised up and down there on the river. They'd bring the hay in, in wagons. They didn't have balers that went into the fields like they have today. Barnard's had a big stationary baler with the poke-type that you pushed the wires through and fed the hay in with a pitch fork. And they would start lining up like six o'clock in the morning with wagonloads of hay to bring in there to bale. Then they would sell it to Barnard's, and then they would buy it back during the winter, which to a lot of people, that didn't make any sense. So they'd been asked by some of the BIA officials, "Why are you selling your hay to Barnard's for 50¢ and then buying it back five months later for 65¢ or 70¢?!" And one of the gentlemen I remember one time telling us, "If I take the hay home, when I need it for my stock, I don't have any, because my brother comes from <Red Rock>, and he wants ten bales, and my wife's sister comes from somewhere, and they want ten," and they can't say no. They've never been able to say no. So when it come time he needed to feed his horses and cows, he didn't have any hay, he'd given it all away. Barnard had a huge barn and then stacked it outside even. Bought lots of corn, lots of Indian corn. He had a big stationary sheller and would shell the corn. It was kind of the same process. They would buy the corn, and then during the winter they'd sell it back.

Cole: Did they just keep the corn dry and then grind it?

Manning: Yes, he also had a mill there that they could.... They loved blue corn, and they'd make it into blue cornmeal, and they'd charge 'em so much to grind it into flour for 'em. In the fall and early winter, that old mill ran all day.

Cole: Do you remember how many bales of hay you could get out of wagonful of hay?

Manning: I really don't remember exactly. I would say they could put maybe 700-800 pounds of hay on those wagons, and then bale it. And they baled probably seventy-pound bales. So ten, fifteen bales.

Cole: And what kind of hay was that?

Manning: Alfalfa. They would cut it with a horse- drawn mowing machine and rake it with a horse-drawn rake, and then they'd pick it up with a pitchfork. They'd put it in shocks and then pick it up and put it onto the wagon and haul it in and pitchfork it off. It was pretty much physical labor.

I guess one of the things that I remember my dad telling about, was when they built the bridge across the river. They had the money for the bridge, but they had no money for the approaches. So now they got a bridge sitting across the river, and on one end it's twelve foot high. You'd have to climb up a twelve-foot wall to get onto the bridge. And so the superintendent there, they had a police force of two Navajo people, and the BIA superintendent, he told these two policemen, "You go out and you go up and down the river and you arrest every Navajo that's not working. If he's not working, you arrest him and bring him in here." And they did that, and they built the approach with wheelbarrows and shovels. (several chuckle) That would be interesting today! If the guy wasn't hoeing his weeds, if he was leanin' on his hoe, they just hauled him off. They had a compound there that they kept 'em in, and they kind of slept on the ground. That was the way the approach got built to the bridge.

Cole: How long did the hay business continue like that, do you remember?

Manning: Oh, it continued up into the, oh, late fifties, early sixties. And then maybe one or two pickup balers. If I remember right, I think the chapter bought a tractor and a baler, and on the baler it had its own engine--had an engine that you'd start to run the baler. And then they'd go around into the various fields and bale the hay. But even after that, they would load it up and bring it in, and Barnard's or Shiprock Trade, or one of the trading posts would still wind up buying it. It just made it a little easier, took a little of the back work out of it.

Cole: Do they still grow quite a bit of hay down there today?

Manning: Yes, they do. They still grow quite a little bit of hay. Most of it they sell themselves. They have like a farmers' market I guess is what you would call it, and they bring it in, pick up loads at a time, and just sell it on the road. An awful lot of hay through this whole valley is just sold down the road. There isn't enough raised to really bring in large commercial haulers and haul it out. They don't farm like they used to, they don't do near as much, but the ones that are farming are probably working at APS so they can afford the farm.

Cole: (chuckles) Were there other crops besides the corn and hay?

Manning: Oh melons and squash. They really loved watermelons and raised lots of squash. Corn, alfalfa, a little oats and a little wheat--not a whole lot, because they didn't have thrashing machines to thrash it. That was basically their basic crops.

Cole: How did the Navajo in the <Shiprock> area water their crops?

Manning: BIA had built an irrigation ditch, and they got the water out of it. I remember they'd work out their assessment by cleaning it. And they would clean the ditch with teams and a slip or a scraper, and they really cleaned the ditch. There would maybe be seventy-five or a hundred Navajo people with teams and scrapers, and they'd clean that ditch from one end to the other, and it was a clean ditch. Of course, back then, ten acres was the maximum ground they could own. I remember a gentleman by the name of Jim Johnson was a very energetic individual, and he'd have his ten acres, and then he'd keep working, he'd get another ten acres. Then when he'd get up to about forty-five or fifty acres, somebody would go down to the bureau and tell 'em, "This guy's got too much land," and they'd come and take it away from him. And they didn't pay him, they just took it away from him, that was it, "Here's your original ten acres." And he'd start all over again. In four or five years, he'd be farming up to fifty acres, and the same thing would happen over again.

Steiger: Would he be trading other people for their land? How would he get that extra?

Manning: He would trade for it. He'd give 'em a cow or a horse, or make some kind of agreement with 'em. Then when he got up to doing too well, somebody would go down to BIA to the superintendent and tell him, "This is what's going on," and they'd come take it away from him.

Cole: Why did they have that regulation of ten acres, do you know?

Manning: I don't know. I know it's kind of like the reservation's been forever--why they have a lot of the regulations they have. That was just the thing. Ten acres was the maximum you could have.

Cole: And that was a BIA regulation?

Manning: Uh-huh. The tribe, in those days, had practically no authority of any kind. It was all under the bureau. They did everything. They did the school and they'd just go out and I guess you'd literally say kidnapped kids. They'd start across the reservation, up in that area, and here was a child that was six, seven, eight years old, they just picked him up and hauled him into the boarding schools. It wasn't, "Do you want to go?" or "Does Mom and Dad want you to go?" It was, "You know, we've got you, and you're on your way." They run pretty strict schools, they were quite abusive. And the Navajo people would hide out the oldest boy, so that they'd have somebody to help herd the sheep and take care of things at home. And most always, the oldest son did not have any education, because they would hide him out when they were out roundin' 'em up to take 'em to school.

Steiger: That was in the fifties they were doing that? Sorry to interrupt.

Manning: No, this would be--let's see, I graduated in 1949, so it was in the late thirties and early forties. No, by the fifties this was not going on, no. They still had the schools. BIA still pretty much had control. I don't think the tribe really got too much involved until, oh, gracious, into the sixties. And then they gradually begin to turn almost everything over to the tribe. The tribe took over the irrigation system and those kind of things. In the early days, just like I say, the superintendent told 'em, "Go out and arrest every guy that wasn't workin'." Today that wouldn't fly very high. But then the superintendent was it. He was judge, juror, and the whole nine yards.

Cole: Do you remember what his name was?

Manning: (sigh) No, I don't. I really don't. I know probably some of these older--not really older-- but guys that are ten years older than I am, they'd probably remember. I can remember one they called John Collier. I think he was the one that cut their livestock down so drastically. I didn't ever know him, knowing who he was. Trading posts pretty well stayed to themselves, and they tried to avoid the bureau as much as they could.

Cole: Did the bureau have any involvement with the traders?

Manning: They would check on you if there were complaints of dishonesty or something. But they weren't really involved very much. You had to have a license with them to have a trading post--you were licensed through the bureau, and those kind of things.

Cole: You were describing for us earlier kind of the living conditions that you lived in as a young boy. Could you describe what the living conditions for the Navajo were at that time?

Manning: They were very tough. Today they talk about some of the Navajos being poor, but there weren't some of them poor, they were all poor then. Most of them lived in a hogan with a dirt floor. Of course that wasn't anything unusual. We had dirt floors in part of our house. There weren't any mobile homes and those kind of things. Water, especially if you got away from the river, was a real rare commodity. Of course you have to have water, and that was a great need. But they basically lived in hogans or small one or two-room houses. They were an energetic people, as far as I could see. Loved their kids and wasn't a whole lot on discipline. Like I say, in <Shiprock> in those days, there wasn't a safer place to live. But there's been an awful lot of change. Of course, there's been that in all of our lives, due to prosperity, I guess.

Cole: Would you consider, or do you know, were the Navajos that lived in the <Shiprock> area maybe a little wealthier than ones further out?

Manning: Those that worked for the BIA, they got a regular paycheck. Those that farmed and had stock, it would just depend on what the stock market was. Hay was 25¢-50¢ a bale. Lambs, oh, gracious, I can remember lambs even in my trading time being at 7¢-8¢ a pound. That's not much money. I can remember my dad telling about buying lambs for 25¢ a piece. Back before they had the trucks, they used to drive 'em. There was a railhead, the train come into <Farmington>, and they would drive their lambs from as far away as <Red Rock>. They would drive 'em and take 'em to <Farmington> and ship 'em out on a train. One year they got to the wash up here, and it was running, and they waited, and they waited. It just kept rainin' and they couldn't get across it. Finally each one of 'em picked out so many head of lambs, and they just drove 'em into the wash, made a bridge, and walked the others across 'em. They put hundreds of lambs in there and just used 'em to make a bridge so the others could walk across. My dad said it didn't really matter, I guess, a whole lot, they were only worth a quarter.

Cole: Do you remember about when that might have been?

Manning: It was in the thirties sometime. I remember him telling about that Reuben Heflin had got across the wash before the rain came. And when it comes down those washes, maybe they hadn't run for six months, and then you get a heavy rain--well, it's just a wall of water because there's so much trash in 'em, tumbleweeds and stuff. So you're runnin' maybe an eight or ten-foot wall of water. And he had got across with his lambs, and Dad said he can remember him standing on the other side just laughing. He thought that was the funniest thing in the world, that he got across, and all of the rest of 'em were still on the other side when this came, and it just didn't let up. They had a deadline to meet. I mean, that train was gonna be there, and they had to get there. So that was the way they did it.

Cole: And these were the traders that were driving the lambs?

Manning: Yes. And there was probably, I imagine there was lambs there from probably twelve, fifteen different trading posts. And in those days, there was lots of lambs. The sheep that they have today, it's just a drop in the bucket to what they used to have. And of course when there was more rain, they had better rains and had more grass--had all those kind of things. It's gradually dried up. There in <Shiprock>, up where the hospital is now, all that mesa up there they used to--I can even remember 'em cutting grass. When I was a little kid, my dad tells me that the grass up in that area and all the way towards the state line would be up to the stirrups on a horse. And today you have a hard time finding some grass that you can even call grass-- it's just dried up.

Cole: Do you speak Navajo?

Manning: Very little. I spoke better Navajo twenty- five years ago than I do today. My dad didn't want my brother or I, either one, to learn Navajo well enough to understand a sad story. (chuckles) That was his comment. If we got to gettin' too good at it, he'd back us off. So no, I do not speak Navajo well. I can get along in a trading post, but as [far as] talking politics, no, I don't.

Cole: Did the Navajo in the <Shiprock> area speak English, most of 'em?

Manning: Yes, and then that was one reason that I don't speak any better than I did. They spoke English there probably a lot quicker than they would like at <Teec Nos Pos> or <Red Rock> or <Dennehotso> or those places. They just spoke Navajo while in <Shiprock>. You could get by--even when I was a kid, you could get by without speaking Navajo. There was lots of pointin' and guessin', but in a trading post you could get by.

Cole: Were there particular items that like the women would buy, versus the men?

Manning: Oh, there would be in dry goods. They all liked the velvet blouse. The women all wore long squaw skirts and maybe two or three of 'em at one time, if they had 'em. In the early parts, they just had to have the basics. They just didn't have money or income for anything else. They worried basically about having food to eat, and maybe a pair of Levis and a pair of high-top shoes. And the women wore about the same, the shoes. The Navajo women did not wear pants. I mean, it was, oh, gracious, when the Navajo ladies first began to wear slacks or pants, it was kind of strange. You just wasn't used to it. But they all wore dresses.

Cole: When did that clothing change begin, do you remember?

Manning: Oh, let's see ... in the latter part of the sixties it began to change. I know even there at Barnard's, they began stocking blouses and skirts and more up to what you'd call stylish items, instead of a squaw skirt and a velvet blouse. And shoes. The early part of it, they'd have maybe just two different styles of shoes. Then they were having fifteen or twenty styles. Then that's where the dry goods business kind of finally went out. They got to where twenty styles wasn't enough. So then you just quit the shoe business, because the trading post wasn't set up to handle that many.

Cole: Did you ever have a Navajo nickname?

Manning: They called my dad Tsiis ch’ilí and I was called Tsiis ch’ilí yázhí. My dad had black, curly hair. Let's see, Bruce they called Biníyol. He'd been in an accident and had been injured in the neck and his head set like this. They said he had his head towards the wind. Most everybody wound up with a Navajo name.

Steiger: What did Tsiis ch’ilí mean?

Manning: Curly hair.

Cole: Did Bernard's do a fairly sizeable rug business?

Manning: Early, the rugs were bought by the pound. They really didn't pay a whole lot of attention to quality. Put 'em on the scales and weighed 'em, and they were "X" amount of dollars a pound, and they stacked 'em up, and there really wasn't any market for 'em. When the stacks would get yea high, well, they would trade 'em off to Farmington Merc. or Gallup Merc. on their bill. And then I don't know what Gallup Merc. or Farmington Merc. did with 'em--it's not like today. You know, today, a high-quality Navajo rug is worth lots of dollars and in considerable demand. It was kinda like buying the lambs and the wool. They did buy quite a few of 'em. And then as time progressed on into the sixties, seventies, and eighties, well, they began to make a lot finer rug. They learned that if they kept it straight and kept the pattern good, well, they could get more money for it. And then it developed into an arts and crafts business. Prior to that, it was just kind of a way of having an extra ten dollars income by weaving a rug.

Cole: So you went to work for Barnard's in 1948?

Manning: Well, I went to work steady in 1953. I got home from <Korea> in 1953, and I'd worked in the summertime, going to school there. But steady, I went to work in 1953.

Cole: We were talking earlier, your dad owned a quarter of Barnard's?

Manning: He owned a quarter of it, uh-huh.

Cole: And then did he try to buy the store?

Manning: He tried to buy it. When Bruce Barnard I [the first] passed away, it went to his son. He had an only son, and oh gracious, Bruce was probably in his late thirties, early forties. He had a heart attack and was gone. He had married a lady by the name of Roderick [phonetic spelling]. Her folks owned half of <El Paso Texas>. They had banks and shopping centers. They were very, very wealthy. So Bruce Barnard Trading Post didn't really mean a whole lot to 'em. Dad run it for years after Bruce Junior died, and then they said they wanted to sell it, and that was when we made the offer. It could have been a good deal for both of us. I think the families--I think my dad and Frances could have got together, had they not had the attorney in it. But the attorney, he just wanted.... Frances, I think she was pretty sure, knew that we would pay for it. But when that attorney said, "I want a mortgage on your home," well, my brother, he just, that was it, he went right through the roof and it was all over. And then my dad stayed, even after that. And we bought the business and my brother and I didn't have any money. Working trading posts, you don't make big wages. I remember I started at $27.50 a week. That was whatever it took. I mean, you didn't worry about forty hours, it was sixty and seventy hours, but that's what you made. So we bought out Chuck Dickens who I had worked with for years at Barnard's, and then he went and built, started a business, and then he wanted to move, and so we bought that thinking that Dad was gonna quit. Because the Navajo people have a great loyalty to a particular trading post. Bruce Barnard had the customers they had, Shiprock Trade had theirs, and there was a great loyalty there, but as far as the Navajo people, basically, my dad was Bruce Barnard. Then after we bought it and it came right down to it, my dad couldn't quit, he wouldn't leave. Well, the business didn't leave either, and so that left my brother and I down there. We worked a lot of hours 'til we got that trading post paid for. We'd be to work at 7:30 in the morning, and by the time we got the trading post cleaned up, and we had a self-service laundry and got it cleaned up, we were coming home anywhere from twelve to one o'clock in the morning. We did that for five years.

Cole: And when was that, that you bought Dickens?

Manning: We bought it in 1968.

Cole: And that was at Barnard's?

Manning: Uh-huh.

Cole: So you actually worked at Barnard's for about fifteen years?

Manning: From 1953 to 1968.

Cole: How many employees did Barnard's have during that time?

Manning: Oh, during that time, let's see, we had what? When they went to self-service we had two check stands. Had two check stands, two checkers, two people in the meat market, two people in the dry goods, one person in the pawn, and then my dad and one other person just kind of did whatever. So that's what?, twelve? Twelve, fourteen employees. And then he had two people outside that took care of the stock and took care of selling hay and doing those kind of things.

Cole: How many of the employees were Anglo, and how many were Navajo?

Manning: Let's see, there was myself, my brother, and Chuck, my dad--I guess that's it, four.

Cole: And then the rest were Navajos?

Manning: The rest were Navajo people, very good workers, very dependable. They were to work every day.

Cole: And at that time period was everybody just paid a salary?

Manning: Yes. Yeah, they were paid a salary. Wasn't a big one, but it was a salary.

Cole: Just for the record, what was your dad's name and your brother's name?

Manning: My dad's name was Luther, and my brother's name was Jim.

Cole: And we should probably find out about your mother, too, what her name was.

Manning: My mom's name was Madge. She was a Reid [phonetic spelling]. She was raised in the <Bloomfield> area. She and my dad married in about 1929, I guess. My dad wound up here just by accident. He was raised in <Indiana> 'til he was through high school, and then he came to <Denver>, I think with a cousin. And when he got to <Denver>, there was a gentleman that needed to bring two cars to <Shiprock>, and so he hired my dad to drive one of the cars. My dad just never went home. He liked <Shiprock> and went to work at Barnard's. That was how he wound up here.

Cole: Did your mom ever work in the trading post?

Manning: No. My mom was Mom. She took care of the house and took care of the kids. There were three of us, I had two brothers. But no, my mom never worked in the trading post. My mom never worked anything but being a housewife. She was always there when we got home or skinned our knee or whatever we did, Mom was there to take care of us. Personally, I think that was a real blessing to us. Some kids today don't have that privilege.

Cole: I'm sort of wondering, in Barnard's in the late fifties, describe to us what was happening to the Navajo economy, and maybe what happened to Barnard's.

Manning: The economy, after World War II was over, the economy was improving every year. There was more money, there was more jobs. Roads began to get better. The road from <Farmington> to <Gallup> wound up paved. It wasn't very wide, but it was paved, and you could travel. Business picked up enough that Barnard's doubled the size of their building. They put a large dry goods section on the back, to the south side of the building, and they were good times business-wise. The Navajo people were, like I say, they had a lot more money to spend, and they spent it. They pretty much do today. I know families that have $60,000-$70,000 a year incomes and they pretty well spend the $60,000- $70,000. But I guess we all do. (laughter)

Cole: What kind of jobs were being created in the <Shiprock> area?

Manning: Well, at one time Kerr McGee came in and had a big uranium mill there that hired a lot of people. Fairchild was there at one time, and hired a lot of people. Of course the uranium business, it just kind of killed itself all over the country, and they closed the mill there with the uranium. Fairchild was just an unfortunate situation. I think they were from the Dakotas, a gentleman was around, kind of raisin' trouble, and they literally, physically took over the building with rifles and guns. After that happened, Fairchild just pulled out and left. But they were hiring several hundred people, mostly women. The Navajo people, men and women, their hands are a blessing to 'em, they can do anything with their hands. It seems as one thing would come in, then they had a helium plant there that hired probably--they probably had, what, 35-40 homes over there. And then it gradually, they run out of gas for it. But if the tribe would just change their policy, <Shiprock> would be a town of 30,000 in a heartbeat.

Steiger: What was Fairchild making?

Manning: They were a semi-conductor plant. They were making chips. Quite intricate work. I mean, they weren't very big pieces that they had to wire a lot of wires onto, but the ladies knew how to do it.

Cole: And during this sort of economic upsurge, did pawn and credit still have a big part of it?

Manning: Pawn and credit was still there, yes. The BIA increased. I don't really know how it works, other than it seemed like what one guy was doing, now they're hiring three guys to do the same job. So now you got three paychecks instead of one.

They did improve their agriculture. I think the tribe was involved with this. They had a farm training area there that had about probably 400 acres, 500 acres, and they had Navajo people that went there and were taught how to farm--you know, the technical part of putting fertilizer, and what crops to raise. And then when they had finished this course, which was probably about two years, then they were given 120 acres of ground and a loan. I think the BIA was pretty much financing the loans and what not. A few of them made it, and quite a few of 'em didn't. Sometimes they have a hard time working for themselves. You gotta be pretty disciplined, especially if you're farming. I mean, things have got to be done today, they can't be done tomorrow. Where the Navajo people were working for wages, and knew they had to be to work at eight o'clock and didn't go home 'til five, I mean, you couldn't ask for more dependable people. But some of 'em had a problem where they were working for themselves. You know, "Well, today let's go visit Aunt Molly, and we'll do the farming tomorrow...."

Cole: How big of a pawn business did Barnard's do?

Manning: They had thousands and thousands of dollars' worth of pawn. And this was back when your dead pawn, there just wasn't a market for it. I can remember them taking silver belts, and take the first one and wrap it tight, then wrap the second one around it, and put 'em in a bushel basket, and when the bushel basket was full, Russell Foutz would give you $500 for it. Today's world, any one of those belts would have probably brought $500. Beads, they would take beads and tie it with a quarter-inch cotton rope and when you could reach around it like this, he'd give you $500 for it. And Russell was the only one.... In the <Shiprock> area, in this area, he was kind of the first one that went into the arts and crafts business. He would take those belts and beads and bracelets and things and go to <Denver> or <Phoenix> or <Scottsdale> or wherever, and he'd get rid of 'em. But that was the market.

Cole: What time period was that, do you remember?

Manning: Oh, this was still in the sixties.

Cole: Did you have a lot of dead pawn then?

Manning: Barnard's pawned for a year. They would hold an item a year, and if they made any attempt at all to pay on it, they would still hold it. But yes, there was still a considerable amount of dead pawn.

Cole: In your store--you purchased Dickens--did you run a pawn business there, too?

Manning: Yes, same kind of thing. We've been in the pawn business all my life. We're still in it. My daughter runs the pawn shop for us that we have here in <Kirtland>. The pawn business is changing, but I don't want to change. I just want to pawn Indian jewelry. And so many of the other businesses that compete with us, they pawn pickups and cars and trucks and tractors and stereos and VCRs--and I'm not going to change. As I told my daughter, "Maybe here in a couple of years you can just take this thing over and you can pawn pickups if you want to, but I'm not going to."

Steiger: How come you don't want to change?

Manning: Just hard-headed, I guess. I just don't want to do it. We have a decent pawn business, it makes us a decent living, and we just pawn jewelry and saddles and shawls, and that's all we pawn--baskets. I think my daughter's a better pawn operator than I am. She doesn't have near the dead pawn I used to have. She gets along well with the Navajo people. She's got a sense of humor and she knows when to joke about it and when to keep her mouth shut. She's doing very well. But they could do more business by going into these other things. So far we have not.

Cole: When did you open your pawn shop in <Kirtland>?

Manning: When the FTC got into the pawn deal and said that one percent was the maximum you could charge with no minimum fees. Well, you know, you loan the guy twenty bucks, in a month he owes you $20.20. You can't stay in business. I mean, it's an impossibility. It was a detriment to the Navajo people, in my opinion, because everybody left. There was no way you could stay in business in the pawn business. You just couldn't loan money at that way [i.e., rate (Tr.)]. Even if you went to the bank, they had a minimum charge that would cover their expenses. We left in 1975, something like that--whatever year that they had that ruling. That was when we moved off and put a pawn shop in up here at <Kirtland>. And everybody else did the same thing.

Cole: Did you continue to get a lot of your same customers?

Manning: Same people. One thing that maybe cuts our business down a little, every year we lose another couple of customers. As I said, the Navajo people have a great loyalty to somebody that they like and trust and do business with. And it isn't particularly me or Eddie or anybody else. Each one has Navajo people that they want to do business with, and that's where they do their business. But I'm sixty-seven, and some of 'em are older, and each year a couple more of 'em pass away. And the younger Navajo people don't place the value on jewelry that their parents did, or their grandparents--they just don't.

[END SIDE 1, BEGIN SIDE 2]

Cole: [gives tape ID] Jack, a minute ago we were talking about the pawn business. Maybe describe to us how the pawn business worked in, say, 1953, when you started in the trading business.

Manning: The principle was still the same, except that everybody held pawn a lot longer. Most pawnshops now pawn under the state pawn law, which is that you hold it for four months. Many of us hold it longer. Today we hold it at least eight months, but back then, there was not--I don't even know if there was a pawn regulation of any type, other than what came under your trader's lease through the bureau. But everybody then held pawn for a year. I remember back then that some of that pawn would be in there for four, five, six, seven years and never go out. They would just renew it or pay the interest on it. Sometimes the beads or belt would be so covered with dust when they did take it out, that you'd have to dust it off good to find it. Other than that, the principle is still the same. The dollars have certainly changed. Probably at that date the average pawn was probably $15, and today I imagine the average pawn is close to $100. But the principle's still the same. There's a lot more pawn today, there's a lot more items than what there was then. But of course the population is a lot heavier today than it was in the early fifties. Most of the Navajo people still have some turquoise and silver jewelry. One thing hurting the market today is they're making so much imitation. When that happens, it just hurts you, because people that don't know it, they read about the plastic turquoise and the nickel silver, and they don't know how to tell the difference, and so you get pretty leery of buying something. I wish it had never happened, that they begin to make this costume jewelry, is what I call it. But it's hurt the business.

Cole: Would women and men pawn equally? Or was one....

Manning: Basically, the Navajo society is a matriarchal society. The woman's the boss. Even today, we pawn maybe 85 percent to ladies and 15 percent to men. A lot of times when they both come in, husband and wife will come in together, she does the business. The amazing thing about it, if you run into a family where the man's the boss, sometimes they have some real problems--financially, marriage-wise, the whole thing. The old-time matriarchal society still seems to work best.

Cole: Would that have been the case in the credit business also?

Manning: Pretty much so. They probably weren't as forward with it as they are now, but they were still the boss. The husband may come in and make the deal, but he made the deal that she told him to make.

Cole: How much of a payment would you have to make on a pawn item before it would go dead?

Manning: Just the interest. All they paid was the interest. The interest was one percent a month, it was 12 percent a year. And they charged one percent a month interest. And you didn't have to do that on a monthly basis. All you had to do was pay the interest sometime within the year. So you could pawn the item. Let's say you pawned it for $10.00, and a year later you could come and pay the $1.20 and it would be renewed for another year.

Cole: Did you ever loan out pawn?

Manning: To some people. A lot of times the pawn was pawned for more than it was worth--the actual item. But you knew the people and you knew that they loved it and they weren't going to lose it. I think that happens even today--or I know it does. We loan to people that we've loaned 'em a lot more than the item was worth. You don't do that in every case, but it's good people that you know, and know what they're going to do, and you can do it.

Cole: I'm kind of curious, why wouldn't Navajos go to a bank? Why would they do the pawn instead of getting a loan from the bank?

Manning: Well, there wasn't any banks. And banks, years ago--they're still the same way today--they want security. The Navajo people didn't own anything. They don't own the land where their home's at. And then a bank, they couldn't repossess anything. You went back on the reservation.... Let's say they loaned money on cattle or livestock or something, and I don't pay, they can't come and pick 'em up anyway, 'cause the bureau will see that they don't do that. So banks weren't in the picture very much. Today a bank wants.... I'm past my time. I can remember the time you'd go into a bank and they'd get you out a piece of paper about that big, and you'd sign your name on the bottom of it, and they'd give you $10,000 and you're going to pay 'em back in a year or whatever the time was, and that was it. Now, you've got a stack of paperwork that high, and it's government regulations. It's very difficult for 'em, even today. If they live off the reservation, then that's a different story, because they've bought a piece of ground and they have a home on it, or they have a mobile home on it, and they own it, they have some equity in it. But the reservation itself is still pretty much protected. They have a homesite lease that's good for ninety-nine years that they can revoke any time they want to. And a bank just don't want to do business on that. I imagine, really, the federal regulations wouldn't even let 'em do business on it. So this is a detriment to the people living on the reservation. The reservation, in my opinion, should be done away with. They've gone past their time.

Cole: I'm sort of curious, because as I understand it, the trader also really didn't own his building.

Manning: No, we don't own anything at <Shiprock>. We have a fairly decent building down there, and if they want us off, they just come in and say, you know, "Adios, and it's ours!" And you carry insurance, and the benefactor of the insurance is the Navajo Tribe.

Cole: Why is that?

Manning: That's just the rule of doing business-- but it's always been that way.

Cole: So if your building were to burn down.

Manning: It's the tribe's building, it's not our building. We built it....

Cole: Could you insure your goods?

Manning: Oh yeah, you can insure your goods.

Cole: And that'd be separate.

Manning: That's a separate thing, yeah.

Cole: I'm sure the trader also needed to get capital from a bank. Did that impact how banks would loan money to traders?

Manning: That was back to the thing of signing your name. Today, I don't think--the way a trader had to get money in the thirties, forties, fifties, sixties, he couldn't get it today. The regulations would not--the banks just wouldn't loan it, because he doesn't own anything there. He owns his inventory, but that's it. The buildings, the lease, you have a twenty-five or a fifty- year lease, but let's say you get crossways with a politician, they can get that lease revoked pretty quick. It doesn't happen a whole lot, but it could. I mean, there's nothing to keep it from it.

Cole: What was the process of getting a lease?, like when you bought your store in <Shiprock>?

Manning: Well, of course it already had the lease, it was already existing. But then we had to go to <Window Rock> and explain to 'em, "Mr. Dickens is wanting to sell, we're wanting to buy." First we had to go to the chapter. Went to the chapter and usually that was no problem. I mean, everybody knew everybody, and Chuck's gonna leave and we're gonna move down there. Well, that's great, they'd sign the paper and you'd take it to <Window Rock>, and then it would have to go through their trading committee over there. It was maybe a forty-five to sixty-day process. If you knew somebody--it's like politics anywhere, if you knew somebody, they'd hand-carry it for you and you could get it through in maybe a day. But through the normal procedures it would take that long. And then the BIA had to approve it. But if you had not been in trouble, accused of cheating or stealing or being dishonest in business, there was no problem there.

Cole: Did you ever, once you'd purchased your new store, have to then negotiate a brand new lease, once that lease had ran out?

Manning: We just got extensions on it. That's what we got today. They'd just extend it for another ten years or another fifteen. I think the last one we got was a fifteen-year extension.

Cole: Does the tribe get a percentage of the business?

Manning: Yes. On the groceries, they get 1½ percent of the gross, on the laundry they get 4 percent, and then we have a carwash there, and they get 4 percent of that.

Cole: Was that always the case, that they'd get a percentage?

Manning: No, it wasn't always. The Traders Association was formed and worked great, and I kind of stayed out of it pretty much, as politics, in the early days when this lease deal came in. Two or three traders had got in trouble. They had padded accounts-- dishonesty. And so they made a deal. To kind of save them, they wound up making a deal with the tribe that "we'll pay you 1½ percent of our business." And my dad, he fought it as hard as he could fight it, he and Bruce both. They said, you know, "Those guys got in trouble. Get rid of 'em." Anyway, they had the vote and the whole thing, and they wound up with this, and my dad said, "You guys are gonna be sorry about this." And the comment was, "Well, we'll pay what we want to anyway. We're not going to worry about the 1½ percent." I think there was a minimum of $300. And as in any type of business, basically, most of the traders were honest. There were a few that weren't, but that was where the 1½ percent came from.

Cole: Was that also on the pawn business, too?

Manning: The pawn would just be on the interest, not on the amount that you loaned--it was just on the interest. It was 1½ percent of your gross sales, and the pawn would just be on the interest part of it. And it run into several thousands of dollars in places like Barnard's and <Shiprock> Trade would be where they were doing a large volume business. The tribe didn't even have a system set up to come and check their books. Years later they did. But it was a "bail a few guys out" deal is what it was.

Cole: How did the Navajo react to a dishonest trader? Did you ever get a chance to see that?

Manning: No. You know, I really didn't. I don't ever know of anybody in <Shiprock> that got in trouble. I think they were--the Barnards had that store, the Evans had Shiprock Trade. This is back in the, say, forties and fifties. Bonds had the other one. And they were honest people. They made a profit, they didn't give things away. Their prices were probably a little higher than they were in <Farmington>--one reason, because they paid a higher price. Where they were buying from Farmington Merc., well, they had a price that they delivered right there in town, 'cause they only had to take it two miles. But they had to haul it thirty miles to <Shiprock>, or they had to haul it 140 miles to <Greasewood> or something, and the farther they went, the more they charged, and that makes sense. But no, I've never.... I know they put a trust in you.

I guess one of my most miserable times of being in business, I had a person get into our pawn room. After we moved off and got in here to <Kirtland>, I went out to pump some butane, and wasn't paying any attention, I guess. Anyway, I went out and left the door open. Somebody got in and took twenty-six pieces of jewelry. And they knew what they were doing, they took good jewelry. It hurt me. They lost trust in me. They had brought their jewelry, I paid for it, most of it I paid double what it was worth. But that did not solve the trust thing. The fact is, two of the customers today that I had done business with for years, I lost one belt that I paid $5,000 to the individual for the belt, but that did not replace the belt. And we'll shake hands, but there's not the trust. If I could change anything that I've ever done in the trading business, that would be the one thing that I'd change, that I'd lock that door. And today, they'll come in and they'll pawn something, and they'll say, "You know, I trust you." And to me, that means a whole lot.

Cole: Did you ever have any problems of robberies or anything like that in the <Shiprock> area?

Manning: In <Shiprock> various times they had break- ins, but it would be--oh, they'd take some Levis or cigarettes or candy. Generally, it was kids. And this was probably the sixties, seventies, eighties. The farther you come into modern times, the more often it occurs. As a kid, I left my bike wherever I got off of it. I had a bike when I was about seven, and I'd get off of it, and it may be by the house, or it may be fifty yards from the house, and it was always there the next morning. It's not the same today.

They did have a few [robberies]. Barnard's did have one major robbery, and it was an Anglo, or it wasn't a Navajo. Somebody got in and used--I don't even know what they call it--they cut a hole that big in the vault door that they could crawl through the vault. This was a bank vault door. All they were after was money. We didn't lose one piece of pawn, fortunately. But that was done by professionals or somebody that knew what they were doing. I came out of the pawn room that afternoon, and there were two men standing just back behind the cash register, into the store area. And I stepped back into the pawn room. For some reason, boy, the hair on the back of my neck just stood up when I saw these two guys. [I said to myself,] "What the heck's the matter with you? Go on out and get your business done," and I did. And that night was when it happened, and I know it was those two guys, in my mind. And I couldn't identify 'em on a bet, but I know that's what it was.

Cole: Did they ever catch 'em?

Manning: No.

Cole: Were you a member of the United Indian Traders Association?

Manning: Yes. When we purchased the Dickens Variety Store--he called it Dickens Variety--Dickens Trading Post, we joined the Traders Association then. I think Barnard's, I'm sure they were in the founding, you know, when they originally set it up.

Cole: Apparently, when they began the Association, they actually had numbers they gave out for jewelry.

Manning: Yes.

Cole: Do you know if Barnard's had a number?

Manning: You mean the pawn ticket?

Cole: Well, actually, what I've seen is a number that they would stamp in a bracelet or a piece of jewelry to sort of authenticate it.

Manning: I see. No, Barnard's, I never saw 'em doing that. I know that they used what they called a pawn tag. They had a brass tag with a number on it, that they would put onto the item, but it was just for identification, just a way--they identified the number, and then the customer was given a corresponding number, and when he wanted to get his item back, well, he would bring that item [i.e., corresponding number] with him. Back then, it was different. Now, one transaction, if you come in to pawn to me, and you pawn a $500 belt for $20, you can't come in next month and get another $20. You've got to take it out, and re-do a complete new transaction. In those days, they'd borrow $20 and come in and pay $5, and then three days later they'd borrow $10, and you had a paper and you just scratched it out and wrote it down, and scratched it out and wrote it down. And this would go on endlessly. There'd be maybe pawn tags stapled to pawn tags. You know, they'd be that thick that you'd trace the history of this thing back for a month or six months or two years. Today you can't do that. It was a lot simpler then.

Cole: What kinds of issues were the Traders Association involved with that you remember?

Manning: Mostly just involved with, as regulations began to come onto the reservation, they were involved in that. Basically--and again, I wasn't involved in it that much, my dad was. He'd go over and he'd come back that same day and say, "All this is, is a social gathering." (chuckles) He wasn't really sold on the Indian Traders Association. They stayed in it, and it did help when DNA came in and began to think everybody was a crook. You were accused, and it was a benefit then, because they already had an organization set up that all the traders belonged to, and they were able to get together and hire an attorney to kind of offset some of this. But in my opinion, that was one of the best things that the Traders Association did.

They also pretty much insisted that you stayed-- well, not pretty much so, they did--that you stayed to authentic Indian jewelry, as you were dealing with it, selling it, as arts and crafts came into it. They didn't want the junk, they wanted the true Indian arts and crafts. And I think that was a good thing.

Those two things, to me, was the two things the Indian Traders Association did, other than a chance to get together twice a year and visit. Those that drank, drank, and they had to carry 'em home. (laughter) That was part of it.

Cole: Were there a lot of the traders that that's the only time you'd see 'em?

Manning: Yeah, in the early time, back, like I say, in the fifties and times like that. But as roads improved, as transportation improved, Jewel McGee would stop in Barnard's maybe twice a week, and he and Bruce would visit, "How much are lambs gonna be this year? How much wool's gonna be? Have you talked to such and such a buyer?" and those kind of things. Hugh Foutz from <Sanostee> would be in. As the roads got good, and transportation was better, why then it was pretty close- knit. Early, early, early times, gosh, they'd be out there for six months at a crack, you know--didn't even leave.

Cole: Did the Association ever work on any kind of group buying or selling, do you know?

Manning: No. You mean like a co-op?

Cole: Right.

Manning: No. I don't think the guys could have got along! (laughter) They'd have had a hard time getting those old-time traders.... Once they got ahold of something, they.... Trading posts stayed in the same family for year after year after year--you know, generations even. Just because, "I've got it, and I don't want to sell it. I'll let my son or my daughter or something, take over as I get too old." But great people to hold onto something.

Cole: When they had the FTC hearings at <Window Rock>, did you go to that?

Manning: No, I didn't. (sigh) I stayed out of politics as far as I could stay. The FTC thing was bad information and a bad deal. It hurt everybody, but it hurt the Navajo people a lot more than it hurt anybody else.

Cole: I'm sort of curious, too, on the livestock business. How did that change over the years, sixties, seventies, eighties? Is it as productive as it used to be?

Manning: Part of it was. It keeps getting less and less in that climatic conditions have changed. There's not the range that there was, there's not the grass. Another thing is, they can make so much more money by getting 'em a job with the bureau, or with the tribe, with APS, with New Mexico Public Service, with the oil company, that just brings in so much more money than the livestock business. And so then when you do that, you can't take care of 500 head of sheep. You can take care of twenty, but you can't take care of the big flocks that they used to have. And there's--oh, gracious, I don't know what the percentage would be, but it's drastic low to what it was years ago.

Cole: When would you say it kind of peaked?, at least when you were involved.

Manning: As I was involved, probably from the middle sixties on, it gradually was a downward trend. Each year they'd buy less bags of wool and less lambs. And it's almost, oh gracious, I think as far as the livestock business, it's almost extinct on the reservation as far as involved in their livelihood. It's more or less just extra income. And sheep take a lot more work than cattle. Those that are still in it, most of 'em have cattle. They have a few sheep, but that's just so they will have fresh mutton to eat. There isn't near the wool or the lambs. In <Shiprock> I don't know where anybody'd even hardly--other than Shiprock Trade was buying lambs--Barnard's quit. Down at Bond and Bond, which is now Chuck Foutz, he doesn't buy. And with Eddie or with [Jed's Change?], I don't know whether he'll buy, even. They do go to the livestock auctions: there's one in <Cortez>, there's one in <Aztec>, there's one in Breen, and they take their livestock there and sell it.

Cole: Were you or your dad--did you buy and sell many horses?

Manning: Not much in horses. There were lots of horses. There's still too many horses on the reservation. (laughter) They didn't buy or sell many horses.

Cole: In your dealings as a trader, did you have any involvement with working to improve arts and crafts, the weaving or....

Manning: Not personally. Even today I'm not into the arts and crafts business. I just never did get into it. It's a good business. I know a lot of the Tanners and some of the Foutzes that have done very well with it. But again, to do that, you have to travel, and I'm a person that--you know, they could chop the highway off three miles up here and four miles that way, and I'd live forever. I don't like to travel. My idea of an extended vacation is a day to get there, and two days there, and one day back. In the arts and crafts business, you gotta move around. I have two or three good friends, Eddie and Joe Tanner, and those guys that do very well at it, but they like to move around and I don't. I guess that's the reason we did never get into it. You've gotta go find a market for it.

Cole: Could I ask you a question about something we talked about a while back? I've been wondering, talking about the <Shiprock> Fair again, as a young boy did you actually get to go out and wander around the fair?

Manning: Oh, yeah, sure. Yeah, my mom and dad didn't worry about me being to the fair. My brother and I, we were four years apart, but we'd get to go over there when we were yea high. We were accepted. We did not go to the yé’ii bicheii. My dad said, "That's no place for you. That's their beliefs, their lifestyle." But as far as--they'd have a rodeo, and the rodeo stock would be the ornery cow up the road, and the horse that the guy couldn't ride. I mean, that's what they used for rodeo stock. But yes, we went. We ran [all] over <Shiprock>, just wherever we wanted to go.

Cole: What other events did they have besides the rodeo?

Manning: Oh, they had horse races. There wasn't really so many events as it was [to] just get together and visit. That was basically the thing. They'd see their friend that they hadn't seen since last fair time. There was lots of laughin' and Navajo hand- shaking. They weren't.... What's the word? Outwardly affectionate people--I mean, as far as hugging and kissing or that. That you just didn't see. But they were a concerned people. But the fair was a time to get together and visit. And then of course there was the yé’ii bicheii part of it. And that was what they came for. It was the ceremonial part, it was the religious part, and they would be there for that. As we see fairs today with carnivals and lots of livestock displays and produce displays and all that--there wasn't much. The fact that they now have, what is it, like 4-H--kids raise a lamb and sell it--that probably didn't come in 'til, oh, maybe twenty-five years ago, they began to have that. And that started out, I think the first one we went over to, I think they had eight lambs. I mean, that was the lamb show, you know. And it's built up to where now last year they probably had sixty or eighty lambs in there to the 4-H part of it.

Cole: So was your dad ever invited to Navajo ceremonies? Or did he go?

Manning: My dad was not a religious man. My dad didn't even go to church until he was fifty-something, and he felt that was their tradition, and the white man wasn't really that much welcome there. A few of 'em went, a few of 'em were invited, and probably my dad was invited, but he never went.

Cole: Were the traders ever expected to contribute to the ceremonies?

Manning: Oh, yeah. I guess as frightened as I ever remember being as a little kid is when they come around in costume in the yé’ii bicheii, with the mask and the thing, and come out and hoot and holler in front of the store and what not. And they'd take out cigarettes and flour and all that kind of thing. And I don't know, maybe I was five years old or something, and these guys were comin', and boy, I know I really high-tailed it home. But yes, they were--basically it's illegal. I think with the bureau thing, you can't get involved in politics or their traditions. But you still made a contribution. Now, it's down to they almost kind of tell you what they want, you know. Then, it was flour and mutton and cigarettes and candy, and that type of thing. Nobody had any money.

Cole: Did you eat mutton, too?

Manning: No, I'm not a mutton eater. My dad didn't like it, and we never had that. I've got some friends that, man, they still can't get by without good mutton stew at least once every two weeks. Ate a lot of beans and potatoes.

Cole: Overall, how have you seen trading change over time?

Manning: From being a very integral part of the Navajo's lifestyle, down to the point now that it probably--as I grew up with trading--non-existing. It's convenience stores now. That's basically what the trading posts are across the reservation, they're convenience stores. In <Shiprock> it wasn't that much, because you had the Catholic Church and the Christian Reform Church, and if they had a family member die or something, well, they would generally go to one of those two places and they would help 'em take care of it. Out [at] <Sanostee>, <Red Rock>, <Red Mesa>, the trader might be called to take care of it. Death with them was a very taboo thing. They just didn't want much to do with it.

We had a man by the name of Tom Johnson that worked at Barnard's as long as I can remember. He burned down three homes. When a person would die in the home, they'd burn it down, and take nothing out of it. He just literally burned it down, and he burned down three homes.

I can remember a lady one time having a seizure in the store, and boy, Bruce just had a--I mean, he couldn't get her out of the building. He was trying to be kind, but also in the back of his mind, "If this person passes away in this store, I'm out of business." And they got the lady out. Of course they didn't know whether she was having a heart attack or what. But she had a seizure is what she had. But had she passed away in the store, he could have burned it down and started over. I mean, that's how rigid they were with it. I know he was one scared man. (chuckles)

Cole: Did Barnard's or your other store have guest hogans?

Manning: No. Again, this is farther out they had.

Cole: What would you say you're most proud of as a trader?

Manning: I guess of the trust that a lot of Navajo people have in me, and that I've never been dishonest with 'em. I probably have--not probably, I do have-- more Navajo friends than I have Anglo friends, because I've spent my life with 'em. They're a good people. They've adopted, I guess, some of our ways, and some of 'em haven't been good. But the older people, I think their word was their bond. What they told you was what it was. Maybe we all do. Race has nothing to do with it. I think as a country, we've become more dishonest people--"don't hurt to lie about it a little," you know. That's just maybe a bad lifestyle that we've got into. I enjoy seeing my Navajo friends. I'm not involved at the pawn shop as much as I was--our daughter runs it, and she's worked with us for probably twelve years or fourteen years. But when I am down there, I go down on the first of the month to help, I see 'em come in, we have a good time. We visit and we do it in English--we don't do much in Navajo. I've forgot most of the Navajo that I ever did know. But it is getting to the point where I wanted.... I was down there maybe two months ago and a gentleman came in and I asked him, "What can I do for you?" He said, "Ach, I don't want to deal with you, I want to deal with your daughter, she knows what's going on." I said, "I finally got this thing where I want it!"

In the early times I used to get so upset. They'd come in and they'd want to do business with my dad, and they just wouldn't let Chuck or I do it. I mean, they'd wait all day. My dad would get--he said, you know, "Do something in here! I've got 'em backed up." I said, "They won't let me. I've asked 'em, and they just want to do business with [you]." It was kind of that way as my daughter first started comin' in with us--they wouldn't let her wait on 'em, and I'd have to tell 'em, "She knows what she's doin', she's my daughter, she's okay." Then when I got that, "I don't want to do business with you, I want to do it with your daughter," we're gettin' where we need to be.

Cole: What do you think you taught the Navajo, if anything?

Manning: I don't know whether I really taught 'em anything. (chuckles) Probably the only thing that I hope they picked up was that my dad was an honest person--honesty with him was an obsession, and he tried to pass that on to Jim and I. I don't think--I'm not going to say--sure, you can find somebody that you've had a little trouble with, or might say, "No, he's not [honest]," but as far as the three of us are concerned, I don't think they'd find very many that would say, "No, they were not fair with me." And these individuals were fair with us. There was a good relationship. I've lost thirty pounds in the last five months. I like to eat. Grace Toglena [phonetic spelling] had been back. Her kids moved back to <Washington>. I hadn't seen her in five years. And she came in the store and I was down there at the shop, and she come in and she looked and she said, "Jackie!? Is that you?" And I said, "Yeah." She said, "You are so fat! I can't believe how fat you are! What in the world's the matter with you?!" So I took Grace's advice, and I'm going to lose forty-five, fifty pounds. (laughter) And those things to me are kind of fun things.

Cole: What would you say you learned from the Navajo?

Manning: To be patient, don't get in a hurry. Even today, they still have patience. If you don't get it done today, it'll be there tomorrow. And not to be too loud-mouthed. They were a quiet people. I respect their traditions. I think that if that's what they do-- my dad told me this story. He said there was a little boy, he was probably eight. He had impetigo all over his face, all over his hands. And impetigo can just be a running sore. It used to be very prevalent on the reservation. And they had him into the PHS hospital, and Dad said this little kid, it was just pitiful to see him. And so the family went out to the mountain behind <Red Rock>, they had a three-day sing. He said when the kid come back, his skin's like mine. He said there wasn't a blemish on it. And he said from then on.... It wasn't particularly for him, but anytime they come in and said, "We need money for a sing," he said, "If at all possible, we made sure they had it." That I didn't see, but my dad did. So I guess it comes back to faith and what you believe. But the doctors, they couldn't touch it. Whatever they did--he didn't know, I don't know--but the little boy didn't have a sore on him anywhere.

Cole: Did you stock any special items at the post for any kind of doctoring or veterinary stuff?

Manning: Yes, they kept veterinary supplies there-- ointments and salves, and then when penicillin came in, penicillin and syringes, and sheep dip, and those types of things. As far as for an individual, it was just your over-the-counter aspirins and Alka-Seltzer and Pepto-Bismol. They used a lot of Pepto-Bismol. I can remember 'em buyin' Pepto-Bismol by the cases. But that was basically it.

Cole: If you were going to tell an Anglo about what he should know about Navajo culture or religion, or anything like that about the Navajo, what would you tell them?

Manning: Oh, to respect their beliefs, even though they'd probably be different than his or hers. To take time to get to know them. I don't think you make friends with the Navajo (snaps fingers) like that. I think it takes time. It takes some trust. All in all, they're very good people. I love to do business with them, and live among them, and let them have their room, and not try to change 'em particularly to my way of thinking. They'd be good people to know.

Cole: What would you say would be the difference between the way a trader interacts with the Navajo, and the way a missionary or a schoolteacher....

Manning: A trader was--not today, the old-time trader--he was their source of livelihood, so to say. He provided the groceries for 'em and took care of their stock, or purchased it. Missionaries--they [the Navajos] don't like to offend anybody, so missionaries come in and maybe it's a Mormon missionary, and they accept it, it's great; and six months later it's a Christian Reform missionary, and they accept him as great. They don't like to tell you no, and so they may belong to four different religions. Schoolteachers, as I grew up and went to school, and even as most of our kids grew up, they had a lot of respect for teachers. Today in our school systems, it's a disaster. There's no discipline, they're scared to discipline. In my opinion, when you lose discipline, you've lost everything. With some of the rulings judges have handed down, a teacher's scared to do anything, and kids find that out. They know that. We've got trouble right here, and this is a little quiet community. We've got kids that are scared to walk down the halls of our public schools. And that's sad. And to me, it goes back to government rulings, to judges' rulings, that you can't tell somebody "no," that you can't say, "Johnny, you go sit down, and you stay there. 'Cause if you don't, I'm gonna blister your hiney," or "you're gonna stay after school," or whatever happens. And they're scared to do that. You can go down to the school board here and mention lawsuit, and they'll go right through the roof, they'll give you whatever you want. And that's not right. And so not only have the Navajo people, I think, lost respect for educators, but so have the rest of us.

You know, the teacher used to be--that was the choicest job you could have in a community, because you were looked up to being smarter than anybody else-- especially if you'd gone to college and had a degree. Those were rare things as I grew up as a kid. The only person I knew that really had a degree was the schoolteacher, the lady that tried to teach me to read and write and figure two and two. If I got in any trouble at school, it was minor to what [I got] when I got home. And so I'm not a quick learner, but it only took about once for me to know that I'd better behave in school. We don't have that today.

Cole: What impact has technology, like television and stuff, made on the reservation?

Manning: Oh, they love television. It's made a world of difference. Television and an automobile has changed their way of living tremendously. I doubt whether you can find a home that doesn't have a TV and a VCR in it. It would be so rare that it would be--I'd almost gamble that you'll find a TV and a VCR in practically every Navajo home. And you find 'em in your home and my home. They like movies. As I was sayin' a while ago, they got five places to rent videos right here in <Kirtland>, and we're a little tiny place, and they do a good business. Eddie's being wise, pawning the VCR. He pawns it for $40, that's $4 a week times 52 is.... I don't know, what is that? Two hundred and some dollars. And if you're doing that with fifty VCRs, you take 40 times 50 is 2,000, you take a $2,000 investment and turn it every seven days-- not bad--a lot better than I do with the jewelry or the belts. But not in my lifetime.

Cole: Maybe we should get you to just elaborate. When we had the tape turned off, you explained that they would get them out on the weekend, but I don't think you have that on this tape.

Manning: Okay, as a lot of pawn businesses have gone into pawning electronics, on Monday an individual will bring their VCR in and pawn it to you, and then on Friday they come in and take it out and watch movies over the weekend. And then on Monday it comes back. Mike Lee has a pawn shop just about, oh, seventy-five yards from us, and we're good friends. He said, "I can almost set my watch by people bringin' their VCRs in on Monday. This family's in by 9:30, and this family's in at 11:30, and this one doesn't come in 'til four." But they come in on Monday, and they pawn their VCR. The same process takes place on Friday. They come in and take it out. It's a good business if you're just not hard-headed.

Cole: Did you ever trade with other Native American groups other than Navajos?

Manning: No. Once in a while we would see a Ute that would either come from maybe Igracio or <Towaoc>. Other than that, it wasn't like Clarence. Clarence [Wheeler] was over there in that area where he was with the Hopi and the Navajo both. And I think he speaks both languages pretty well.

Cole: Do you have any favorite stories or humorous stories that come to mind?

Manning: Oh.... (pause) Not that really comes to mind. I know back in the horse and wagon days, the biggest excitement is when a team would run away. Something would frighten 'em, scare 'em, and they'd take off with the wagon. I can remember the Navajo people just--if you heard a lot of commotion, you could almost bet that you could go out and down that gravel road you'd see a team goin' lickety-split and everything flyin' out of the wagon, and it fallin' to pieces maybe, but that was a big joke, that was lots of fun, as long as it wasn't your wagon. (laughter) I don't remember anything that comes to mind right quick.

Cole: Do you see any future in the trading business on the reservation?

Manning: I see no future in it. It's convenience store. I think it'll get more and more--I think the time will almost come where even convenience stores will have a hard time making it. <Shiprock>, <Kayenta>, <Chinle>, places like that, will get bigger supermarkets in 'em, and with their ability to travel and liking to travel, they'll drive there. One thing that used to keep them to a particular location was credit. [Now, there's] very, very little credit on the reservation. I think even with anybody, maybe <Red Rock> out there, but I would say their credit is almost nil. No, Indian trader's a thing gone by. I had to fill out.... I was having an interview here a while back with an individual, and it said for "occupation," and I wrote down "Indian trader." And this guy said, "There's no such thing as an Indian trader." I said, "Yeah, you're lookin' at one. I was born an Indian trader and I'll die an Indian trader." He said, (almost in disgust) "Indian trader!" He didn't understand it. I think he thought it was a bad or an unkind thing, that maybe I was trading Indians! (laughs) Anyway, it's been a good life.

Cole: What do you think the future of the reservation is?

Manning: I don't think it's gonna change--it's not a good future. The Navajo people, more and more, are wanting to get off the reservation. Those that are progressive, and have the chance, they're coming off and buying a piece of land that's theirs. As I said before, in my opinion, the reservation has outlived itself, it needs to be made into a state, completely done away with--something. But as it functions today, it's not a good deal. And you can probably find somebody that would disagree with me, that it is a good deal. But as I've seen it all my life, it's not a good deal.

Cole: Do you have any questions, Lew?

Steiger: I think I've asked 'em.

Cole: Okay. Is there anything else you'd like to add, Jack?

Manning: No, just I think it's nice you guys are doin' this--not particularly on mine, but I may even go over there and see if I can see what some of the other traders had to say one of these days. There's a lot of 'em, most of 'em I've known their dads. I've got to that age. But it's been.... Bruce Barnard used to say, "When you get a whole bunch of Indian traders together, those that have got it are lyin' that they don't have; and those that don't have it are lyin' that they got it. So," he said, "it's a heck of a lyin' party!" (laughter) Anyway, that was one of the old- time guys, that's the way he viewed it, as far as the traders were concerned.

Cole: Well, thank you.

Manning: You're very welcome.


