NAU.OH.76.30.11

51734

W. P. Shofstall

Interviewed by John Bury

October 1974



Bury:  Well, I was just interested in a little of your background.  It means more, I think, to the type of study when we can see the person and where he came from.

Shofstall:  Very good.  My parents were both born in North <Missouri>, in Shelby County.  They were born both on the farm.  I was born there-well, I was born out on a farm-Leonard, <Missouri>, was the post office address-August 22, 1903.  My childhood memories began primarily when I started to school, so I remember primarily in school, walking to school.  When I first started, we walked about three miles.  Don’t remember much of the details about it.  And then the next....  I also remember in walking to school, of course it was a one-room rural school.  When it rained, why, my father would get on a horse and ride up.  There’d always be two or three, four parents waiting there, and the kids would get on the back of their father’s horse and ride home, rather than walk home in the rain. My childhood memories were very happy in that we played and we were in the country and we had lots of space to play, and went fishing and hunting and that sort of thing.  Early schoolhouse memories were of getting the old potbellied stove heated up so that school could start in the winter.  And of course the thing that you remembered in the farm in North <Missouri> was when the spring came you could hardly wait until it got warm enough and you could throw off your shoes and go barefooted. I started my formal education in a teachers’ college at <Kirksville Missouri>, in Northeast <Missouri>.  I first started teaching right out of high school.  We could take an examination then, and qualify to teach.  And then I started in summer school, after I started to teach in 1919, and then I graduated in 1926, because as I say, I went to summer school twice.  I taught two years in that rural school.  I graduated from high school when I was sixteen.  That was largely because my birthday was August 22, so I could start school quite early. My informal education:  I suppose I got more education, or what I’d call real education, between 1946 and 1950 when I was quite a mature person, and spent those years in <Europe>.  This was an entirely different education.  Quite interesting to me, when I came back I expected my professional colleagues to give me credit for having had an interesting and different experience, but I found it didn’t mean anything to most educators, but I consider it a very important part of my education. Another important part of my informal education was that all the time, as soon as I was old enough....  For example, I drove a car when I was twelve years old.  It was a Ford-Model T, of course.  And we used to have Chautauquas in those days, and I used to be one of the people who would drive to the railroad station about 20 miles on dirt roads to get the Chautauqua performers.  Well, this was quite interesting for me, because this was a group of people I’d never had any dealings with before, and it was quite interesting to drive back 20 miles on a mud road with these people.  These are just memories that I....

Bury:  Those are good memories.  I can see how they would add to your education.

Shofstall:  But my informal education was at first I clerked in the general store, even before I finished grade school.  And then I worked in the bank.  And then I ushered in a movie.  That was while I was going to college.  And then I worked my way through college by first working on the college farm, and then I worked in the library. And then probably the third aspect of my informal education, other than my <Europe>an experience and my work experience, the most important part was I was active in student government.  And this gave a country boy who didn’t know much....  But I felt I was somebody and learned a lot in this student government experience.  Economically, I’m sure, by current standards we would have been called economically deprived, without any doubt.  I had to go away to high school.  In fact, I went away from home even in the eighth grade.  I went away to high school; four or five of these country boys went to town where they had a high school, and we lived together in sort of an apartment.  It was pretty rough.

Bury:  Do you feel you were really deprived, though?

Shofstall:  No, not at all.  As I say, my mother sold eggs and sold chickens to furnish spending money and my clothes.  I had an experience during my college days:  I had an aunt.  Since I was the oldest of three children in the family, and the first one that went to college, she was a fairly successful businesswoman, and so she called me to <Kansas City> one time and took me into a clothing store and said, "I want you to buy all the clothes that you want."  So for the first time I bought a suit of clothes and I bought another suit of clothes, and I bought shirts and things.  Up to then, I’d gone pretty much in overalls.  And then she said, "Now then, do you have a tuxedo?"  Well, I didn’t know what a tuxedo was, so I bought a tuxedo.  So as far as I know, I was almost the only boy in this teachers’ college who, when they had a dance, had a tuxedo, didn’t have to rent one.  But the point is....  And she continued to send me money.  This gave me a feeling of self-confidence that was almost equivalent to that of being in student government.  These are the things that I think helped me far more than formal education. Now by way of employment, my first employment, as I said, other than these things I did while I was still in school, was these [twelve] years of rural school.  And then I went to a small town, about 3,000 people, had two elementary schools and a high school, and I went there as high school principal.  After I’d been there about three months, the superintendent resigned to become state superintendent of schools, and I became superintendent of that small place.  This was a very interesting experience.  I was at that time, I think, the youngest superintendent in the state of <Missouri>.  I immediately started going to summer school, working on my master’s.  So I completed my master’s in three years of summer school.  Just before I was ready to start work on my fourth year as superintendent in this small town-this was in 1929-why, I had a call from Stephens College in <Columbia Missouri>, asking if I’d be interested in coming down there for a part-time job, and working on my doctorate as research secretary to Dr. W. W. Charters [phonetic], who I found out later-I didn’t know at that time-was a very famous educator.  Well, some way or other, something caused me to....  This was a junior college, something that appealed to me, and I went down, interviewed, and got the job. Then that starts a series of three things that make me say that the most important things that ever happened to me in my life were pure accidents.  Some months after, I asked why they picked on me, and they said, well, they called over to the University of Missouri and asked the dean over there if he knew of some young man that would be interested in being a secretary of research.  The dean said, "No, I don’t know of anybody, but we have a required course for the master’s degree in which I had about 400 people this summer, and I’m just grading the questions."  They had about a 300-400 true-false final examination on it.  Well, it happened that about five of us had known that this examination was coming up, and I don’t think we got ahold of the actual questions, but we had an idea about what most of the questions were.  So all that summer we met out under a tree and boned these questions.  Well, to pick up the story, the dean then, when they called over, said, "I’m just grading the questions, and the top paper in the group is a fellow by the name of Shoftstall.  I don’t know him, but you might contact him."  So that’s accident number one in my life. Well this Stephens College experience was a very significant experience because we had this very fine educator as sort of a research person, and we had a program in which we tried to get every faculty member to carry on some kind of practical research.  For example, a swimming teacher would come in and say, "I think I can teach girls to swim faster if I have music."  So we would ask her, "How much would that cost?"  She might say, "Well, it’d cost about twenty dollars."  So we had a fund, and we’d give her twenty dollars, and all we’d ask of them is if they’d write up a research project and carry it on as research.  Well, this was a very interesting experience, and this was an experimental school, so during that fifteen years that I was there, I met and worked with practically all the top educators in the <United States>.  Many of the people that we employed and worked with there, many of them now are very famous educators.  And we had people like Bill Inge, who was a playwright, who taught freshman English for us there.  And then we brought in Maude Adams at that time, because we would never bring in a guest lecturer or a guest performer.  We’d say, "If you’re willing to come and stay a week and meet and work with students, we’d like to have you.  But if you’re not, we don’t want any one-night stands."  Well, this was very stimulating, and I think got me set in a research-minded, experimental attitude, more than any other one thing that happened to me. Well, a second big accident that happened in my life, unplanned, was that I, in the fall of 1946, had a call from a friend that I had met.  He was a rather well-known educator, and said that he had heard that they were hiring some people-the United States Armed Forces-in Europe, and wondered if I would be interested.  Well, not thinking that I would be interested, but never one to turn down/investigate an opportunity, I said yes.  So they sent me an application, material from the Pentagon, and I filled out the blank.  Just about the first of December, I got a call from them saying that they wanted [me] to come to Washington, that they were going to hire me.  So I went to <Washington>, went to the Pentagon, and that was quite an experience for a country boy.  I was met by a young woman.  She said, "Do you know me?"  And I said, "No."  She said, "I worked in your office for three years."

Bury:  This would be at Stephens?

Shofstall:  At Stephens.  And she said, "You gave me a job while my husband was going to medical school, and I’ll never forget it because it enabled us to finish the medical training and so forth and so on.  Now I’m secretary for the chief of personnel for the United States Armed Forces.  I saw up on the board one day, this job, and I went to my boss and I said, ‘I know just the man for it.’"  (laughs)  So that’s the way I got that job.  And then by virtue of the fact that I got that job, I went to <Europe> and found myself scheduled to work with the Germans.  And I hadn’t had any German since-in high school I think I had one year, and in college I had a year, and anybody knows that even if you had four years in college, you wouldn’t know much German.  And this had been twenty-five years before.  So I didn’t know any German, so I started inquiring about somebody to teach German.  And to make that long story short, the person that was sent to me to teach me German is now my wife.  (chuckles)  So that’s the story there. Now then you asked about employment.  I think I’ve gone through that.  My philosophy, my politics, and all of that has developed pretty much since this European experience, because I didn’t do much reading before then.  Since then I’ve read, I would suppose, an average of one or two major books a month.  I’ve made hundreds of speeches and so forth, and I’ve done all of those things.  I consciously accept invitations to speak-not because I want to speak-but because I’ve taken it a point to use each request to make a speech as forcing me to think through my position on different subjects.  And so that has been the basis upon which I have formulated my views.  My experience in <Europe> was very shocking because I saw the <United States> government almost succeed in making <Germany> a communist country, because they placed former communists in charge of all the newspapers and radios and communication, and we were given instructions-it had nothing to do with my work, except that if we said anything against the Russians, we would be on the plane home in twenty-four hours.  I didn’t realize that America was so oriented in that direction, until that experience.  It was a real shock to me.  And then I got the second shock when I got back.  I told people then-German people and people who couldn’t understand it at that time-I said when I got home, "The American people, I’m sure, don’t know about this."  Well, when I got home, I found out that true, they didn’t know about it, but they assumed that I was pro-Nazi and pro-German-first, because I have a German name.  Well of course there’s no significance to that.  I’m also a member of the Sons of the American Revolution, so that didn’t have any significance.  But I’d married a German woman, and they assumed that I had been subverted on that.  So I found then, in my attempts to tell what was happening-and I’ve been attempting to ever since-that I got this image built up that I was a totalitarian dictator, anti-democratic sort of person.  Unfortunately, I did probably carry on more of a crusade than it was good for me to do.  And then when I came back from <Europe>, I came to Arizona State, and it was in ’50.  Gradually that reputation got connected with me, largely because I got another shock.  When I came to a state university, having had fifteen years in a private school, and I came to a state university as dean of students, and it was my concept of a dean of students that they were sort of the attorney for the defense as far as the student was concerned.  And I found that this wasn’t the position that you took in a state university-that you were supposed to be against students, not for them.  Well, I made the mistake of battling for some students who weren’t worth fighting for at all, but it kind of got me crossways with the faculty.  They thought that I was just soft on students, you see.  I was treating them the way we had treated them in a private school.  And incidentally, that’s one of the sources of my great conviction at this time, that it would be a crime if we let private education disappear in this country:  first, because I studied and know enough about <Germany> to know that the first thing that Hitler did was to eliminate all private schools, because you can’t have a totalitarian regime with private schools. Well, then the sixties came along, and that was the beginning of the revolution that’s going on in this country.  And I got ahold of a film which was made by Fulton Lewis, III, called "Operation Abolition."  I don’t know whether you ever saw the film or not.

Bury:  It rings a bell.

Shofstall:  It was on the San Francisco riots, and this was a very beautiful documentary.  I suppose I showed that film around, I imagine, a hundred times.  A group of business people bought me three copies of it.  Well, this finished me off as far as the faculty was concerned, at Arizona State.  They just simply....  Well, in fact, on two different occasions they petitioned that I should be fired, to the president.

Bury:  This film was about the riot at Berkeley?

Shofstall:  No, this was before Berkeley.  This was a trial in <San Francisco>....  Isn’t it strange, as many times as I saw it....  They were identified communists that disrupted this trial, and it pictured how identified communists were trying to operate in this country.  So I enhanced my reputation as a totalitarian dictator. Now then, the next significant stage, I was....  Well, first of all, this got so bad that they sort of got me out of the dean of students business and kicked me upstairs to be a professor.  Well, these were some of my most wonderful days, because I had academic freedom, which was something I’d never had.

Bury:  I noticed in a newspaper article that I have here, about the time you were a professor.  They said that in spite of what the people said, that your relationship with your students was very close; and as a professor you were a very open, very accepting professor as far as allowing them to help you prepare curriculum.

Shofstall:  Didn’t do any lecturing at all.

Bury:  Being open to ideas.  This hardly fits, to me, the idea of totalitarianism!

Shofstall:  Confused the hell out of the people over there.

Bury:  Right.

Shofstall:  The next thing I heard, we were driving back from <Los Angeles>....  I don’t want to drag this out too long.

Bury:  You’re doing great!  You do what you want.

Shofstall:  Driving back from <Los Angeles> one day, I heard on the radio that Sarah Folsom had died.  Never thought much more about it.  The next thing I knew was that some members of the legislature and a member of the state board came to me and said that they’d like for me to consider-wondered if I’d consider-the state superintendency.  Well immediately my right-wing friends, who were still my friends at that time-they’ve all left me now-they began putting pressure on the governor.  In fact, one experience I had was the governor’s assistant called up, "Why don’t you call off your dogs?!"  I said, "I haven’t got any dogs to call off!"  Well, anyway, whether they put on the pressure or what, the governor appointed me as superintendent.

Bury:  I want to ask you one thing here, as sort of a point of transition:  Your feelings toward what Mrs. Folsom had done, since you were really the next in line.  The gentleman in between was really, I think, just a caretaker between your two superintendencies.

Shofstall:  Right.

Bury:  How did you feel?  Did you feel that you were a natural sort of heir to what she was doing?  Or do you feel you identified differently?  Do you agree with what she tried to do in some of her areas of [unclear].

Shofstall:  Yes, I agreed with what she tried to do.

Bury:  What did you think of her personally?

Shofstall:  I didn’t know her personally, but I found from my experience that she was a wonderful person who was trying to do the right thing, but was a lousy administrator.  And I’ve found out since that this is not primarily an educational job, this is a management job.  And now I think I feel that it’s a real asset to be an educator at the same time.  But if I had to make a choice between a manager and a non-educator, and an educator and a non-manager, I would take the manager and the non-educator, because we can employ plenty of people, like Jim Hardgraves [phonetic] and everybody else around here, to handle the educational possibility, if the person is a decent manager.  Of course part of my definition of a decent manager is consultative management, that management doesn’t imply telling everybody what to do and how to do the things:  it’s giving them the freedom and the support to do what they want to do professionally.  Now if you interpret a manager as a dictator, well then that would be very sad, to have a manager of that kind in an educational job of this kind.  This is the thing that has disturbed me about the selection [unclear].  I find that very few of the people-although I think maybe Carolyn Warner does-realizes-very few of the people, the candidates, none of them, except possibly her-realized that this was a management job.  Well, that’s [unclear]. Now then you have here the question, "Why did you enter the profession of education?"  I entered the professional of education for the reason that I have found most of my colleagues have entered the profession of education.  And that is that I had a parent-in this case it was a mother-who visualized that there was nothing higher that her children could achieve than to be a schoolteacher.  It’s sort of like Catholic mothers:  many of them think there’s nothing higher that their child could be than to be in the priesthood.  And that was the attitude of my mother.  Now my father couldn’t have cared less.  And I’ve talked to many people, Ph.D.’s and so forth, and I found almost without exception that one or both of the parents had the ideal.  And that’s one of the reasons that today I feel that the key to quality education is the values of the parents.  I think one of the reasons we have maybe not the best educational system in the world, is that I don’t think our parents respect learning.  Now, they respect going to school and getting a degree and so forth, but they’re kind of like a lot of college students that you and I know, that they’re really not interested in learning in college, but they want the bachelor’s degree as a union card of some kind or another.  And I find that there are an awful lot of parents that are not interested in learning.  And I think until parents get interested in learning, that we’re not going to be able to strengthen our education. Now I make that on another basis.  Now you’ve been in school enough, and you know that in almost all fields, especially an Orthodox Jew is far superior to the non-Jews.  And the reason for that is that the Jewish religion is highly respected for learning.  I got this also driven home to me when I was in Taiwan.  So Chinese, you have exactly the same thing, where it’s part of their religion.  And the fact is that on our third-grade reading test, the only minority group that tops the Anglos on everything is the Orientals, right here in <Arizona>.  That’s also an aside.

Bury:  That’s a good aside.  Keep it up, I like those.

Shofstall:  "Why did you enter the profession of education?  Describe the significant events in your educational career."  I think I’ve hit most of those.

Bury:  I want to just touch on something.  You’ve mentioned management, and you’ve mentioned that you’ve had other experiences besides education.  This has been similar to my own education.  Do you feel that one of the problems of education generally today is that they don’t recognize the need of outside experience and expertise, management skills, accounting skills-that educators [unclear].

Shofstall:  Typewriting.  I took a course in typewriting when I was in high school, and I’ve never regretted that.  I can still today sit down and type a letter in typewriting at a pretty good speed, because I have a touch system and so forth.  Just a little thing like that.  The reason I mentioned a while ago this student government thing:  I learned something about management.  And another thing that I have done consciously....  Somebody was telling me today, they said, "It’s gonna be hard for you when you retire here, because many of the people now with whom you spend a lot of time, people here in the department, they’re gonna forget about you."  I said, "Well, you don’t have to worry.  I have more friends outside the field of education than inside the field of education"-not more, but just as many.  Especially that was true at the university.  Most university people run in the university circles, and that’s about all they run.  I think I’ve tried to keep my relationships broad.

Bury:  I was wondering, even more generally, is what I’m getting at, and you’re defining it now for me in my own mind-is education too much of a closed shop?  Teachers, all the way up, administrators, not realizing what total society is, what the total economic situation is, to impart this to their children.  Do you think we’ve become too ingrown in education?

Shofstall:  Absolutely.  I just would like to see a study sometime on the percentage of teachers who have actually held down a job, a paying job, for any length of time, other than teaching.

Bury:  That’s what I’m getting at.

Shofstall:  I think it’d be very small.  And it’s one of the reasons that I’ve pushed very hard on cooperative education.  I think that every high school kid, boy or girl, should have an experience at least one year where they go to school a half a day and work a half a day.  Or that’s one good thing I like about the Russian system:  Before you can go into a university, you have to work at least two years.  Now this fits fine with the Marxian theory, but it fits fine with my theory too.  I find among many educators-in fact, I’ve heard some of them even say it-and also ministers in the pulpit-that well now, with the inventions of machinery and with the automation and so forth, we’re gonna soon have a twenty-four-hour week and so forth.  In fact, a lot of students are sort of convinced that it’s not gonna be too long before you can get along without working at all!

Bury:  What do you think will happen to us then?

Shofstall:  Yes, what will happen to us?  Now, your next question here is, "Why did you choose to run for the office of superintendent?"

Shofstall:  I didn’t choose to run for it, except that when Jack Williams called me and said, "I’m going to recommend you for appointment for state superintendent, you’ve got to promise me that you will run when this term’s up," because I had a year and a half to go before my unexpired term was filled.  So that’s the only reason I ran.  And you noticed at the first opportunity I got knocked around, I took it. "What specific training have you had which would qualify for you for the position of superintendent?"  And I would say the breadth of my whole life experience, working for fifteen years in an experimental school; working for fifteen years in that same school was a private school; my experience in <Europe> which was a very broadening experience, the first time I’d come in contact with any culture other than my own.  And the fact that I had done many different kinds of work before I even started to work.

Bury:  You know, they say you’re so anti-communist, but I’ve noticed in your writings, and I noticed this just a little bit with Mrs. Folsom too, that you’re not so anti any system, that you have looked at them and studied them, and like you would say, "Look at this one point of the educational system.  This is something we should do."  So you do look at things ...

Shofstall:  Sure try to.

Bury:  ... and study their system.

Shofstall:  I’m pro individualism.  And communism and socialism are collectivism.  And if there’s anything I have become more and more, the older I get, is I highly respect individualism.  This is the one thing that bothered me so much in the College of Education at ASU, and I don’t think it was any exception.  Professors would lecture on individualized instruction and so forth, but they didn’t do a damned bit of individualized instruction [unclear].

Bury:  It’s still the same.

Shofstall:  It’s still the same.  And then I found as I have watched practice teachers and so forth, they would go out and teach the same way they had been taught.  I mean, not the same way they had been taught-the way their teachers had taught.

Bury:  Right.  This is something I wanted to ask you right at the beginning.  We say that we teach as we were taught.  You were taught in a one-room school.  You went out and started teaching in a one-room school.  How has that affected you today, right here?

Shofstall:  Very definitely, because it, first of all....

Bury:  Do you find that all those new things they talk about at ASU are the same things you [unclear].

Shofstall:  [unclear] open classroom.  Boy, we had eight grades right there in one room!  If that isn’t an open classroom, I never saw one.  It’s certainly individualization.  Certainly cross-age teaching.  I really can’t think of anything that....  And reading.  For example, I taught little kids to read when I was sixteen years old.  Our books then were phonics.  And I never heard of phonics.  I don’t know how I learned.  It must have been by phonics, but anyway these books just taught me to teach the other kids to read by phonics.  Yup. "What is your current political affiliation and how does this relate to your philosophy of education?"  In the first place, my nominal affiliation is Republican, but my affiliation is conservative.  And of course I don’t define conservative the way most so-called liberals define it.  Most liberals define conservative as reactionary and living in the past.  I define conservative as being concerned with basic principles, and making decisions on the basis of principle, rather than opportunism, which I think most liberals are.  For example, I have great respect for history because I feel that there is nothing new under the sun.  I am also convinced that human nature, the basic human nature of man, has not changed in 5,000 years.  So I’m concerned about what we have learned in those 5,000 years.  And when I talk about conserving, that’s what I think we need to conserve.  But I find when I can get a real liberal that will talk to me-and the real liberals, for example the communists that I’ve known in <Europe> and here-I have no trouble with them, because we just agree in the beginning we operate on different basic assumptions.  And you don’t have any argument if you can agree on basic assumptions.  It’s a difference in basic assumption.  And one of the basic assumptions of the liberal is that everything has changed, including man.  And therefore, naturally, our values that were held even a hundred years ago, are no longer valid.  I had a professor at ASU actually tell me, "I don’t see any sense to studying history."  Now he was a professor!

Bury:  I wouldn’t say that.

Shofstall:  Alright, my philosophy of education, as I say, I would say individualistic preparation for a world of work-and I don’t necessarily mean working with your hands.  I think the nuclear scientist is engaged in the world of work the same as the carpenter.  That’s just about it.  And also in education I think value education has to be a part of education.  I think the biggest crime, the reason we have a crime rate that we have, the reason that we have juvenile delinquency, is that so many of the people to whom children look for guidance say there is no absolute right and wrong.  I think there is an absolute right and wrong.  That’s what I would call conservative also.  Now that doesn’t mean that I think that I, or everybody who believes that way, always does right.  But I think we’ve got to keep on the road.

Bury:  Or try.

Shofstall:  And we’ve got to try.  The thing is now that it’s gotten to be....  For example, let’s just take promiscuous sex.  Now to me, that’s wrong.  But the people who say there is no right and wrong, they’re not willing to condemn that, don’t you see.  Now then, I’m sure there always has been and always will be shackin’ up.  But the fact remains it always has been and always will be wrong.  The same way with stealing and anything else that you want to put in the area.  Incidentally the last speech, the one I’m making on October 4 down in <Texas>, is kind of the last one I’ve made, and that kind of states my philosophy more than any.

Bury:  [unclear]

Shofstall:  She has a copy of it.  I have it down to be printed.  Incidentally, up here I started this spring, every time I’m asked to make a speech, I have spent a lot of time on it.  For example, this speech I have revised it ten times.

Bury:  I noticed the one that you wrote in the ASCD book.  Excellent.  I think I referred to it in the letter I wrote you.  Very good.

Shofstall:  Well anyway, I said, "I’m going to make every speech an attempt to put all I know about the subject, down.  And then I’m going to print it, so that when I get through, I’ll have about all I know about education in that series."

Bury:  I snitched one of each out of your closet!

Shofstall:  Now then, there’s a lot of repetition in them, because....

Bury:  That’s the best way to get it down.  That’s right.

Shofstall:  Yeah.  "Do you feel that the electoral process is a positive or negative attribute in regards to the functions of the office and its relationship with public education?"

Bury:  I could have made that a shorter sentence, couldn’t I?  (laughs)  Should it be elected or not?

Shofstall:  When I first came in, I was quite sure it shouldn’t be, it should be appointed.  I thought it was a professional job, and therefore they should select a professional and appoint them.  Now as I’ve been in the job five-and-a-half years, I’m convinced now-as I said a while ago, it is a managerial job.  But more important than that, the thing that’s happened to public education is that parents feel helpless to influence public education.  They’ve lost not only control, but they’ve lost influence.  And I think we owe it to them to give them a person they can vote on.  Now it’s true that that person is not going to change things much, but it gives them a chance to tell the people that this is the type of person that we want as the head of our school system.  So I think we don’t want to deny them this opportunity to vote.

Bury:  I want to ask you on a phrase there:  "the person can’t do much"-meaning the superintendent.  As you know, I’ve been studying all the superintendents, and this is a big question.  How much can the superintendent do publicly in a publicity manner, or legally, job-owning-what can be done?

Shofstall:  Job-owning is all.  I’ll give that a more elegant name-leadership.  I think-and I’ll say this in humility, although it doesn’t sound like humility.  I think that by virtue of my having spent many years thinking on these problems, having clarified my own thoughts, and having, I think, to some extent, become a person, that I have influenced education, and have caused many people to be concerned with education who normally would not, had they had a superintendent who had gone for popularity within the profession.  Now, this may be imaginative, but I think the very fact that eleven people ran for this office indicates that some way or another the word got around that this was a very powerful office.  And of course they’re going to wake up to the gross realization that the power only lies with the personality of the person, that there is no real legal power. Now it comes to the next point, however.  The reason many people say that they want an appointed superintendent and elected board is that they say then there would be more harmony between the board and the superintendent [unclear].  Well, my point is, that would be the kind of harmony you have in any totalitarian regime?  And so what we need more than whether we have an elected or appointed superintendent, the legislation needs to be written to define the functions of the two so that they’re not overlapping.  At the present time, the board thinks that the superintendent works for them, and the state department works for them, and they are trying to administer the state department.  And if you could imagine anybody trying to work in a situation with nine bosses, you can see how ridiculous it is.  Furthermore, they should be policy-forming, and not administrating.  And as I say, as long as the legislation is written that way, so that it’s not clear, then I don’t care whether the superintendent is appointed or elected.  Either you’re going to have strife, or you’re just going to have a figurehead for a superintendent.

Bury:  Well, you mentioned the legislation.  In doing this history, I’ve gathered all of the legislation in regards to your office, and I’m annotating it.  And what you’re saying has been true for 103 years.

Shofstall:  Is that right?!

Bury:  The office has been defined, redefined, overlapping.  There’s not one consistent act or bill that is consistent with the one previous.

Shofstall:  That is tremendous.

Bury:  They’ve cut.  In fact, in some times in the 1880s, they even cut the pay out completely-again in the 1890s.  Then they’d triple it the next year.  Then the year after that, they try to get rid of the office completely.

Shofstall:  Could you get an article printed on that sometime before the first of January?

Bury:  You’re gonna have it all.  That’s gonna be part of our story.

Shofstall:  Yeah.

Bury:  You’ll have it before the first.

Shofstall:  Alright.  "Describe the positive events in Arizona education during your incumbency."  Okay, I think the emphasis upon basic skills started with my election.  Although Mrs. Folsom talked about it, nothing was done about it until I said that I thought every child should learn to read.  And that started an avalanche that has grown.  The second thing has been the emphasis upon career education, the world of work.  The third thing....  I’m just saying the things that to me are the most significant.  The third thing is the drug abuse prevention program.  We just had a two-and-a-half-hour program on that this morning, which I think convinced some of the board people that that was something they didn’t know anything about.  That was pretty terrific.  I’m talking now about things that really didn’t exist, or if they existed it was not very much, before that.  I think we have developed an emphasis upon libraries that [we] never had before.  We have completely changed the state department from a regulatory agency to primarily a service agency.

Bury:  I saw your new handbook.

Shofstall:  And then we have organized, reorganized the state department as a functional organization, rather than as a line-and-staff military type of organization.  Now, I was just adlibbing those.  I probably missed something.  I think most of the other things were here before I came.  Oh! I have also tried, and haven’t been too successful, but I’ve tried to get the schools more concerned with religion as it relates to education, being fully aware of the notion of separation of church and state.  Our religious freedom is being interpreted as freedom from religion.  And I’ll just give you one thing that I’ve done, which is concrete.  First of all, from time to time now, I will have....  People will call, "Would it be alright for us to give a course in the Bible as literature?"  I say, "Sure!  Glory be!"  But it’s amazing how many people think that they couldn’t do that.  But I think I’ve tried to build an atmosphere where they could.  About six months ago I got a book called Truth:  God or Evolution?  Now this wasn’t a book on the creation theory, but it was a book which proved as conclusively, as clearly, and as simply as anything I’ve ever read, that the theory of evolution cannot be proven, any more than the theory of creation.

Bury:  That’s right, it’s a theory.

Shofstall:  It’s a theory, but it is taught in our schools as a fact.  And this completely affects everything that’s taught.  Well, what I did was to take this over to the attorney general.  I said, "Would I get in any trouble to distribute this book?"  And he said no.  In fact, I was very surprised, because the man I took it to is almost an atheist, I would say.  And he read it and was very much interested in it.  So I wrote to all the superintendents and said, "If you would be interested in this book, I will send you a copy of it."  I got 150 requests, which means that there’s something there.  Well, this is just one little thing.

Then I started three months ago having once a month a prayer breakfast here at the state department.  Well now, this is just an emphasis.  Then another thing that I have plugged for and haven’t made much progress, but I have had little opportunities here and there, and that is this salvation of private education.  I’ve had chances where my people, where we could give federal funds to private schools, but our people would tend not to do it unless I would kind of insist on it, if it was within the law.  And I have championed the voucher system as one solution to it.  But these are things that I’ve worked on that I haven’t completed.

Bury:  They’re important too.

Shofstall:  Oh, I didn’t mention....  This, I guess, comes in another category of things that I’d say....  Of course none of these things are ever completed.  I think I will by the first of January have free enterprise so well established that I don’t believe they’re ever gonna get rid of it, unless the country goes bad, worse than it is.  And that has been a real uphill battle.

Bury:  Yes, it has.

Shofstall:  Social studies teachers, not intentionally, not maliciously, but just because of the training they’ve had, are 90 percent socialists.

Bury:  I suspect so, because I think in most studies made, the highest degree of socialistic or liberal thinking always usually is found in this area.

Shofstall:  Yeah.

Bury:  I think most educators, regardless of where they stood, would agree with that.

Shofstall:  "Describe the negative events in Arizona education during your incumbency."  Of course the most negative have been my disagreements with organized ... teacher unions.  I’ll call them teacher unions.  I cannot....  I don’t blame the teacher union people.  You wouldn’t be elected as an officer in an AEA if you didn’t put teachers first.  If you weren’t working for [teachers]....  That’s the reason they elect you, to work for teachers.  Well, my point is that we all should be working for kids, and teachers are important.  That doesn’t say teachers are not important, but that means that they should take second place to children.

Bury:  Do you think teachers have lost what professionalism they have had because of this?

Shofstall:  I think they have, and I think we see it especially this fall with all the strikes over the country.  I just think it’s criminal for a teacher to strike.  And here’s my reasoning.  I think it would be criminal, for example, if my doctor would decide to strike.  Now then, if my doctor doesn’t want to treat me, that’s his business, and he has a perfect right to.  But for him to put out a picket in the front of another doctor, to tell that doctor he can’t treat me, then that’s something [unclear].  It’s the same thing with the [children]:  if that teacher doesn’t want to teach these children, that’s alright, he should walk out, say, "I’m gonna walk out.  You’re not payin’ me enough.  The working conditions are bad."  But when he says that another person can’t come in there and teach those children....

Bury:  You know, in your writings you do draw corollaries between doctors and teachers, and it’s something I’d like to bring up, and that’s the professional training a teacher doesn’t hold compared to doctors.  Do you feel that they’re trained as professionals?  Do you think they’re given a chance to develop a professional conscience, a professional ethic?  Do you think our universities are doing this, our colleges of education?

Shofstall:  I do not.  They used to do it.  I remember when I was working on my doctorate they talked about it a lot, and teaching was the profession, and they talked about professionalism, and they developed professional codes and so forth.  Well now they still have the codes, but you never hear much talking about it.  You know, the doctor has their code that says the patient comes first.

Bury:  You’d think if the teacher organizations could put as much effort into patrolling their own ranks, as they do into getting salary increases, that they could be a profession.

Shofstall:  I think they are a profession, they should be a profession, it is a profession.  Now, you talk about training.  I think the fact that we have no provision for any type of internship type of training is horrible.  I certainly wouldn’t want a physician operating on me who had learned everything he knew about operating, out of a book.  Now they have this practice teaching, but that’s not the same, they’re not in charge of the classroom, they’re not responsible.  So I think we should do that.  And then we have this most unprofessional thing in that they can renew their certificates-the only way they can renew their certificates is taking thirty hours of graduate work.  Now my soul! many of the people teaching those graduate courses haven’t been in a high school or grade school classroom for twenty-five years.

Bury:  [unclear]

Shofstall:  Well now the negative events in Arizona education [unclear].  The one has been this breach between me and the organized teachers; and the other has been my difficulty with the state board.  These have been negative events.  The most negative of all has been the state boards insisting on having a committee made up of laymen and professionals to write a detailed course of study.  I just know too much about how curricula are written to think you could ever get a valid curriculum.

Bury:  They’ve attempted it before.  This is the 1899 one the state board did.

Shofstall:  Is that right?!  (laughter)

Bury:  And there’s many more, by the way.  I thought you’d like to see that.

Shofstall:  Oh boy.

Bury:  As you say, nothing’s new under the sun.  In your office, and running for your office, you’ve used local control as an issue.  Do you see local control as an issue in this curriculum and course of study the state board is concerned about?

Shofstall:  Very definitely.  You know the sad part is....  There are two very sad things.  Now this wouldn’t be grist for your mill.  First of all, the two people who are like thorns in my side on the state board are Jenkins and Ben Picconi [phonetic].  Both of these people I raised all kinds of hell with the governor to appoint them.  (laughs)

Bury:  Oh no.

Shofstall:  That’s [unclear] number one.  Number two, I started this course of study business, but I had no idea what developed.  I said that I thought laymen should tell, in very broad terms, very broad terms-I called them basic concepts-that they wanted their children to get out of school.  So they picked it up immediately and they set up basic concept committees.  I met with the basic concept committee in social studies, and I said, "Now my idea of basic concepts would be that you wouldn’t have more than fifteen, and maybe you’d have only four or five basic concepts that you think a graduate from high school should have in social studies."  The next think I knew, Jenkins and Harris attended that meeting and said, "That isn’t what we want.  We want the detailed list of facts that you want these children to learn."  And from that point on, the whole thing went.  Now then, so, when you come to local autonomy, what I say is, parents should have local autonomy about what is to be taught.  The teachers should have local autonomy about how it’s to be taught.  Now then, the only reason for having a state statement on what is to be taught is that we have such a mobile population, so there should be some type of coordination.  If a child is in the fifth grade and he moves from <Phoenix> to <Tucson>, in mathematics he shouldn’t suddenly have long division when he had been doing something else here.

Bury:  You’ve mentioned before, about two years ago, about the state would support the basic curriculum, for instance.  Is this what you mean?

Shofstall:  That’s what I mean.

Bury:  You’d have a consistent basic curriculum; the local districts could add to that.

Shofstall:  Could add to it, but have all to do with about how it’s to be taught.

Bury:  I keep seeing a problem here.  I see one group, or one part of education out on a limb because of all your statements, and that’s the colleges of education of universities.  It seems like if you could accomplish this-and I am in agreement with you, it would be nice if it could be-would have to close up shop or change their ways, because they have a vested interest, don’t they?  Every one of your suggestions is a threat to them.

Shofstall:  Yeah.  In fact, I don’t know whether you ran across it anywhere-I’ve stated on several occasions that the one generalization I made as a result of my three years of teaching graduate students and undergraduates at university-and like all generalizations, this probably is not true-but it seems to me the longer the child stays in school, the less self-motivated he is.  And I’ll take that clear up to graduate work.

Bury:  I think there’s a lot of truth to that.

Shofstall:  Obviously you have great freedom in your thesis, but I’ve seen many of these theses, the way they’re run, boy, they’re just doing leg work for a professor.

Bury:  Yeah, I know what you mean.

Shofstall:  I mean, I don’t know who you advisor is, but he must be....

Bury:  I’ve got some tremendous guys.  First of all, my director, my chairman, is Raymond Hewitt.  I think he’s worked with you a couple of times on reading and other areas of curriculum.  He’s one of these very fair, open-minded, conservative-using the word in the nice sense-persons, as we’ve been discussing right here.  And he has been so excited about this project, that he’s just held my hand all the way through-in getting the committee set up so we could do it just as we’re doing now.  It just means a lot.  In fact, I think it means a lot to a number of [unclear].  They’re very proud that we’re doing it, and I’m glad we’re doing it.

Shofstall:  Does Walkup know about it?

Bury:  I don’t know if he knows directly.  I was sitting at the same table with him Monday night, and I’m very concerned about the channel and the authority.  And of course Dr. Clawson [phonetic] has been completely behind it.  In fact, Dr. Clawson is sitting on my committee.  It’s the first time he’s ever sat on a doctoral committee.  And that shows how he feels about it.  And so when I get into Dr. Clawson’s office, I think I’ll ask him if Dr. Walkup knows, or [unclear].  I’m sure he knows, but I didn’t know exactly how I should (laughs) handle it.  I’m very conscious of channel of command, and I did not want to go over Dr. Clawson’s head if he hadn’t told him yet.  Dean Beal [phonetic] knows, and approved it right away-was, again, very excited about it.  As director of our graduate college, you never know which way he’s gonna go.  They said, "You’d better go in there and let him know ahead of time."  I went in there and he said it’s a very respectable and worthwhile study.

Shofstall:  "What accomplishment are you most proud of regarding your tenure in office?"

Bury:  These are probably a little redundant [unclear] too, but there might be one or two things, you know, you feel a little puffed-out about and good.

Shofstall:  I’m most proud of the fact that I have succeeded in convincing many people in the state of <Arizona>, that the state superintendent and the state department can be a very significant element in the public education system.  I think without reflecting on the people....  When I came in here....  In fact, many people couldn’t understand why I even came.  The department was just a non-entity, with the exception of kindergarten....

Bury:  Historically, you are very correct, because I would say, except for the very first one, A. P. T. Safford, who was also the governor, who went out and did very much the same as you’re doing now, almost a hundred years in between, and I say possibly maybe tying you and maybe Mrs. Folsom together in some like ideas-the people in between (laughs) I don’t know.

Shofstall:  Yeah.  "What are you most disappointed about regarding your tenure of office?"  I would have run for state superintendent again, had the state board been willing to serve as an advisor and a policy-maker, rather than trying to administer the state department; and rather than trying to interfere with local autonomy.  But that’s [been], I have to say, without any doubt, the greatest disappointment."How do you view your relations with executives?"

Bury:  Particularly with Governor Williams.

Shofstall:  I hope you’ll talk with him, but I think I have very fine relations with him.  With the legislature I have very good relations, except with a few of the extreme right.  I have better relations with the extreme left than I have with the extreme right, which is interesting.

Bury:  From what I can tell, Mrs. Folsom had a great deal of difficulty with the legislature.

Shofstall:  Yes.

Bury:  To what do you attribute her difficulty?  People have called her a politician.  People do not call you a politician-at least the ones I’ve checked with.  They say you’re too blunt and honest to be a politician.  It would seem to be the other way around:  she should have gotten along with them, and not you.  But why?  Was it because she was a woman?

Shofstall:  No.  I tell you, I think Mr. Harold [phonetic] could answer that better than I can.  Ask him that question.

Bury:  Okay.  Very good.  Thank you.

Shofstall:  He served as the legislative budget analyst.

Bury:  That’s right.

Shofstall:  [unclear]  The judiciary, we have very fine relations with them.  In fact, Gary Nelson was a student at ASU when I was there.  With the press, I’ve had a hard time keeping the press from reporting me in terms of my image, rather than as I am.  But I feel in the last few months that I’ve sort of crossed that hump.

Bury:  I would agree with that.  You think they’re beginning to understand?

Shofstall:  I think they’re beginning to understand.  Unfortunately, John Veesey [phonetic] is the one that understands me most, and John has been taken off the education beat.

Bury:  And he’s with....

Shofstall:  He’s with the Gazette.  And the Republic, for a long time, they’ve had such a series of people.  But I think I’m breaking through that now.  Of course the Tucson papers, the Citizen has always been very good, but the Star has always been on purely political grounds.  The county and district officials, I’ve gotten along very well with the county superintendents.  Those are about the only county officials.  The district officials, again, as soon as....  To the extent I’ve been able to separate the actions of the board.  It’s been very difficult to get people to realize that these things the board....  The people don’t understand why I can’t keep the board from doing the things they’re doing.  And they put me in the same pot with 'em, although they can read in the papers almost daily that I’m fighting with them all the time.  But I’ve been so strongly identified....  And then also, they had the same problem-I mean district officials-the same problem that everybody else has had, is that they all tend to look at my image rather than look at me.  To any extent that I’ve had personal relations with people-and this applies to teachers and everybody else-I haven’t had any difficulty.  But I have had difficulty living down an image. Number 13.  "Within the last decade, federal funding has drastically changed the profile of Arizona education, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, and the state department of education.  How have you reacted to this?"  Well of course when federal funding first started in 1965, I was one of the chief opponents, because I operated on an assumption which I still hold, and I still believe it’s true, that federal control will always accompany federal aid.  You just can’t....  I would resent my congressman operating....  I call the opposite of that the theory of "put it on the stump and run."  And that is what people thought was gonna happen.  Now then, as I have observed it in the five years I have been here, the office of education has very slowly been attempting to shift control of funds to the state agency, away from the federal agency.  But I don’t think they’re going to be able to succeed in the long run.  And I see eventually the trend going toward more and more state control and more and more federal control.  In other words, in the direction of centralization.

Bury:  Away from the local district.

Shofstall:  Away from the local district.  In the first place, the local districts have asked for it.  They’re asking for more and more federal money; they’re asking for more and more state money.  But my position has been since that money’s been handed out, I’ve taken the position that I’m going to get every dime I can, and try to do everything I can to see that it’s spent as intelligently as I can.  I think I might have some trouble defending that on moral grounds, but I kind of have a feeling that one always has to choose between values.  And the higher value in this instance, as far as I’m concerned, is to do whatever I can for education.  Just like Social Security, I’m fundamentally opposed to Social Security.  But come January 1, brother, I’m gonna have my name in there, simply because of the income tax and the taxes I’ve paid over the years, have meant that I have been unable to save for my own security the way that I should have saved for. Alright now, "What is your opinion of the current textbook adoption discussion?  Do you feel it should be more of a state prerogative or a local prerogative?"  It’s simply, again, if the local schools want the state to pay for the textbooks-which they do-then they’re gonna have to take the control.  And if they will take the responsibility, are willing to take the responsibility of paying for them, they can have the control.  But you can’t get a legislature, and you can’t get a state board to approve textbooks that they don’t like, if they’re payin’ for 'em.

Bury:  That’s clear enough.

Shofstall:  Number 15, "Do you agree that we should have more local control?"  Just a flat yes.  "Is it possible with federal funding and the movement toward taxation equity to ever have local control again?"  And I’ve already answered that.  "How do you envision the superintendent’s role in this controversy?"  To shoot off his mouth at every opportunity he gets, and be as honest about it as he can.  "What is the role today of the state department of education, state superintendent of public instruction, with the local districts?"  And I have said that we have tried to move it away from regulation to service.

Bury:  This is getting that new service direction?

Shofstall:  New service direction.  And I think the publication of this little booklet is concrete evidence of that.

Bury:  It is, very much so.

Shofstall:  "What is your opinion of bilingual education?"  I’m much more interested in bicultural education than I am bilingual education.  I have seen too many, I’ve lived too long, I know too many people who were children of immigrants, whose parents didn’t speak English, and the day when they went to school they couldn’t speak English, who are today leaders in this country-and they’ve never heard of bilingual education.  I know too much about how people learn a language.  I saw when I was in <Europe>, I saw little kids, children of military officials and so forth, come to <Germany> and in four or five months, playing with German kids, knew more German than their parents who might have majored in German in college.  And so I think if....  Now, to the extent that bilingual means respecting the culture of a child, and respecting the fact that the child doesn’t understand-in other words, treat him as an individual-then we’ve got to have more of it.  I remember very well....  We’ve had in our course here, because we’ve had many friends in <Germany>, many of them sent their children over here to go to the university, and we were always sort of godparents to them.  I remember one girl-I won’t tell the whole story, it’s sort of sad, her parents sent her over here to get her away from her sweetheart and she was very unhappy-but Erika is interested in swimming, so she got this girl to take swimming.  Well, the girl had been a good swimmer, was a good swimmer, but the swimming teacher had no concept of what it was to not understand the language, and she threw that girl out of the class because she said, "You’ll never learn to swim!  You don’t even know how to do what I tell you to do!" and so forth.  But she was yelling at the girl in English.  And I’m sure there are elementary teachers who do that to little Indian kids and little Mexican kids.

Bury:  They did that, I know, in <Alaska> with the Indian children.  It was a tragic thing to see that.

Shofstall:  If that’s what you mean by bilingual education, God knows we need more of it.

Bury:  We’ve got two general terms:  We used to talk about the melting pot.  Now we talk about cultural pluralism.  Do you feel that this idea of cultural plurality, respecting and having people respect their own cultural background and take pride in it, is important?

Shofstall:  Absolutely.

Bury:  Instead of melting us all down to the one [unclear].

Shofstall:  In fact, I don’t think you can ever become a good American unless you respect your homeland.  My wife....  In fact, she’s in a book club with about twenty young intellectual wives of university professors, so every once in a while she just unloads and says, "Look, here I am the only foreigner in the group, and I am standing up for America here all the time.  You people are always runnin’ it down."

Bury:  Do you think maybe we take it for granted too much?

Shofstall:  We take it for granted, and we’re too critical.  But, she takes the point, and I believe in it very strongly:  she says that if you can’t love your own country, you can’t ever love another country.  Just like if you can’t love your own parents, and respect your parents, it’s pretty hard for you to have respect and love for other people.  There’s something about love and respect which is indivisible, like freedom.  You can’t have free enterprise if you don’t have academic freedom, and vice versa.  You can’t have academic freedom if you don’t have free enterprise ... or free speech and so forth.  A lot of people want to make freedom divisible.  You either believe in it, or you don’t believe in it.

Bury:  Can’t shade it.

Shofstall:  "What is your opinion of bilingual....  What do you think should be the educator’s role in the problems of drug abuse, alcohol, human sexuality, and ethical behavior?"  I think that all those should be handled up in a values clarification program, and I think teachers need to be trained in values clarification.  And I think they need to have courses in logic, they need to have courses in philosophy, and they need to have courses in religion or something as a background for it.  Now so far as sex education, if they mean by sex education, teaching values, then I’m all for it.  But if you mean by sex education....  See, I’ve tried to find out what it is that these kids who all say they want sex education want to know.  I asked a group of seniors down in Flowing Wells one time a year or two ago, "What is it that you don’t know about sex you want to know?"  One boy finally had the nerve, "How do you lay a girl?"

Bury:  That’s direct!  That takes care of the whole thing.

Shofstall:  That takes care of the whole thing.  And I’ve never had any of them....  And they talk about look at the VD rate, or look at the illegitimacy rate.  Can’t tell me those kids who get VD and illegitimate children don’t know about sex.  They try to say that these kids who get illegitimate children are innocent babes.  There may be one out of a thousand that was innocent, but most of 'em....  I can’t tell it in German, because it’s funny in German, but the mother says, "My Eliza, first time, boom.  Other children, all the time, nothin’!" "How do you see the future of education in your office?"

Bury:  That’s a futuristic question.

Shofstall:  That’s a futuristic question!

Bury:  Are we gonna make it?

Shofstall:  Well, I say again, it all depends on what we do about private education.  If we keep it in the public sector, it will eventually become what it is almost today, a monopoly.  And I don’t believe in monopolies of any kind.

Bury:  Let me ask you about private education.  Do you think that it would be possible, it would be correct, for federal funding, state funding, and even local funding, to be provided to private education, as long as, say, they met just certain basic educational standards, like having certified teachers?

Shofstall:  And so long as they’re nonsectarian.

Bury:  Right.  Do you think they have a right to share that [unclear]?

Shofstall:  I don’t think that private education [unclear], but I think the children have a right.  I think we should look to the children.  And then the other thing is, you see, if you have plenty of money today, and you don’t like what’s going on in a public school, you can send them to private.  But how about these people who don’t have the money?  I think we’re being discriminatory against poor people.

Bury:  Now, when we talked about alternative or private education, how do you view all the different kinds?  Because we have way-out free schools, we have very conservative parochial schools.  Do you feel that they all sort of have a place in [unclear]?

Shofstall:  Absolutely.

Bury:  This would give the people a chance to choose.

Shofstall:  Just like, again, I come back to free enterprise.  If we’d never allowed Henry Ford to do a lot of crazy things, we’d never have had mass production.

Bury:  That’s for sure.

Shofstall:  I was up to a seminar on [unclear] up at Jackson Hole....

Bury:  Is this the one you gave me that letter on?

Shofstall:  Yeah.  One of these people talked about luxuries, and he said he’d sold his boat, and he had a sports car, and he didn’t think that luxuries were right.  And yet-I may have told you this-I’ve lived long enough to see many things which were luxuries when I was young, which are now necessities.  A car is one.  In 1910, ’12, and so forth, you had to be a rich man to have a car.  They sold then for almost as much as they do now!  But we came along and mass produced 'em.  You’ve got to have that freedom.  If you don’t, why are we out-producing the socialist countries?  The only way they keep up with us is through their slave labor and imitating us.  They even take our computers....

Bury:  That’s for sure.  I wanted to ask just a few things of you here-and I’ve taken so much of your time.  It’s been a fantastic interview.

Shofstall:  Nothing anybody likes more than talking about himself.

Bury:  Well, you do a great job of it.  And in fact, that’s one of the things I wanted to mention, that you should consider-have you yet read Harry Truman’s Plain Speaking, oral interviews?

Shofstall:  No.

Bury:  I’m gonna take the liberty of sending you a copy.  I’d like to be the one to give it to you-not because it’s Harry Truman or anything, but because of the way it’s done, and particularly the fact of a person sitting down, as you have done, saying it as it is, and how important this is, what a service you’re providing.  And maybe as you read this, if you get some time, you may even want to continue on in this area, because you’ve got a lot to offer, and I think that it’s something you want to think about doing.

Shofstall:  Well, I’m planning now to....  Next semester I’m going to try to complete a textbook on free enterprise for high schoolers.

Bury:  And you should really include, as soon as you can, as you leave this office with it so fresh in your mind, sort of a continuation of what we’re doing now, saying it as it is, even getting it down to the names and the places and the people with the state board controversy, with the whole situation as you’ve seen it.  I think it would be invaluable, because as I say, when we look at <Arizona> education, we look at A. P. K. Safford, then we look at Dr. Shofstall.  And your view from the bridge I think would be excellent.  That’s just my personal opinion.  Keep you goin’, doin’ a great job.

Shofstall:  Next semester maybe you and I could do something.

Bury:  That’d be fun.  When we type this up, you see how you like it.  The other thing, Mrs. Blemell [phonetic] mentioned you had more scrapbooks at home.  If you do, could you bring 'em for me to look at?

Shofstall:  Sure.

Bury:  I won’t take 'em out of the office.  I’ll just look at 'em here.  They’d be a great help.  And that’s all I have.  Thanks a lot, it was a fantastic interview.

Shofstall:  Well, thank you.



