MARILENE BLAIR INTERVIEW

NAU.OH.75.12

United Indian Traders Association

[BEGIN SIDE A]

This is Karen Underhill with Northern Arizona University. We're here with Marilene Blair, and it is Thursday, February 12, 1998, about 12:35 p.m. Lew Steiger is running the equipment, and Brad Cole is here from NAU, and Elijah Blair. 

Underhill: Well, Marilene, we'll start at the beginning. Can you tell us where and when you were born? 

Blair: I was born in <Provo Utah>, twenty-sixth of September 1919. 

Underhill: And where was your family living at the time? 

Blair: The Toadlena Trading Post. 

Underhill: And who were your parents? 

Blair: George and Lucy Bloomfield. George Bloomfield, and Lucy Guymon Bloomfield. 

Underhill: And how did they come to have a trading post? 

Blair: Daddy worked at the government school at <Shiprock>, under Mr. Shelton, who was superintendent at that time. And he sent him to <Toadlena> to help build the Indian school there. He told Mr. Shelton at the time--at least this is the story that's told me--that if he ever gave Dad a raise, that he would quit. And Mr. Shelton came out and raised his salary to seventy- five dollars. I think it was a month, or something like that. So Daddy quit, and he bought the store from Merritt Smith. That's the way we got to <Toadlena>. 

Underhill: How many brothers and sisters do you have? 

Blair: (chuckles) Seven. 

Underhill: And where do you fall in that? 

Blair: Second to the last. 

Underhill: What was the trading post like when you were small? What are your early memories? 

Blair: My early memories were nothing but good, great. I wish that kids nowadays could have a chance to be raised in a place like we were. It was wonderful. 

Underhill: And what made it so wonderful? 

Blair: Freedom, I guess! We just.... Well, what do I say? During the summertime we just roamed the hills and the mountains and enjoyed. There was Monte, Ruthie, Paula, and I, were kinda the last four of the kids. We just roamed those mountains all the time, and the hills--<Two Grey Hills>. We lived in the canyon and the mountains and it was great. 

Underhill: What did the trading post look like then as you were growing up? 

Blair: Just like.... I don't know how to tell you how it looked. Dad had everything in it: coffee, lard, sugar, just about everything that the Indians would buy at that time; cloth and shoes. 

Underhill: Where was your home at the trading post? 

Blair: Right in the trading post. The house was connected to the trading post. 

Underhill: And how many rooms did you have? 

Blair: Really, just three. Wait, no, that's not right--four. We had the living room, the dining room, and the kitchen, and a bedroom. That was all. 

Underhill: And all the kids slept together? 

Blair: Well, we slept on the counter in the store a lot. But that's.... Wait a minute, I'm fogged up. There were two bedrooms. That's right. Mother and Dad had the first one, then we had the one beside it. And it had a door that went into the warehouse. We did a lot of sneakin' around at night. 

Underhill: And what were you sneakin' for? 

Blair: Candy. (laughter) Crackers and cookies, whatever we could get our hands on. 

Underhill: What kind of chores did you have to do as a child? 

Blair: We gathered the eggs, we took the milk to the spring house, we went and got it when we got ready. We didn't have any electricity. There was a spring about, oh, I don't know how far it was from the house, but that's where we got our water, too. We carried the water from there at the spring, and kept the milk in there to keep it cool. I chopped a lot of wood. And we fed the livestock. We had rabbits, and we took care of them 'til we had so many rabbits we couldn't take care of them anymore. Dad said, "Turn them loose!" So we did. We had cows. That's one thing I never learned to do, I never learned how to milk a cow. The rest of the kids all learned how, but I just didn't. Gathered eggs. 

Underhill: Did you have a garden? 

Blair: Yes, we did. Dad had a garden down below the store, and we helped take care of it, watered it, and pulled the weeds. 

Underhill: What kind of things did you grow out there? 

Blair: You name it! We had beans and peas and carrots and potatoes and tomatoes. You name it, any kind of vegetable that was raise-able, we raised at Dad's farm right down below the store. 

Underhill: Would you sell any of it or trade any of it in the store? 

Blair: I think we gave quite a bit of it away, but I don't remember ever selling any of it. Probably gave a lot of it away. 

Underhill: Where did you go to school? 

Blair: Well, I think Grace already told you the story about how the school was. Dad and the minister there at <Toadlena>, Mr. Kobes, or maybe it was Mr. Brink--I'm not sure which one it was--went to <Aztec>--I believe it was <Aztec>--and they got permission to have a school in the minister's little chapel there. Then Dad recruited a bunch of Navajo kids to go to school so we'd have enough for a school in those eight classes, from first through eighth grade. And that's where we went to school with the Navajos and the minister's children, Mr. Kobes’ children, when I was growing up. He had three children. I remember the name of two of them--Elsie and Gerald. Gerald was killed in the war, and they never did know where he went, or anything about what happened to him. Then they moved to <California>. We went there 'til the eighth grade. Then we had to go away to school. And Dad found a lady in <Mesa Arizona>, that would take us, take Paula and I. Ruthie was staying with somebody here in <Farmington>, and then she moved to <Provo>. Then Paula and I went from September to Christmastime, and Paula was kind of ornery. And she wouldn't mind the lady, so they sent us home. 

Underhill: And how'd you feel about that? 

Blair: I didn't like it, because I liked Mesa better. Well, we could go to church there, and we could go to Mutual, which was a church function. And at <Toadlena>, we didn't have any of that. I really enjoyed it there, but we moved to <Shiprock>. Dad went to work for the WPA, I think it was, building reservoirs on the reservation. They had two great big tents, and we lived in those tents for a long time, until they built a house for us. And we caught a bus from there and went to <Kirtland>. That was quite an experience. 

Underhill: How long did it take you to get to <Kirtland>? 

Blair: Oh, a good hour, back in those days, 'cause the roads weren't paved, they were dirt. It was a good school, <Kirtland>. I enjoyed it very much. 

Underhill: When you were young, did you speak Navajo? 

Blair: A little, not as much as--I should have learned. They were teaching the Navajos to speak English, and we weren't allowed to talk to them in Navajo. I can talk a little bit, I can talk a little bit of trading post Navajo, but as far as having conversations outside of the trading post, I couldn't do that. 

Underhill: Did you have a Navajo nickname growing up? 

Blair: What was it, Lij? ‘Asdzání hashké, I think. 

Elijah Blair: __________ make her say it. 

Blair: What? 

Elijah Blair: I was gonna make you say it. 

Underhill: And what does that mean? 

Blair: It means I was mad all the time, I guess , I don't know. 

Elijah Blair: "Mad woman." 

Blair: That's what they called me after we got into the store. As a child, I don't remember any nickname. They called me mean. That's what they called me when I was young and goin' to school. Why me, I don't know, but that's what I got stuck with. 

Underhill: What was your mother like? She had seven children. 

Blair: She was a wonderful woman. How do I explain Mother? She was one of the most wonderful people I ever knew. She was kind to a fault. She only whipped me once that I remember of, in my whole life. 

Underhill: Did you deserve it? 

Blair: Probably. We went out in that little white house that's in that picture, and Dad had some dynamite fuses out there. We took dynamite fuses-- Monte and Ruthie and Paula and I took them up on the side of the hill and we set them off. They just chased _____. And it was horrible what they called them. I don't know if I should even tell what they called them in those days, 'cause it's not nice. Turn it off, so this won't hear that. 

Underhill: You can tell us when we're done, if you'd rather not. 

Blair: 'Cause I don't want to say. Well, anyway, we set all those dynamite fuses off, and they just chased all over the place, and we got a big bang out of watchin' them, and then when we got home, Mother and Dad were really aggravated with us, because we could have blowed our little heads off, I guess. She lined all three of us up on the porch and took a buggy whip and she whipped our legs. 

Underhill: And what was your dad like? 

Blair: Dad was kind, gentle--very kind and very gentle. I don't remember Dad ever spanking me. They punished me by putting me--when I'd do something wrong, they'd put me down in the basement, 'cause I was scared to death of the dark. And it was dark and dreary and damp, and that's where they kept potatoes and all the perishable things that they sold in the store, they kept them down in the basement. Oh, I hated that place! All the devils in hell were there. 

Underhill: What do you remember about trading? When a Navajo customer would come into the store, can you tell us what a typical interaction might be? 

Blair: Well, they just asked for what they wanted, and if they didn't have the money, then Dad charged it and we'd charge it on the charger. We just had a little--what do you call them, Lij? 

Elijah Blair: The McCaskey accounting system, [you kept] a little pad. 

Blair: Little account papers. We'd charge it on there, and then they'd generally pay for it. Lamb season and wool season, they'd pay up their accounts. Dad just--he was very trustworthy, and the Indians were trustworthy then, too. They were honest. I'm sorry to say they're not like they used to be. They were very good people back when I was growin' up. Most of them are good people still yet, but some of them are not. 

Underhill: And would both men and women come into the store to trade? 

Blair: Oh, yes, a lot of them. We had a great big potbelly stove and they'd come in and Dad built a bench alongside the store, and they'd sit there and have gossip sessions--just enjoy each other's company. Dad and Mother would talk to them. 

Underhill: In Navajo? 

Blair: Yes. 

Underhill: And would both men and women have accounts? 

Blair: No, I don't think.... Well, the ones that wove rugs did have accounts, yes, but I don't think there was too many women alone had accounts. I don't really remember that much. When we moved to <Mancos Creek>, there was a lot of women had accounts, because they did more work than the men did. 

Underhill: And what were the popular items that the men and women liked to trade for and have? 

Blair: Coffee, lard, sugar. That was the main things--coffee, lard, sugar, and flour. 

Underhill: Did your parents accept pawn items? 

Blair: You know, I don't think Dad did too much pawn--not when I was young, anyway. If he did it, I don't remember. Doesn't seem like he did very much pawn. If he did, I don't remember. 

Underhill: Did your family go to any Navajo ceremonies while you were growing up? 

Blair: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, lots of them. 

Underhill: What were they like? 

Blair: We went to squaw dances, and we went to coming out parties for the young girls [Kinaalda], and fire dances, and their ceremonial dances, Yé’ii bicheiis. 

Underhill: Would the missionary family also go to the ceremonies? 

Blair: I don't remember them going to those ceremonies. I really don't remember them going to the ceremonies at all. The Kobeses, you mean? (

Underhill: Yes.) No, I don't think they did go very much. 

Underhill: And as a child, what were your impressions of the Navajo people? 

Blair: They were my playmates, they were my friends, they were good people. 

Underhill: When did your family leave <Toadlena>? 

Blair: Daddy left <Toadlena> when he came to <Mancos Creek> to help me, because they drafted Raymond into the service and I was there by myself, and with a baby to take care of. I think that was.... Hm.... About 1944--1943, somewhere along in there. Raymond worked at the refinery at <Prewitt>, and as long as he worked there, he was not eligible for the draft because it was a necessary thing for the defense, I guess, making gasoline and what have you. And Roscoe talked him into going to <Mancos Creek> to take care of the store, and sold him a half-interest in it, and I went to the closet and bawled my eyes out because I didn't like it. But about three months later they drafted Raymond, and then he had to go to the Marine Corps. So Dad came there to help me. I guess at that time he sold the store to Grace and Charles. 

Underhill: How did you meet Raymond? 

Blair: No! Well, you want the truth, or do you want me to fabricate it? 

Underhill: I think your children and your great- grandchildren deserve the truth. 

Elijah Blair: I know they do . 

Blair: Oh, shoot! When I was about thirteen, Charles was workin' at the store, and he had a magazine called Ranch Romances. In the back of it, it had pen pals. So Paula and I decided we would write to, see if we could get our names printed in that magazine, and they printed mine. And I got letters from all over the world, and Raymond was one of them. 

Underhill: Was he in <Kentucky> then when he wrote to you? 

Blair: No, he was in the Marine Corps in the <Philippines>. And then he went to <China>. I have nearly all of his letters. Somewhere along in there, he decided he wanted me to quit writing to everybody else but him. So I did. 

Underhill: And you knew then! Now, when he was released from military service, he came back? 

Blair: He wrote to Mother and Dad and asked if he could come to visit me. Daddy was very much against it. Dad had been in the service at <Fort Wingate>, and he said, "Servicemen are no good! [I] don't want you to have anything to do with this boy." So Mother wrote to him and told him that he was welcome to come. And then Raymond wrote to Mother and Dad both, and Dad finally wrote to him and told him he could come. And then when he got out of the service in <Portsmouth Virginia>, I guess it was, instead of going home, like he should have, to see his parents, he caught a bus and came to <Gallup> and sent me a telegram when to meet him, and his telegram came with the mail, and it was late coming, so Grace and Charles and Ruthie and I crawled in the car and we went to <Gallup> to meet him. Grace and Charles and Ruthie run off and left me all by myself. And he had told me what he was going to wear, and I'd told him what I would be wearing, and we met on the streets in <Gallup>. 

Underhill: Oh, my goodness! And what did you think when you first saw him? 

Blair: I was scared to death! About his first words to me were, "Do you want a stramberry ice cream?" I told him no. He said, "Well, how about a soda pop then?" I said, "No, thank you." Anyway, Grace and Charles and Ruthie finally came back, and we came to <Toadlena>, and there was some kind of a party there that night. They had parties there all the time, and the government school people came to the trading post, and then we went to the government school and they had bridge parties and different kind of parties, different card games and things. When we walked through the door, Dad met us at the door. Before that, when we started, it was kind of funny, Dad stood on the porch of the store and he shook his finger in my face and he said, "You'll be sorry, my girl; you'll be sorry! This is not the right thing to do!" But it was too late then. Dad looked Raymond in the eye, and Raymond looked Dad in the eye. They were just like that from then on. They were closer than Dad and his own sons-- they really were. I don't know what it was, some kind of a charisma or something. (with emotion) They were buddies from then on. They hardly ever did anything without each other. It was really kind of funny, that Dad and Raymond took such an instant liking to each other. Of course the liking was love. 

Underhill: And when did you marry? 

Blair: On the twenty-fifty of December 1937. I met him in October. But we'd been corresponding ever since I was about thirteen. We got married in front of the Christmas tree, and Mr. Kobes married us. 

Underhill: Now, in 1937--and I'll shift gears a little bit for you--that was in the middle of stock reduction, or just the end of stock reduction? Do you remember much about that? 

Blair: Yes, I remember about it. They really chomped the Indians down on their stock, and it was sad, because they weren't rich to begin with, and then they chopped them down on their livestock that they could have. They really struggled. It was a struggle for them to make a living from then on. 

Underhill: Were animals destroyed at <Toadlena>? 

Blair: No, I don't remember animals being destroyed there. I think they just took them to <Gallup> and put them on a train and sold them to wherever. I imagine to wherever they butchered animals at that time, and sold them for meat. I guess that's what happened, I really don't remember about that. Grace probably remembers more about that than I did. But I don't know whether Grace was there at that time or not, 'cause she was down in Southern <New Mexico> after they first got married, so I don't really remember about that. 

Underhill: And do you recall at all what impact it had on your dad's business? 

Blair: Well, I know--Grace probably told this story--I know that Dad had a contract with a buyer that was any number of sheep--it was an unlimited number. And the stock market broke, and Dad had that contract, so he went around and bought a lot of other traders' livestock at the going price that Dad got, and then Dad had a guilty conscience about it, because the bottom dropped out of everything, so Dad really went into debt. He really went into debt, and it took him 'til he left <Toadlena> to get out of debt, I think. When he sold <Toadlena>, I think he paid off the last debt he owed. [He] was out of debt then. 

Underhill: You mentioned that he worked for the WPA. Do you recall what he thought about the WPA? 

Blair: Well, he taught the Navajos to build reservoirs all over the reservation, and windmills to feed their livestock so that they could catch the water so that they could have the water to feed their livestock. And windmills and reservoirs is what I remember, with the old scoop shovels that they used to dig the places out to make the reservoirs with, with their horses and fillin' the scoop shovels. The scoop shovels were about that wide, as I remember, and pretty long, and they just go along and scoop up the dirt. 

Underhill: Do you think the Navajo were aware of the Depression or big world issues? 

Blair: . (pause) I don't think as much as the rest of us did. But when the war came along, I think they did, because they were drafted into the service. 

Underhill: How many folks that you knew, Navajo men, were drafted? 

Blair: (whew) I don't remember. 

Underhill: A fair amount? 

Blair: Quite a number. I know they went to the Marine Corps base in <San Diego>, and that's where Raymond went, too, when they drafted him. They put him on the rifle range, because they couldn't get through to the Navajos what they wanted them to do. And Raymond said he made sharp shooters out of every one of them. So they thought the Navajos were pretty good at that, after Raymond could talk Navajo to them and told them what he wanted done, and teach them how to shoot, 'cause Raymond was a sharp shooter in the Marine Corps, too. He's got medals for that all over the place. I don't know where they're at ______________. 

Underhill: What was happening at the trading posts during the war? How did the war affect trading? 

Blair: Well, you had rationing, which was.... But I don't think it affected the Navajos too much. They still had enough coffee and sugar and lard and flour, and they had their livestock for their meat. I don't think it affected them too much. And they didn't very many of them have cars. Most of them had just wagons and teams that they came to the stores with. 

Underhill: And when they came to the store, where did they stay? 

Blair: Well, at <Toadlena>, I really don't remember. <Mancos Creek>, we had a hogan out the side of the store that they stayed in when they came to the store and they needed to stay overnight. They all stayed in that hogan out the side of the store. 

Underhill: How many people would it hold? 

Blair: Whew!, as many as could [fit]. They slept on the floor on the sheepskins. We didn't have any beds. They put a stove in the middle of the hogan, just like the general hogans were. That's the way they stayed. At <Toadlena>, I really don't remember. 

Underhill: At <Toadlena> or <Mancos Creek>, would you buy lambs every year? 

Blair: Yes. 

Underhill: Can you remember roughly how many? What would be an average buy? 

Blair: Shoot, I don't remember. I know they had quite a herd at <Mancos Creek>. I imagine somewhere over a thousand, but I couldn't say for sure. 

Underhill: And how did you get those to market? 

Blair: We herded them from <Mancos Creek> to <Farmington>, put them on the train down here. We herded them across the mesas from <Mancos Creek>, clear over those mesas, and came down, what, Apache Street? Oh, here I am talkin' with my hands again! 

Underhill: That's okay. That's great. 

Blair: Apache Street. I have pictures of when we came down Apache Street. The cars would--Raymond would get out in front of the sheep and he would tell the people, "Please don't blow your horns, and please just get off the side of the road and let us get our sheep by." And a lot of them wouldn't do it, they'd blow their horns, and when they did, the sheep would just go into a circle and mill right around in the middle of the road, and nobody could go anyplace. I remember one time there was a truck driver in a great big truck. Raymond asked him, "Please don't blow your horn or anything." He blowed his horn anyway. It made Raymond really mad. He didn't get mad very often, but he grabbed the door, pulled him out of there, and shook him. He said, "Don't you ever do anything like that again!" I grabbed him, I said, "Raymond!, Raymond!, don't do that!, don't do that!" Anyway, we got them on in here. <Farmington> wasn't very big at that time. 

Underhill: And how long would it take you to get from <Mancos Creek>? 

Blair: Oh, two or three weeks. 

Underhill: And would you go on the drive? 

Blair: Well, we'd go out every night to see where they were, and follow them along, and bring their supplies to them, the Indians that were herding the sheep. We'd bring them supplies that they needed. 

Underhill: And how many folks usually would take a herd? 

Blair: Oh, four or five [and sheep dogs that belonged to the Indians]. 

Underhill: And at <Mancos Creek>, when Raymond first agreed, was he a partner with Roscoe McGee? 

Blair: Yeah, Roscoe sold it to him when he asked him to come over there--sold him half of it. And then when they drafted Raymond, he sold the other half to Daddy. 

Underhill: You said you stood in the closet and cried. Why did you do that? 

Blair: I didn't want to go back to the trading post. 

Underhill: Really? 

Blair: We were doing real well at the refinery, but Raymond's lungs were not too good there, and the doctor told him that he needed to get away from the refinery, the gas and all the fumes and everything. That's one reason we moved out. It was about three months and they drafted him--if it was even that long. 

Underhill: You mentioned you had a child. 

Blair: I had Diane then. She was between three and four years old when we moved there. She was born in 1940. 

Underhill: And where was she born? 

Blair: In <Gallup>, St. Mary's Hospital. 

Underhill: So what was <Mancos Creek> like in the early time, when you're out there with your daughter and your father came to help? 

Blair: We didn't have any running water, didn't have any electricity. We had a fireplace and we had a big potbelly stove, a stove in the store. It was a good place. It was a good place to be. Lots of good memories from there. When Diane had to go to school and I boarded her out.... Well, in the meantime, Raymond was drafted and went in the service, and then he came home in 19.... When did he come home? He came home in 1944, I think. Somewhere along in there, he came home from the service. And then I had Michael. Before that--way before that--he went to work at the government school at <Chinle>, and I was pregnant with our first child then. That was a long time ago. And I wasn't feelin' very good, and went to see the doctor, and the government doctor.... Oh, how do I say it? He examined me internally, which he shouldn't have done, and he broke the water, and he insisted that we stay there at <Chinle>, and I said no, because I knew that the baby couldn't have been over six months, and there was no way back that time that they could take care of him. So they took me to <Gallup>, and he only lived two hours. 

Underhill: And that was your first child? 

Blair: That was my first child. And then Michael was born in 1946. Diane was born in 1940, and I was ill during a lot of that time. I was in the hospital more than I was out, I think. 

Underhill: Do you have just two children? 

Blair: Just two--two living. They're good kids. 

Underhill: And what was life like for them growing up at Mancos Creek Trading Post? 

Blair: Well, as I said, Diane, we boarded her out with Ruthie's mother-in-law, Grandma McGee. First we sent her--the bus run from <Cortez> to <Shiprock>, just right for her to go to school down there the first year. But a lot of times those bus drivers would forget to pick her up. And Raymond had sold our car. About the time the war started, he sold our car for more than we paid for it to begin with. He thought we'd just come to town and buy another car, and it was impossible, so we were afoot. I'd have to borrow a pickup or something from an Indian, and go down and pick her up. Either that, or she'd have to stay with the schoolteacher down there. They didn't like that very well, so we started boarding her with Grandma McGee until Michael started school, and then we moved in here. First we lived in a little shack up where Mesa Shopping Center is right now. And I mean it was a little shack, right out in the middle of--that whole thing was just a big field, and that little shack was out in the middle of it. We lived there 'til we got this house built. In February we moved into this house. (pause) That day Raymond had a payday at <Mancos Creek> and he needed to go. He just moved me in here, then he took off. (pause) We'd just bought a new Chevrolet truck, and when he got to the hogback, he said he noticed before that, that it wasn't driving just exactly right--and I had driven it, too, and I had noticed it didn't drive just exactly right. We didn't know what was wrong. We had taken it into the garage several times, but they couldn't find out what was wrong. Anyway, he got to the hogback down here, and the, oh, whatchacallthat? Lij, what do you call that thing? 

Elijah Blair: The drag link on the steering. 

Blair: The drag link came off, and he just went over the bank into the wash down below. They didn't have that divider in there then. I don't know how he ever came out of it alive, but he did, thank goodness. That was the day we moved into this house. 

Underhill: What year was that? 

Blair: Oh, Michael was six years old, so what year was that? It was February. 

Underhill: [Was it 1952?] 

Blair: [It was] 1950, 1951, 1952, something along in there. I don't remember exactly when. But we are commanded to keep a journal, and I am regretting the fact that we didn't keep a journal. 

Underhill: The Church asks that you keep a journal? 

Blair: Yes, the Church asks us that we keep a journal. I'm tryin' to now. I'm trying to catch up on things, and I'm trying to write my life story as I remember it, and things that happened to me. And I'm tryin' to do that now, to be a better member of the Church--I keep a journal. 

Underhill: When you were at <Mancos Creek>, and before you moved to town, did you have a post office? 

Blair: No. They brought the mail there for the Indians, but we didn't have a post office. 

Underhill: What kinds of services did you provide? You had the trading business, but what other kinds of things did you do for [your Navajo customers]? 

Blair: Oh, dear. Raymond was doctor and nurse, midwife, you name it! Anytime the Indians had trouble, they came to Raymond, and he would go get them and take them to <Shiprock> to the hospital. I remember one time that stood out in my mind very much was ... they lived up on top of the mesa above the store, and the wife of the man up there came down and said somebody had shot her husband, and they needed to get him to <Shiprock>. So Raymond ran to <Shiprock> to get the people to come and get him, and they wouldn't do it. So Raymond went back and carried him off the mesa and took him to the hospital at <Shiprock>, but he died anyway, because it was so long between the time he was shot and gettin' him off of that mesa wasn't easy. 

Underhill: Why do you think they wouldn't come get him? 

Blair: I always wondered why in the world they wouldn't go and get that man. But they just said "No." Well, it was on the Ute Reservation. That was one reason, I guess. We were two miles into the Ute Reservation--<Mancos Creek> is, from the state line, it's in <Colorado>. And I guess that was one of the reasons they wouldn't come and get him. I don't know. I really don't understand why they wouldn't come and get him. But they didn't, so Raymond went up and carried him off the mesa, put him in the back of the pickup and took him to <Shiprock> to the hospital. 

Underhill: What was your role at the trading post? 

Blair: Helpmate. 

Underhill: And what kind of help did you provide? 

Blair: Anything that had to be done. We had a cistern, and Raymond was too big to crawl down in the cistern to clean the cistern out. That was my job. It wasn't easy, it was a big cement hole. It was deep. There was a ladder down there, and I'd clean it out. Then we'd go to <Cortez> and haul the water in a tank and fill it up. We had a pump on it. Raymond finally got tired of that, and he bought me a second-hand sink from <Gallup>. Sometime we went over there to <Gallup> and he found a second-hand sink and he brought it in and put it in and plumbed it and put me a pump on my sink in the kitchen. And that was a great day, I didn't have to go outside to get the water anymore. And a lot of our water was caught rainwater and snowmelt, and it went through a , what would you call it? A big box that had different kind of some rocks to sand--bigger rocks on into little rocks--so it was purified. At least they said it was. It didn't kill any of us. And then it went into the cistern from there. But the water came off of the barn and off of the house and went through that purifying system. That's where part of our water come from. 

Underhill: Did you have electricity? 

Blair: Nope. Then we finally got electricity. They put a little light plant in, and we got electricity at last. That was a great day. 

Underhill: How would you receive your news from the outside world? 

Blair: We had a radio. Like that one down there, just a battery radio. I think I've got it down in the basement right now. It was just an old battery- operated radio, and then we got an electric one. I know it's down there in the basement. I don't want anybody to go down there! 

Underhill: How often were you visited by salesmen? 

Blair: Oh, about once a month, I think. Then we traded with the Farmington Mercantile, which was down by the railroad, right down there. I can show you where it's at, but I can't tell you where it's at. 

Underhill: And what kinds of things did you buy from salesmen? 

Blair: Everything we bought in the store: shoes, socks, underwear. We bought material. I think first we went to <Gallup> and bought it from the Kirk Brothers. And then when they got the Mercantile down here, we bought everything we needed--all the canned goods and everything like that, that we needed. 

Underhill: So at <Mancos Creek>, how many employees did you have? 

Blair: Until I left there, nobody. And then, oh, when Daddy was there, and my mother. They had a house of their own there. There's nothing there now. They tell me they just wiped the whole thing out, there's just nothin'. But Dad had a good house there, and we lived in the store. The trading post had a house right beside it, and we lived in there. Until Raymond bought Round Rock and Rock Point, he took care of Mancos Creek--Daddy and him. He took care of Mancos Creek after I moved to town, Michael had to start school. There was no school out there, and there was no way to get him to school. I just had to do it. I had to be with my kids, and that was Raymond's desire, too. 

Underhill: Of that generation of traders, what characteristics did they have in common? 

Blair: What characteristics did they have in common? Well, I think they all loved the Navajos, and I think the Navajos all loved them. I know that the Navajos that we traded with loved Raymond. They depended on him for everything under the sun. You name it, and they depended on him to take care of it for them. He was a good man, my husband was. 

Underhill: What might separate a good trader from a bad one? 

Blair: Somebody that took advantage of the Navajos. Somebody that would take their pawn in, and the minute it was dead, sell it; [somebody] that cheated them on their lambs and their wool. That's the one thing I can say about my husband, he never cheated a Navajo out of one red cent. In fact, there was a family that lived right across the state line from us that he fed all the time he was there, practically. Once in a while one of them, they had a little herd of sheep, not very many, but a little herd of sheep. (pause) Maybe I shouldn't tell that story. But once he was told, "Because Frank and Ben Todasheenee [phonetic spelling] had lots of sheep, pay them that much for their lambs and wool and the sheep. And because Lizzie over here just had a little flock, pay her less." Raymond said, "No, I will not do that. They will both get the same price, or not at all, or I won't do it." He never cheated a Navajo in his life. And he never sold their pawn. There was pawn at <Round Rock>, and when we sold Round Rock, there was pawn that had been there for I don't know how many years, and he still didn't sell it. I don't know what happened to it after he sold the store. But I know that he never sold a piece of pawn unless the Navajo said that he didn't want it anymore. That was the only way he'd sell it. He did hang it out. When it went dead, he'd hang it out. The Indians would come in, and they'd say, "We don't want you to do that," so he'd put it back in the vault. He just didn't do things like that. I guess that's why I'm not a millionaire! But that's all right, he was honest, anyway. He was honest to a fault. 

Underhill: And would the Navajo folks who had brought in the pawn ask to borrow it? 

Blair: Oh, yes, they borrowed it all the time. It was a safe place to keep it. They'd borrow it for their sings and their ceremonies, and when they got through with it, they'd bring it back. They said, "That's a safe place to keep it. We know that it's all right there." Many of them said that to him. Raymond felt the same way about it. He was a good man. 

Underhill: What do you think the Navajo customers thought of you and your role at the trading post? 

Blair: They called me "the mad woman." ‘Asdzání hashké. (laughter) 

Underhill: And why was that? 

Blair: I don't know why they called me that. (chuckles) I really don't know why they called me that, 'cause I'd get mad at them and cuss them out once in a while. 

Underhill: What kinds of things did they do that would be irritating? 

Blair: Well, it started at <Toadlena>. Some of the Navajos--one of the Navajos especially--would steal from us. I'd get mad at him and yell at him. I don't think Dad ever yelled at Navajo in his life. I'd yell at him and holler at him and get mad at him, 'cause he'd do things that were wrong. At <Mancos Creek> they'd do the same thing. The Navajos, a lot of them were thieves. And if they could get away with it, it wasn't a sin. If they got caught, it was a sin. And when they stole something, and I'd catch them at it, I'd cuss them out. (laughter) I got along real well with the Navajos, they were my friends. There was some that lived right around the trading post, and they took care of me when Raymond was gone, and saw that I was all right. 

Underhill: Your parents were very active in the rug business. (

Blair: Yes.) Who were some of the weavers you remember? 

Blair: Daisy Toggelchee was the main one. At <Mancos Creek> was Hosteen Yazzie’s family, mostly, that wove the good rugs. And there was a few others that wove rugs. Lizzie--and that's all I know her by, is Lizzie--was right across the river, right across the state line--wove some small rugs. And her daughter wove some small rugs, too, but they weren't anything to brag about. They were just little rugs, helped them to get along, keep them alive. But Hosteen Yazzie’s family were--I guess they called them Teec Nos Pos, didn't they? 

Elijah Blair: What's that? 

Blair: The Hosteen Yazzie rugs. 

Elijah Blair: Oh, Teec Nos Pos rugs, yes. 

Blair: I think they called them Teec Nos Pos, but they didn't come from <Teec Nos Pos>, they came from <Mancos Creek>--the ones that I remember. I don't remember any of the Teec Nos Pos rugs looking like that at all. I have one left. It's at the bottom of my cedar chest. 

Underhill: And how did your parents, or later on, you and Raymond, influence Navajo weaving? 

Blair: Raymond worked a lot with Hosteen Yazzie's family, I know that. The other ones, I don't think he worked with them too much on the weaving. But Dad's the one that worked with them at <Toadlena>--and Charles, later on, after Dad left. But Dad and Mr. Davies are the ones that really worked with them on the <Two Grey Hills> rugs. Then Mr. Davies left, and I don't know who took over <Two Grey Hills> after Mr. Davies left, but Dad kept working with the Indians. I remember hour after hour he'd sit on the living room floor, going over those rugs, telling the Indians how to make the designs better, and how to clean up the wool better, and how to card it finer. He really worked with them hard, Daddy did, to get the rugs to where they were something special. I think--I don't know whether you can get the book, I don't have it, I wish I did. It's by Gilbert Maxwell. He tells a lot about how Daddy worked with the Indians. I don't even know whether.... I think probably maybe in a library in <Albuquerque> or someplace, I don't know. 

Underhill: We may have one, too, in <Flagstaff>. 

Blair: You've got one? 

Underhill: I think so. 

[END SIDE A, BEGIN SIDE B] 

Blair: By Gilbert Maxwell? 

Underhill: ... history I'm reading. 

Blair: Well, he pretty well summed it up, I think. 

Underhill: And based on your experience, what makes a good rug? 

Blair: The pattern, the weave, and the care and the straightness of it. If it was straight and the pattern was like it should be, not all globbed up, was what determined if it was a good rug or not. 

Underhill: And who bought the rugs? 

Blair: Daddy bought them, when I was there. And Raymond bought them at <Mancos Creek> and <Rock Point> and <Round Rock>. And then Mr. Witt came to <Round Rock> and he bought rugs, too. And Mr. Witt worked for Rock Point a long time, and Raymond finally sold him part of it. He owned part of it until we sold it. He was gone by then, and his wife owned the other part, and we had Round Rock. We had people workin' for us there, but Raymond pretty well ran the store. He was there most of the time. Joe Wright lives in <Cortez>, he was there with us. Walter Scribner worked for us a while. My daughter and her husband worked there for a while. Her husband didn't like it out there, so they moved to town. 

Underhill: And who would they sell rugs to over the years? 

Blair: A lot of them we sold to tourists. I don't remember people comin' to <Mancos Creek>, rug buyers. It's just tourists bought them, mostly--come through and buy them. 

Underhill: And how did the tourists strike you, coming to <Mancos Creek>? 

Blair: Well, they were different! They were all right. It was fun. 

Underhill: Where were most of the tourists from, do you remember? 

Blair: All over, everyplace. 

Underhill: Foreign countries, or just <United States>? 

Blair: I don't remember any foreign countries, but all over the <United States>. As far as I can remember, they just came from everywhere. 

Underhill: Do you remember any humorous episodes with the tourists? 

Blair: Oh, not really. They just came in and went through the rugs and bought what they wanted and left. 

Underhill: Was your husband a railroad retirement agent? 

Blair: He worked for the Railroad Retirement Board. He took Indians from <Mancos Creek>, from <Rock Point>, and from <Round Rock>, brought them in to the agent down here in <Farmington>. That was one of the salvations of the traders and Navajos at that time, was the railroad work. They made good money on the railroad. He also worked with them on fires all over the place. They'd have a forest fire someplace, and he recruited a bunch of Navajos to go work. He'd take them to the fires and bring them back, and they made good money at that, too. It was a good job for them. 

Underhill: I have another question about that for you, but we're going to switch tapes. (pause) This is Tape 2 of our interview with Marilene Blair, and it is Thursday, February 12, 1998, about 1:45 p.m. We were speaking about the Railroad Retirement Board, and the Navajo out working on the railroad and fighting fires and that being a salvation to the traders. Did you handle the payment of those checks to the Navajo? 

Blair: Yes. They got a check from the Railroad Retirement Board, came to them in the mail. The firefighters, they paid them off when they got through with the fire, and Raymond would bring them home. He went with them a lot of times. Michael went with them a lot of times. I remember Michael went once, he wasn't even old enough to drive, but he drove a truck, full of Navajos. 

Underhill: Was it red?, your truck? 

Blair: No. I don't remember what color that truck was. We did have a red truck--that's the one that liked to killed my husband. 

Underhill: It was around 1952 when you bought Round Rock? 

Blair: No, Rock Point and Round Rock, we bought Rock Point first. It was about.... What did I put down there? (shuffles papers) Rock Point in about 1948, and Round Rock about 1949. Now, I won't swear to that. I won't say that that's absolute truth, because I don't really remember. I know when we sold them, I've got the papers when we sold them here. 

Underhill: What were those two posts like? 

Blair: Whew! <Rock Point> was a hard place to get into. There were no roads into it. We had to go over the rocks to get to the stores. The roads were not good, they were dirt. I remember when Michael was a baby--oh, not a baby, he must have been about two or three years old--we had to go out there, and it had been snowing, and we got stuck. We had a load of hay on, and we almost used the whole load of hay gettin' out of potholes. Finally the last time he got stuck, I had Michael's little potty with us, and he didn't have anything else to put underneath the car to jack it up and get it out of the mud, so he used that! And we went over the rocks to the trading post, and that was quite a.... That's an experience. Everybody ought to try that just once. (laughter) It wasn't a good road, but it was passable and we made it. It was fun. 

Underhill: And that's <Round Rock>? 

Blair: <Rock Point>. 

Underhill: Okay, and then <Round Rock>, what kind of place was that? 

Blair: Well, to begin with, it was flat topped and kind of run down. Raymond fixed it up, put a roof on it, and made it--I don't know what it looks like today. I have no idea what it looks like today, but when we left there, it was a good-lookin' place, good-lookin' store. 

Underhill: Were these both bullpen kinds of arrangements? 

Blair: Yeah. Absolutely. It was after that, that they started takin' the bullpens out. 

Underhill: Did you do that at those two stores over the years? 

Blair: We always had bullpens. 

Underhill: And how did the stores change? 

Blair: Well, Thriftway, I think, bought them. Clarence Wheeler bought Round Rock from us. Shoot! Memory, memory, memory! Clarence Wheeler bought Round Rock from us, and Bob Cook bought Rock Point from us... when Thriftway took them over, they paid us. They paid us off. 

Underhill: Now, early on, did you have a lease at <Mancos Creek> on that post? 

Blair: With the Ute Tribe, yeah. Yeah, there was a lease. 

Underhill: And how long did that lease run? 

Blair: Yeesh, I don't think we ever had to renew it or anything--as far as I remember, anyway. We just had a lease with them at <Rock Point>. On <Round Rock>, I don't know whether we had to renew the lease or not. Did we, Lij? 

Elijah Blair: Annually. 

Blair: Annually? Well, Raymond did it. 

Elijah Blair: Up until 1955. That's when that twenty-five-year lease came out. I think you got it from the Bureau of Indian Affairs _________ two or three times with that. 

Blair: We what? 

Elijah Blair: The Bureau of Indian Affairs issued a license/lease annually (

Blair: Yes.) and then you renewed it every year until 1955. 

Blair: And then the twenty-five-year came in, yes. 

Elijah Blair: I think. 

Blair: I think that's right, too. 

Elijah Blair: I think that's the way it was. 

Underhill: And when you sold the stores, were you still on that twenty-five-year lease period? 

Blair: Yes. 

Underhill: What kind of restrictions were placed on a trading post? 

Blair: (whew) They ruined the trading posts. I don't know whether the Navajos realize--to this day I don't know whether they realize what they're doing to their people by not allowing businesses to operate on the reservation, because we hired the Navajo people to help us in the stores all the time, even at <Mancos Creek>. If there's any work to be done, we hired the Navajos to help us, and at <Rock Point> and <Round Rock>, too. Besides, we had a white man there to run the store, but we always employed the Indian people to help us--mostly women. Men didn't work out so good as the women did. Women worked better than the men did. We employed them, they helped us run the stores. 

Underhill: Were there regulations you had to follow? Carolyn, for instance, this morning mentioned that you couldn't sell alcohol on the reservation. 

Blair: No, we couldn't, thank goodness. 

Underhill: Were there other kinds of things like that, that you couldn't do? 

Blair: That's the only one that I know of. There's no alcohol on the reservation to this day that I know of. 

Underhill: Now, when did, if you remember, roughly, when did Raymond join the United Indian Traders Association? 

Blair: When it was first organized, as far as I know. And don't ask me when that was, 'cause I don't know! 

Underhill: Did you have a stamp for jewelry and a number? 

Blair: They didn't make jewelry very much at <Round Rock> and <Rock Point>, either one. I don't remember the stamp. I know there was a stamp, but they didn't do that at <Rock Point> and <Round Rock>--very little. 

Underhill: And at <Mancos Creek>, you didn't have one there? 

Blair: No, we were on the Ute Reservation there. 

Underhill: Oh, that's right. Did you participate in United Indian Traders Association? 

Blair: I went to all the bashes they had. 

Underhill: What were those like? 

Blair: Some of them were pretty wild. (laughter) To be truthful! 

Underhill: And then wild in what way? 

Blair: Well, they weren't "wild," really. There was a lot of drinkin' that went on, but there wasn't anything bad happened at them. Just traders all got together and hashed over their problems and their successes. 

Underhill: What were some of the problems, do you remember? 

Blair: Well, some of the restrictions that they had, and later on was about pawn. They put a lot of restrictions on it, and I know that Raymond had a pawn tag made up and sent it to <Window Rock>. I don't even know who was the tribal chairman then, president of the tribe then. He sent it down to <Window Rock>, and they approved of it. And then all of a sudden they decided that it wasn't right, so they sued Clarence Wheeler and Raymond. They wouldn't let any of the Indians testify for us. We had a lot of Indians come in and wanted to go and testify for us, but they wouldn't let the Indians testify for us. And some of our best customers, who were the poorest, that Raymond helped the most, were the ones that testified against us. (wry chuckle) And then they brought the check in that they got paid for testifying against us, and laughed and gave them to Raymond to pay the bills with. 

Underhill: Oh, my gosh! 

Blair: And that's the truth! (laughs) 

Underhill: Why do you think they did it? Just to get paid? 

Blair: To get money, I guess, I don't know. But it was all about the pawn tag. 

Steiger: Who paid them to testify that way? 

Blair: I guess the tribe, as far as I know. 

Elijah Blair: This was during that FTC hearing, in that period. Is that right, Aunt Marilene? When DNA and FTC (

Blair: That's right.) when that period was goin' on. Probably before FTC got involved. DNA and eventually the FTC got involved, but that was _________________. 

Blair: It was DNA that got Raymond and Clarence Wheeler. 

Underhill: What was the DNA? 

Blair: Huh! Don't ask me DNA! I don't know what it was! 

Underhill: It was part of the tribal council? 

Blair: Part of something that they had drawn up. I don't even know what it stood for. Lij, what did it stand for? 

Elijah Blair: You asked me about this. It's a Navajo word, DNA, and I can't really say it and pronounce it. At that time the Legal Aid Service came in nationally. These Legal Aid attorneys came down here, and they established this DNA, which actually was supposed to protect the rights of Indian people from exploitation and all the things that they said people-- not only on the reservation, but everywhere--but on the reservation they called it DNA, and that was the purpose it was set up for. 

Blair: However, when that happened, Raymond quit takin' pawn. He kept their pawn that they'd already put in there, he kept their pawn, and the Indians, if they wanted to pawn something, had to bring it into town to pawn it, and then they'd come in to Raymond and wanted to go get their pawn, and lot of them lost their pawn. I know the Gold Tooths at <Round Rock> lost a lot of their pawn to bringin' it to town and pawnin' it. They wouldn't keep it, they didn't have to keep it but six months, and then they could sell it. But Raymond, many a time I came to town and just purposely drove into <Farmington> to pick up their pawn, up and down the valley, where they had pawned it, and take it back to <Round Rock>. But Raymond never sold their pawn, unless they told him to. And the main thing that, in fact, about the only thing that I can remember that they didn't take out, and that Raymond didn't take, was the shawls and robes. They would come in and buy a new shawl or a robe and use them in their ceremonies, and then they didn't want it anymore, so Raymond would pawn it. And back then, the Pendleton shawls and robes weren't very expensive. I don't even remember how much they were, but Raymond would pawn them for anywhere from fifteen to twenty dollars, and they just wouldn't take them out, because I guess it was superstition because of what they'd been used for. And I've got quite a few shawls and robes that they just wouldn't take out. And we brought them to town and had them dry cleaned, and so I have them, quite a few of them. 

Underhill: You mentioned going to town to pawn. What are some of the differences between trading posts on the reservation and the ones in the border towns? 

Blair: They didn't keep it. I know what Raymond did. I know what Raymond did at <Round Rock> and <Rock Point>. He didn't sell their pawn. But I know other traders did sell their pawn. The minute it'd go dead, they'd hang it out, and I think it had to hang out for a certain length of time, and then if the Indian didn't take it out, they sold it. But Raymond didn't-- absolutely never did that. And that's one thing that they.... I don't know. I know that the Indians lost an awful lot of their jewelry at that time, because they just went to town and pawned it, and then they couldn't take it out. 

Underhill: How else has trading changed over time? 

Blair: No counter. It's almost got like a convenience store now. Really, I have never been in one of them. I have never been in one of those trading posts. I haven't been to <Rock Point> or <Round Rock> since they put it into a convenience store. But I know they did that. And I don't want to go. I don't want to go back and see it anymore, like it is now, because it's just not the same. I think the closest thing you'll find to a trading post right now is Lukachukai, and that's Hank, Carolyn's son. I think that's the closest thing you'll find to a trading post right now, isn't it, Lij? 

Elijah Blair: Well, that and probably <Shiprock> Trading. 

Blair: It's still not behind the counter. 

Elijah Blair: Oh. Well, Hank's isn't behind the counter, either. 

Blair: It isn't? Well, I don't know, I haven't been there. 

Elijah Blair: But you're right in that it's similar to what it was like. 

Blair: It's about as close as you're gonna find to an old fashioned trading post. But even <Shiprock> isn't. And Jed is a good man, too. He's a very good man. 

Elijah Blair: Well, that's a step up after the trading post. He went to self-service. I think of it as more dealing like the trading posts did, although they did make it self-service. 

Blair: Yeah, Jed trades a lot like an old trader did. But it's still not behind the counter. 

Underhill: What do you think the future is of business with the Navajo? 

Blair: Well, I don't think.... I don't see how the Navajos make it right now. I really don't understand how they make it. I don't know how they sell their wool, I don't know how they sell their lambs, I think they bring the wool to <Shiprock>. I think that's right. I think they bring the wool to <Shiprock>, and the agency down there buys it. I don't think the traders buy it anymore. I don't know, but I don't think they do. Their lambs, I really don't know whether the tribe buys them, or.... I just don't know. 

Underhill: With the United Indian Traders Association, what role did women play in the association? 

Blair: Nothing. (laughter) 

Underhill: And I would like to know why that is! 

Blair: 'Cause the men were all--they were the traders. Women were just flunkies! Well?! We did whatever had to be done, but the men were the traders. We didn't buy the lambs. I bought lambs, and I even bought cows and sheep at <Round Rock>, when Raymond wasn't there. I learned! I learned how to do it, but it was hard, but I did learn how. There was a time when I was runnin' <Round Rock> and Raymond was runnin' <Rock Point>. I had to learn. 

Underhill: Were you living there? 

Blair: I was living at <Round Rock>, and Raymond was livin' at <Rock Point>. I had to learn how to do it, so I did. And I have bought cows and sheep and wool and what have you. But he taught me how. 

Underhill: What are some of your favorite memories at any of those posts over the years? 

Blair: My favorite memories are at <Toadlena>, growing up: the canyon, the mountain, the valley, the <Two Grey Hills>. It was a wonderful life. It was really a wonderful life. I don't think there's a square inch of that mountain that I haven't been over. And there was a time, a long time ago, when we were young, that we had a cabin about halfway up the mountain, a little cabin that they built by a lake they called Hudson Lake. The day school was out, we'd go up to the cabin, and then we'd stay 'til the day school started. We tromped up and down the mountain every day, from the cabin to the store and back up again. But it was a good life, it was a very good life. 

Underhill: Has the physical environment changed much in that area over the years? 

Blair: I think very much, very much. It's not the same at all. 

Underhill: In what ways has it changed there? 

Blair: Well, I think the Indians.... My experience is at <Round Rock>, when I was there by myself, was the Indians tried to take advantage of me, 'cause I was a woman. And there was a bunch of boys there that (chuckles) one of them got drunk one day and just started walkin' around the store, pokin' the windows out. I got mad, I went out and I tied him to a telephone post. (laughter) 

Underhill: How did you do that? 

Blair: 'Cause I was mad! I got muscle! And I called the police, and he said, "Well, you've punished him enough, just turn him loose." I said, "What about all my windows?!" There was about five windows he just poked them out. He said, "Well, you've punished him enough," and he turned him loose. About three days later, they set my hay barn on fire. And I think they did it 'cause I tied him to a telephone post. And that wasn't fun either. The people at the government school wouldn't let me use the water, and I said, "Get the heck on out of here, I'll use the water if I want to!" And I hooked up the hoses to it and we got it out. But the water at <Round Rock> belonged to the store. We had the well drilled. There were a bunch of seismograph crews out there, and we had the well dug. We just had a little pump on it, but the Indian school put a tower on it, and then they used the water. And then they tried to charge us for the water. Raymond said, "No way, that water belongs to me!" I don't know what they did after we left--probably the Indian school took it over. But [it] doesn't matter.

The Indians were a little bit hard to get along with along toward the end, for me, bein' a woman. And I remember one night.... (chuckles) I shouldn't tell this. But there was a big bank in the Chinle Wash runnin' down below the store, and it was about as wide as this house, maybe as wide as the yard, back behind the store, before it dropped off into the wash. These same boys--I don't know, I didn't see them, but I know it was the same boys--they drove in front of the store and around in the back, back and forth, back and forth like that. And here I am, using my hands again! I was by myself, and I got worried. It was late at night and I got tired, and Raymond had a shotgun, and I got out of bed and stuck the shotgun between my legs, and I thought, I've got to figure out how to work this thing. I touched the trigger and it went "schoom!" And thank goodness it hit one of those big logs! Thank goodness it didn't hit the roof, it hit one of the big logs. But boy, (slaps hands together) it just got quiet like that, and I didn't have any more trouble that night. (laughter) 

Underhill: They probably thought if you were crazy enough to shoot your own ceiling, who knows what you'd do, huh?! (laughter) 

Blair: Well, I learned not to fool with the trigger on the shotgun anymore!, that's for sure. At least they quit runnin' around the house like that, back and forth. They got out of there. 

Underhill: What do you think you learned from all your years living with the Navajo? 

Blair: I learned to love them. I learned to love the Navajo people. I still love the Navajo people. They're good people--99 percent of them are good people. There's a few that are dingbats, just like the dingbats in the white race or any other race. But they're good people, and I enjoyed them. They're my people. I feel like I'm more Navajo than Anglo, because I've lived with them all my life, practically. 

Underhill: What do you think they may have learned from you? 

Blair: How to be mean! (laughter) 

Elijah Blair: Not to drive around the store! (laughter) 

Blair: Oh, I don't think I taught them much. They probably taught me a lot more than I ever taught them. 

Underhill: What are you most proud of in your life? 

Blair: I'm most proud of my family and my husband and my children, my grandchildren, my great- grandchildren. And I think how Raymond would have loved his great-grandchildren. It's not fair! I'm pretty proud of my family, they're good family--even my kitty. That wasn't my kitty, that was Raymond's kitty, and that's why he's up there with my family. 

Underhill: What was his name? 

Blair: Meow. (laughter) 

Underhill: Good name! 

Blair: He was born wild, his mother was born wild, his grandmother was born wild, and she had him right out here in a little shed behind our house, and it took Raymond six months to tame him, but Raymond loved that cat--he really loved that cat. He was a good kitty. I had to put him to sleep, 'cause he got so sick, and he got old. That was hard. But he was just like one of the family. And when Raymond got sick, I noticed in the hospital he had little marks all over his knees, and I couldn't figure out what in the world were the little marks all over his knees. And then after Raymond passed away, I was sittin' in his chair over there, and the kitty crawled in my lap, and I could see where Raymond got the marks on his knees from. But he was a good kitty. And I'm very proud of my family. 

Underhill: Marilene, is there anything else you would like to add to your interview? (no audible response) We very, very much appreciate you sharing your memories, and I know it will mean a lot to your family as well. 

Blair: Well, if you need to know when we sold <Rock Point> and <Round Rock>.... 

Underhill: We'll add that [later]. 

Blair: On the twenty-seventh of July 1976, to Clarence Wheeler. That's <Round Rock>. And July 1, 1976, to Bob Cook and Theta Cook, his wife. Clarence Wheeler and his wife, Celia Wheeler. That's when we sold the Rock Point and Round Rock trading posts. I should have one of those made. Maybe I can give it to Elijah, and he can.... (

Underhill: We’ll get a copy of that.) 

Blair: Daddy's first business card. It was "Navajo Indian Trader," and it was C-R-O-Z-I-E-R, Crozier. That was <Two Grey Hills>, that's where the mail came in, until Mother got the post office at <Toadlena>. He sold Navajo rugs and silverware, his specialty. And I could get that made. I just found that the other day. 

Underhill: Well, copies of those things will be great additions. Marilene, thank you so much for puttin' up with us! 

Blair: Vernon's story here, I'll get that copied and get it to you, too. But that only goes as far as Barrigo Pass. 

Underhill: We'll be looking for yours, too, _________. 

Blair: I'm workin' on it, I'm tryin'. This is what Raymond’s creed was, I think. (reading) "The most important message of all of this to me is a man who knows the truth and is guided by it will inspire confidence in all men, by the example he depicts." And I think that's my husband's--he wrote that. And I think that's kinda the man he was. (pause) He was a good man. One of the best. That's enough! 

Note: the official interview ends here. The following audio passages were recorded while still photos were being shot. 

(tape turned off and on) And that house [hasn't been together?] than when they left, except I do have that desk, and we haven't talked about that. He was gonna leave it at <Round Rock>.... (tape turned off and on) (Steiger makes a comment about getting a shot.) (Elijah's aside not transcribed.) You know somethin' else they tell. They say that Hubbell Trading Post is the oldest trading post on the reservation. That's not true, <Round Rock> is. 

Elijah Blair: I wish you'd have said that. I started to tell you to do that, because that is the oldest established trading post (

Blair: It was started by an Indian.) on the reservation. Now, see, they said that <Fort Defiance> was the original one by the traders, but this was by an Indian, and it is the oldest established store on the reservation. 

Blair: That's right, absolutely. 

Elijah Blair: I was hopin' maybe you'd say it. I can't write all these things, coax these people. (tape turned off and on) That was a neat place. 

Blair: And overalls, too. 

Elijah Blair: I've got one of him and mom standing out in front of a smokehouse. He's got a cigar in his hand. He's got an old funny hat on that he always wore. 

Blair: Big smoke! 

Elijah Blair: He loved cigars. He chewed them! He chewed them. He chewed tobacco, he didn't smoke it, but he loved cigars. Yeah. That's my dad, see, right there. That ain't my dad with the suit on. 

Blair: _________ could gather there. 

Elijah Blair: He always wore overalls, bib overalls. And I've got a picture, but it's in those boxes, when I eventually get them back from Jim--the kids want the picture, but I'm gonna take it ___________, reproduce it....



