FLAGSTAFF PUBLIC LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Dr. Agnes Allen and Dr. Minnie Roseberry

Interview number NAU.OH.28.1

Dr. Agnes Allen, who was a Professor in the Science Division of Northern Arizona University from 1934 to 1971, and Minnie Roseberry who was in the Education Department of NAU from 1931 to 1967.

Outline of Subjects Covered in Taped Interview

Tape 1 Side 1

    Dr. Agnes Allen, born in 1901, <Illinois> 

    Early childhood and education 

    Different places she taught 

    First days in <Flagstaff>, 1934 

    Minnie Roseberry introduction 

    Born in <Missouri> 

    Houses lived in

    Arizona Teachers Collect 

    Eating in college dining room 

    Small colleges-places students came from 

    Classes 

    Minority students 

    Training school 

    Science Division 

    Relationship between faculty and students 

    Faculty organization 

    Growth of school 

    Presidents 

    Relationship with community 

    Teaching methods changes 

    Dr. Allen’s research 

    Pow Wow 

    Faculty becoming more interested in American Indians

Tape 1 Side 2

    American Indian students 

    Minority students 

    Black student not accepted to training school 

    More discussion about Minority students 

    Bootlegging on campus 

    Different faculty members 

    Faculty standards 

    Fires 

    Floods 

    <Grand Canyon> airplane crash 

    Navajo Army Depot 

    Water shortages 

    Train wreck 

    Crimes

    Streaking fad 

    Scientific community 

    College dances 

    Different social organizations 

    Mad Hatters 

    Greek organizations 

    Weatherford Road 

    Relationship between students and faculty 

    Different faculty members listed 

    Intellectual black sheep from the East coast settle in <Flagstaff>

Tape 2 Side 1

    Faculty show for students 

    George Hochderffer 

    Colton, C.B. Wilson 

    Grand Canyon painter 

    Olive McNerney 

    Babbitts 

    Suggestions for other people to interview 

    Women faculty 

    Elects President of faculty

    Board of Education, separate 

    School closing, possibility causes rivalry 

    Dr. Walkup and Dr. Eastburn

Taped interview with Dr. Agnes M. Allen and Dr. Minnie Roseberry. <Flagstaff Arizona>. Interviewed January 16, 1976. Interviewer: Susan Rogers. This is an interview with Dr. Agnes M. Allen, who was a professor at Northern Arizona University from 1934 to 1971 in the Science Division, and with Dr. Minnie Roseberry, who was in the Education Division from 1931-1967. The interview is being conducted on January 16, 1976 at 220 South Beaver, which is Dr. Allen's home. The interviewer is Susan L. Rogers, representing the Flagstaff City, Coconino County Public Library.

Susan Rogers: Do you want to give me a little bit of your background before coming to <Flagstaff>?

Dr. Allen: I was born in 1901 in <Normal Illinois>. My father was a high school biology teacher until I was about eight years old and then he moved to a farm in <Missouri>, so I was really raised on a farm. We moved back to <Normal Illinois> in 1918, when I was a senior in high school. My first college education was at Illinois State Normal University. I received a two year diploma---and, so, I could teach with a two year diploma. And, my first year of teaching was the third grade in <Oak Park Illinois>. My second year of teaching was teaching the social sciences, geography and history in junior high school in <Normal Illinois>. Then, I went back to college, and received my B.E.D. degree in 1924. In 1925 I went to Colorado State College at <Greeley Colorado> and received a master's degree in 1925. Following that I taught in the training school at the Nebraska State College at <Chadron Nebraska> from 1924 to 1929. Following that I taught geography in the college at <Hattiesburg Mississippi> for three years. At the end of that time, it was in the midst of the depression and <Mississippi> was pretty well broke. They couldn't pay the teachers and all of us from out of the state lost their jobs. Then I entered Clark University at Wooster <Massachusetts>. I received a master's degree in 1934. At that time they needed a teacher to teach geography in summer school here in <Flagstaff>. A former teacher and friend of mine knew the president, Dr. T. J. Tormey, and recommended me to him for the job. So---at the beginning of summer school in June 1934 I came to <Flagstaff>, supposedly for a five weeks' term and I've been here ever since.

Susan Rogers: You were only supposed to stay for five weeks?

Dr. Allen: Yes.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Do you want to tell me a little bit about your first impressions of <Flagstaff> when you came, and maybe of the school?

Dr. Allen: Well, my very first impression, I came to <Flagstaff> by bus and we crossed <Kansas> in one of the worst dust storms that they had in 1934. I didn't really know very much about <Flagstaff>, except I had looked up in the encyclopedia and the census said that they had 3,000 inhabitants, and it was 7,000 feet elevation, and I did know that it was less than 100 miles to the <Grand Canyon>. Well, I arrived by bus early one morning, and I went across to stay at what was then the Commercial Hotel. And, after I had gotten settled in the hotel, I asked someone how to get to the college; and so, I started out to walk. Santa Fe Street was paved, and Highway 66 came out Mike's Pike, and it was paved, but the weeds were all down over the sidewalks. It was dusty---and, I got out to the campus and I walked around. It happened to be vacation time between the end of the semester and summer school. So, I didn't find anybody around. I walked around but I really wasn't too much impressed because there weren't very many trees on the campus. Where the women's gym now is there were a lot of little wooden shacks; they were student housing at that time. And, then, I went back and looked downtown a little bit. There wasn't only about two blocks or three blocks of the business section. The next day I went back out to the college and the library was open. The very first person I met was the librarian at that time, Miss Ida G. Wilson. I introduced myself and told her that I was to teach in summer school and that I wanted to look in the library to see what they had. She told me at that time another teacher from the training school, Miss Roseberry, was back in the stacks. So, she took me back and introduced me to Miss Roseberry.

Susan Rogers: Miss Roseberry, do you want to tell me a little bit about your background and how you ended up here?

Dr. Roseberry: Well---I was just thinking---I didn't have too much preparation for this. Let's see---I was born in <Joplin Missouri>. I went to school in, let's see---it must have been <Chitwood Missouri> where I started to school. I was just trying to think---we were talking about all this the other day---I hadn't collected my thoughts enough on this to do it.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Well, can you tell me about how you ended up in <Flagstaff>?

Dr. Roseberry: I think the reason I ended up here was 'cause I wanted to get away from my family.

Susan Rogers: You had a job, actually, when you came?

Dr. Roseberry: Oh, yes.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Where did you eventually live, then?

Dr. Roseberry: You mean when I first came to <Flagstaff>?

Susan Rogers: Yes.

Dr. Allen: Well, that summer there was a family by the name of McFate who lived, I forget the name of the street but it was right across from where North Hall is at the present time. I had a room there and ate my meals in the cafeteria. I got acquainted with one of the other faculty members here at that time, Dr. Klonda Lynn, who is now retired from the University of Arizona. And, Miss Ida G. Wilson, Dr. Lynn and I rented a house from Mother Hanley, which was a house that stood where the Bank of Arizona is built now. The three of us had that house but at first we didn't do our own cooking; we ate practically all of our meals in the college dining room and then, gradually, we began to cook more of our own meals. But we always ate Sunday dinner at the cafeteria because everybody dressed up. Everybody dressed up and a lot of the faculty came out and ate Sunday dinner there. Mother Hanley was, of course, the head of the dining hall. And she insisted we had tablecloths on the tables. Really, it was set up nicely and Sunday dinner was quite an affair---and, if any student appeared without a necktie she had a rack of neckties, and she just held them out and they had to take a necktie and put it on before they could eat Sunday dinner.

Susan Rogers: Could you tell me a bit about the students when you first came, and maybe about how they have changed over the years, and their attitudes?

Dr. Allen: Well, we were quite a small school. I don't remember exactly how many students we may have had about that time. Do you suppose that it was around 400, Minnie? Summer school was larger than the regular school.

Dr. Roseberry: Well---I was just trying to think. You have to kinda organize some of this in your mind. It seems to me like it ran between about 450 to 500---maybe---at that time. I wouldn't be sure about that. I know that there was only 35 faculty members when I first came.

Dr. Allen: Well, I remember that summer school was larger than the regular school year because the teachers came from all over the state to take courses in summer school. And, as I recall at that time, you could get a three-year diploma and teach on that. I don't remember the exact year when four years began to be required to get a teaching certificate. But that was one of the reasons that summer school was enlarged because many of the teachers who had only two-year or three-year diplomas then had to come back to summer school and take work to get a degree so that they could have their teaching certificate.

Susan Rogers: Would you say that most of the students were from around <Arizona>, or were there some from out of state, or were they mainly just from <Flagstaff> area?

Dr. Allen: Oh no, they came from all over the state and there were a few from <California>, and there were a few from other states. But I remember distinctly some of my first students were from <Bisbee>, <Yuma>, and clear down to the southern part of the state. Of course that was during depression time and the students didn't have very much money. We had a dairy down on the south campus now, which is about where the infirmary is, somewhere along in there. They had a herd of cows, and they had college students who milked the cows and they'd serve the milk in the dormitory. And, at that time, some of the students, especially I remember those who lived over in the <St. Johns>' area would bring---Oh---produce, sacks of potatoes and things like that to apply on their board and room.

Susan Rogers: Would you tell me a little bit about the actual classes you taught, and maybe how they have changed over the years, and how much homework did you give them?

Dr. Allen: Well, classes were never very large. I think that the very first college class I had, had about thirty in it. It was a summer school class, and it was in geography of the <United States>; but, at the same time, I had the sixth grade and I was a training-school teacher for the sixth grade.

Susan Rogers: Oh, you were a training-school teacher also?

Dr. Allen: Yes.

Susan Rogers: Would you tell me a little bit about the training school; how that developed?

Dr. Allen: When I first came each grade had two rooms. I'm not sure about the kindergarten and first grade, Minnie, but I know in the fifth and sixth grade, and I think the fourth grade, too---there was a room of Spanish-American children---and a room of Anglo children. And, we supervised, in other words, they were segregated in that sense. We did not have any Negro children in the training school. There was a separate Negro school over which is now the Murdock Center at the present time.

Susan Rogers: Were the Mexican children forced to speak English?

Dr. Allen: Yes. Some of them couldn't speak English very well, but they all spoke some English by the time they were in the sixth grade. Minnie, what about your first grade? Do you remember? Did you have two groups?

Dr. Roseberry: Well---I was trying to think---it seems to me like I had three groups. I had a group of the so-called Anglos. And then, I think, they put a second group of first grade Spanish-American youngsters, and it seems to run through my head that I had a second grade of some kind---I can't remember why I had 'em. But I was circulating, and I was trying to think---I was circulating in three rooms there a good bit of the time. You see I taught kindergarten when I first came here.

Susan Rogers: Now, what building was this in?

Dr. Allen: Well, it's where the journalism is----

Susan Rogers: The housing office. The one with the big white pillars.

Dr. Allen: Yes, that was the training school.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Then, did you used to supervise teachers, who were teaching in this school?

Dr. Allen: Oh, yes. Everyone, of course, had to take some sort of student teaching. It has varied over the years. Didn't they have to do two full quarters of student teaching---or, maybe---it was three quarters?

Dr. Roseberry: You know---I can't remember. You'd have to kinda go back on things like that.

Dr. Allen: One thing that both Minnie and I have mentioned this---that---when they did their student teaching, they dressed up. You could always tell when a young man was doing his practice teaching--because he wore a suit and a necktie, and the girls dressed up. And, that was really quite important. We stressed appearance when they were doing their practice teaching.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Do you want to tell me a little bit about the science division, maybe who some of the other teachers were, how thats developed over the years, and some of your first classes that you taught there?

Dr. Allen: Well, when I first came, the science department was in the basement of Old Main, and it was bare. I don't remember, but after three or four years, they remodeled what is now Hanley Hall, which had been the dining hall. They remodeled that and it then became the science building. When I came Mr. Deaver was teaching botany and Dr. Havercheck(?) was teaching chemistry and physics, and Dr. McGregor was teaching one course in geology. And then, in 1937, I was asked to come over into the science department and teach a required course called Man and His Physical World, which we still have. And, from that time on, I was not in the training school anymore. But, over the years, I figured this up---oh---I think a year or so ago. I taught 32 different courses. They included courses in education, courses in geography, courses in geology, courses in---well---methods of teaching science.

Susan Rogers: I was going to ask you, how about any kind of faculty organizations. How were they organized?

Dr. Allen: Well, we really didn't have any. We all knew each other and we knew the students. There were 35 or 40, and we grew very slowly. We knew each other. We had picnics and social times together, but there was no real faculty organization.

Susan Rogers: Tell me a little bit about some of the different social events that happened on campus. You mentioned picnics and things?

Dr. Allen: Oh, we always had picnics; a steak-fry in the fall. We usually had a picnic in the spring. The hiking club always entertained the faculty once every year. The AWS entertained the faculty. Do you remember anything else, Minnie?

Dr. Roseberry: No---It depends on what kind of social affairs they want---because those early picnics they had, and that was the time Dr. Bell would always initiate everybody. They would have these picnics down in <Oak Creek>, I think, or---I can't remember where they had them---and Dr. Bell would always talk, but I've even forgotten what that was. They initiated them into something---I can't think.

Dr. Allen: Being a "lumberjack."

Dr. Roseberry: Being a "lumberjack," it was kind of a tradition that he did that.

Dr. Allen: The women faculty did have an informal group. They called themselves "the potlickers." It started out as kind of a pot-luck group---but---because we liked our own cooking, we always licked everything clean---so---we called ourselves "the potlickers."

Susan Rogers: Now, how many women faculty were there? About?

Dr. Allen: Oh, there were 15 or 17, yes.

Dr. Roseberry: The women were in the minority.

Dr. Allen: As they still are.

Susan Rogers: How was your pay? Did it compare to the men's salaries?

Dr. Allen: I have no idea. It never occurred to me to question whether I was being paid what the men were or not. After all, we had just come through the depression and any job looked good to us.

Dr. Roseberry: I was just going to say, you're thankful to be hired.

Susan Rogers: You were saying something about the fact that the NAU campus has grown very slowly. When do you think it finally picked up speed and maybe really made a lot of changes in growth?

Dr. Roseberry: After World War II.

Dr. Allen: Yes, when the veterans began to come back after World War II. Then, of course, it took---oh---in the late 1940's, we increased---oh---maybe two or three hundred at a time. In the mid-1950's is really when we began to pick up and grow.

Susan Rogers: Now, when you were teaching in the thirties, did most of the students live on campus?

Dr. Allen: Yes, except for those whose homes and whose families lived in town. Every student lived on campus.

Susan Rogers: Now, do you remember any particular rules and regulations for the students at that time?

Dr. Allen: Well, the students nowadays would think that they were ridiculously strict. A freshman had to be in earlier than the upper-classman. The doors of the dorms were locked---and, if anybody was as much as one minute late, they got so many---I don't remember what they called them---demerits, or something like that. And, they would then be campused for so many nights, something like that.

Susan Rogers: Could you tell me a little bit about the different presidents that were there, and things you discovered about their personalities?

Dr. Allen: Well, Minnie. Dr. Gammage was president when you came, wasn't he?

Dr. Roseberry: I wouldn't make any comment on his personality at all.

Dr. Allen: Well, Dr. Tormey had been here about a semester when I came, and he was an educator from <Iowa>. He was really a very up and forward-looking. That is, I think that he was really well-trained and saw the needs and opportunities. He was president until---oh---World War II broke out. Then, he left for some government service, I think it had to do with personnel, and he did not return after that. Dr. Bell was president for a short period of time, and then Dr. Eastburn was president from about 1948 to 1958 or 1959. Then, of course, Dr. Walkup has been president.

Susan Rogers: Could you tell me a little bit about how the community and NAU got along? Did the community participate quite a bit in the functions of the college? Were they close in their relations?

Dr. Allen: Yes, I think that there was a very close relationship. Of course, the university was under a separate board of education. Our board of education were people from <Flagstaff>, or people from the northern part of <Arizona>. There was a very friendly relationship, don't you think so, Minnie?

Dr. Roseberry: With the community, but not with the board.

Dr. Allen: Well, that's true, but with the community. The school was small, the town was small, and we soon got to know each other.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Over the years, did you feel like your teaching methods have changed, or do you basically keep to the same things?

Dr. Allen: Oh, we had innovations. I always used field trips and laboratory experiences a great deal in my teaching. And, in the later years, we had more money to have better equipment. I taught with the same set of maps for the first twenty years, I suppose, when I was here. We just didn't have money. You, and your students, provided the set-up for the course. We had problems, of course. Oh, we constantly worked over the curriculum as to the requirements, and this school has always been a school that required a pretty broad general education in its teachers; much more so than many of the teacher-training schools. Then, of course, we became a general college, and, finally, a university.

Susan Rogers: You said that you often took your students on field trips, can you tell me where you usually took them, and how did you get them there, were there buses, or what, at that time?

Dr. Allen: At first, we took them in our own cars and a few of the students had cars, and then, there was a bus. The bus, when I first came was called "yellow fever." We were lucky if we went out on a field trip and didn't have to push it part of the way back. And then they got "Blue Boy." But, at first, the classes were small and we took our own cars and the students' cars. We went to <Oak Creek> and <Walnut Canyon>. From the time I began to teach geology, I took my geology class down in the canyon for an overnight field trip every spring.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Could you tell me a little bit about the research that you've done?

Dr. Allen: Well, I did not have a topic for my Ph.D. dissertation when I came. One Sunday during the first fall that I was here a group of us went down to the <Verde Valley> and they had just recently opened up <Tuzigoot>. When I was down there I could see the <Verde Valley> as a physiographic unit, and I knew something about the Indians that had lived there, and the copper development---so, I selected that as the area for my doctoral research. Most of the time, I can't say that I ever did much research aside from that. I did research connected directly with what subject I was teaching---like keeping weather records, collecting rocks for the geology lab---that kind of thing.

Susan Rogers: Can you think of anything else you want to add about the college before we move on to <Flagstaff>?

Dr. Allen: Well, of course, in forty-some years you have seen a lot of changes. You asked about the students. I don't think that students have changed very much. We've lived through an awful lot of fads in dress and behavior but, fundamentally, I think that the students have not changed much.

Susan Rogers: Can you tell me a little bit about some of the different fads you remember?

Dr. Allen: Oh, I remember one time, when the girls wore---Oh, I don't know how many petticoats, with skirts that stuck out so that they could hardly get into the room. I remember when the fellows wore duck-tailed haircuts, <Mohawk> haircuts, and things like that.

Dr. Roseberry: Their cords had to be so "dirty" they'd stand alone.

Dr. Allen: Yes.

Susan Rogers: Could you tell me a little bit about those early 4th of July's? Did you ever attend any of those?

Dr. Allen: You mean Powwows?

Susan Rogers: Right.

Dr. Allen: Yes. They used to come and ask the faculty to go out and serve the Indians. Oh, Knoles Bakery would perhaps fix the meat and they’d take it out to the Powwow grounds, and we’d go out and help serve it.

Susan Rogers: Do you remember any problems with the Indians at that time?

Dr. Allen: No, I don't. Do you, Minnie?

Dr. Roseberry: No.

Dr. Allen: The Indians came in their wagons. Sometimes, they'd spend ten days or two weeks getting in from the reservation. One of the things that the Powwow Committee would do was usually, out at the east side of town, they'd have a load of hay, and they'd put a bale of hay in each wagon.

DR. ROSEBERRY: Of course, I think that’s the contribution that Dr. Tormey made to this college, in getting the faculty interested in the Indian people.

Dr. Allen: Yes, and he insisted that we take a course to orient ourselves.

Dr. Roseberry: Yes---and---it is another way that there was a communication between the Museum of Northern Arizona and the college up here. Because they did, we all had to take a course. From that, of course, we made friends and went out on the reservation. But, Dr. Tormey did do that; he saw the value there of this.

Susan Rogers: Were there quite a few Indian students on campus, then?

Dr. Allen: No.

Dr. Roseberry: No.

Dr. Allen: Our first Indian students---I really did quite a bit of research on this, and wrote a chapter on the relationship between the university and the Indians, from the Navajo point of view; I don't know whether they'll ever publish the book or not. Our first Indian students were Indian students from---oh, <Oklahoma>, and they were mainly athletes, who were brought here. Then, our first real group of Indian students were after World War II, and the veterans came back.

Dr. Roseberry: Now, when did Ida come in on this?

Dr. Allen: Well, she was the first Hopi to get a degree. Her name was Ida Fredericks, she was a Hopi girl from New <Oraibi>, and she was the first Hopi girl to receive a degree. Some of us were invited to visit the school out at <Oraibi>. They told her that she could ask---oh---I don’t know, ten or so of her teachers, and they had a dinner for us. And, I think the reason that they had the dinner for her, was to honor her. It was also to show the Indian students that a Hopi could go to college and could graduate from college.

Susan Rogers: Then, after that, do you think that more students came here to college?

Dr. Allen: Well, slowly. It was after World War II, before they began to come in any numbers.

Susan Rogers: What about blacks? Were there very many blacks, or Mexicans, different minority groups, do you remember?

Dr. Allen: Well, there were a few Negro students that came along in the thirties.

Dr. Roseberry: You might bring in Wilson. DR. ALLEN; Yes, I was going to say Wilson Riles, he's now State Superintendent in <California>, and he was one of our students here. Oh, there were several---I remember Augustus Shaw.

Dr. Roseberry: Yes.

Dr. Allen: And---there were---what? Was it the Williams? There were two of them, anyway. They were, really, I'd have to say almost superior students because they went on to graduate school and have really done very well for themselves.

DR. ROSEBERRY: There were very few, though. I can remember the first child who applied for the training school, and I remember Dr. Pugmire would not take her. We had very few blacks. We had a good many Mexicans; of course, you know of the Castros? They were both from here. And...

Dr. Allen: Governor Castro was one of my first student teachers, during the years when I was in the training school.

Dr. Roseberry: I can’t think about...we had lots of the Spanish people. There were very few---but, the thing I remember most is---about the minority, anyway, would be the men like Ned Hathali and Allen Yazzie, who, I think, later went up in the Indian Council. There was Byron Tsinigine. And they were people who, as a rule, Dr. Allen and I both had in class, and both had to approach carefully. We got 'em through, that was it. That is, you weren't demanding on them.

Dr. Allen: Well, the Indian students, for instance, and the Mexican students, too, who stuck with it, we worked with them, and there was opportunity for a good deal of individual attention, as those classes were small. Those who stuck with us, by the time they graduated, you could put them up against any students---but, of course, many dropped out in their freshman year. They didn't have the background, and probably didn't have financial support, and it was just overwhelming to them. But, those that we could pull through---say for the first two years---by the time they graduated, they could be put longside any of the Anglo students.

Susan Rogers: Do you remember any bootlegging experiences up on the campus in particular, or in the <Flagstaff> community?

Dr. Allen: Well, of course, it was strictly against the rules to have liquor on campus. At that time the faculty had to take turns chaperoning dances. Sometimes, I don't know where they got it, but they'd get a little too much liquor.

Dr. Roseberry: Do you remember, I can't think of his name, but one of the janitors was supposed to be the prize bootlegger. I know who his name is, but I'm not gonna say it. Margaret Lopez's father. I can't remember his name, but I always think about him, 'cause he was the one who was supposed to be the prize bootlegger. I think, as faculty people, we didn't come up against that; in fact, a faculty member would have been fired instantly for anything like that. What I would say is that one of the things you'd come up against on the campus would be that there was a high moral outlook about behavior of any kind.

Susan Rogers: Do you know of any instances when faculty were fired because of some kind of conduct?

Dr. Allen: Not for years and years.

Dr. Roseberry: Not for years.

Dr. Allen: No. The faculty just didn't do such things.

Susan Rogers: Did you have a big turnover in faculty, or the same people just stayed on?

Dr. Allen: No, as I was saying, the only way that you got rid of any faculty was when they died. We had nobody leave for years.

Susan Rogers: Then there were just more people coming in?

Dr. Allen: Yes

Dr. Roseberry: Yes.

Susan Rogers: Okay.

Dr. Roseberry: I think that it would be interesting for you to bring out in view of the fact that this is a Mormon community in a way---you don't want to take it into the church, but we had a very high-ranking one, a Peterson, who was a very fine man in the history department, and his son went on to some high-ranking job in World War II, wasn't it?

Dr. Allen: Yes, the Air Force.

DR. ROSEBERRY: They were quite interested in history. I think if you looked at faculty like that, or you look at the English teacher we had here, head of the English department, you couldn't think of them doing anything they shouldn't have done. And you think of Dr. Hill, and if they didn't get their grammar, or they didn't graduate over her dead body. You think of people like that…

Dr. Allen: Academic standards were high and any student who graduated from here had no trouble going on into graduate work. That's held down pretty much to the present time. At first, it was just teachers, but then later it became pre-professionals. The scholastic standards were really high.

Dr. Roseberry: I remember going back to my home school. I just thought about that. The first thing the head of the education department there said to me was, would I come and talk to the class because this school was considered one of the ten best on teacher education, particularly on the new, kind of a something, you know, those businesses here. But this school, through the years that Dr. Allen and I have been here, has had a high reputation. I think you'd find the same out through the state that they like to get a teacher from here. In fact, from the public schools here, I think that Dr. Allen and I have had all of the administrators in class. As far as I look at it, I think the school has had a good reputation for good work. That is, they had respect for it, that's what I meant to say.

Susan Rogers: What do you think the effect of World War II was on the school, or even just on the community? Did you notice a decline in attendance or did more people go to school then?

Dr. Allen: Well, there was a big increase. The veterans came back, and then there were more high school graduates. There's been a big increase. Of course, during the war the thing that helped us out as far as enrollment was concerned, all the young men were gone, and our civilian student body did drop down to around 100, but then they brought 400 B-12 Marine and Navy students in here. Of course, many of them were boys from <California>, and they thought they were coming, certainly to the "sticks" when they had to come to <Flagstaff>. It was amazing how many of them, after the war, did come back and get degrees here. I really felt that what they got here was much more superior in quality.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Do you remember any fires, not only on campus, but in the <Flagstaff> area?

Dr. Allen: The biggest fires have been forest fires that have been fairly close to town, but in town itself, I don't remember.

Dr. Roseberry: The only one I remember was over here, and we called Dr. Colton and the Red Cross took over.

Dr. Allen: It burned three or four homes.

Dr. Roseberry: Yes.

Susan Rogers: And was that in the forties?

Dr. Roseberry: Yes! Anyway, I don't remember too much about that to get any kind of a continuity on it.

Susan Rogers: How about any floods?

Dr. Allen: I've seen water up over the curb here.

Dr. Roseberry: I was thinking when we read about this floodplain out here. They were telling about Rio De Flag downtown, good gracious, it hits us right out here.

Dr. Allen: And I can remember when over here at Five Points that was under water.

Dr. Roseberry: We haven't had any disasters that I can think of around here. The worst disaster that we had, oh, that wasn't here, though, that was at the Grand Canyon when they brought all of those people here.

Susan Rogers: Wasn't that when the plane crashed in the Canyon?

Dr. Roseberry: They brought them in and they are all buried up here.

DR. ALLEN: A big change took place to me, as I look back in the community, and that was the building of the ordnance depot. Prior to that time, the town was growing very slowly and people got acquainted with each other and knew each other. But then, with the building of the ordnance, they brought of course many Indians to work at the ordnance but there were also members of the armed forces. And, after that, they built Clark Homes, wasn't it, to house the ordnance workers? I think that that, at least, speeded up the change in the growth of the community.

Susan Rogers: Do you remember any water shortages?

Dr. Roseberry: I remember the first year I was here, we went out to---what's that spring---the one over by Dr. Colton's?

Dr. Allen: Leroux Springs.

Dr. Roseberry: We carried water, we brought, filled up those oil cans---this high, for drinking water and there wasn't enough water to flush the toilet.

Susan Rogers: When you went out to the springs, did you have to pay for your water?

Dr. Roseberry: No. You just took your bucket and went out and got it.

Susan Rogers: Did you have to wait in a long line?

Dr. Allen: No.

Susan Rogers: Everybody just went out there on their own, then?

Dr. Allen: When I came, you couldn't get water in the fountains at the training school so the kids brought their own water. What was shocking to me, who came from the Midwest, most of them brought it in whisky bottles. One kid had his bottle under his desk---that was his own water. But we went out, not only to Leroux Springs, but we went out to Lindbergh Spring. Boy! You couldn't wash your car. You took a bath, and you dipped the water out of the bathtub, scrubbed the floor with it, and you used water very sparingly. And they also brought water in, in tank cars on the railroad. They'd put the water in the city mains, over there just across from the training school. Every morning, there'd be a clang, when a train would pull up and empty one car, backed up and emptied another car. Those were some in the early days but, then in 1956-57, we had another very bad water shortage.

Susan Rogers: That's not very long ago, really?

Dr. Allen: Well, what about just last spring?

Susan Rogers: What about any big crimes you remember or accidents on campus, either on campus or in the community?

Dr. Allen: I can't recall any major ones. We had a train wreck---during the war---wasn't it, about 17 miles north of <Flagstaff>, I think it was?

Dr. Roseberry: Yes, I think so. We were doing nursing aid and they called us to come to the hospital. But it wasn’t bad.

Dr. Allen: No. I don't remember, but only four or five people were hurt altogether.

Dr. Roseberry: I don't remember that. I don't think very many people were even hurt in that. They brought 'em up to the hospital scared, but that was about all.

Dr. Allen: I don't remember anything on the campus.

Dr. Roseberry: No, I don't either. I think you'd have to get down to modern times on their stripteasing and such things as that---or, whatever it was---they went "raw" up here.

Susan Rogers: Streaking?

Dr. Roseberry: I really can't remember any crime.

Dr. Allen: Well, speaking of streaking, that was relatively a few years ago. They were all set, and were going to have a big streaking affair, and it snowed that evening which dampened that whole thing.

Dr. Roseberry: I can't think of any particular holocaust we've had since I came here.

Susan Rogers: I was thinking about accidents involving students. Were there anything like suicides or anything, depressions, and was there an infirmary?

Dr. Allen: Oh, yes. The first infirmary that I remember was approximately where the greenhouse is, and there was a little house in there, and we had a college nurse, and there was a infirmary.

Dr. Roseberry: I can't remember any suicides.

Dr. Allen: By and large, I think that things went pretty smoothly. I remember---oh---students that got killed in automobile accidents. I think there were two out of one of my classes that were killed in an automobile accident. But, I would say, not really, probably as many proportionally.

Susan Rogers: Okay. What do you remember about any special performances that came to the campus? Were there any famous speakers or scientists that visited the area, maybe gave a talk?

Dr. Allen: Well, <Flagstaff> has always been pretty much of a scientific center, with Lowell Observatory, the museum, and later, other scientific organizations. I can't think of any outstanding ones, but we always had available some of the visiting scientists. The American Association of University Women were instrumental in the first concert series we had in the city. We sold tickets and managed that. Then, it got on its feet and became an independent community concerts organization.

Dr. Roseberry: I was just thinking---Klonda Lynn did a good bit with dramatics.

Dr. Allen: We always had a drama department in early times and the music department was always quite active, and did very well.

Susan Rogers: You mentioned something about having to chaperon the dances, will you tell me a little bit about that? How often did you have dances?

Dr. Allen: Oh---we'd have a dance every---We were on the quarter system when I first came and, I'd say, in a quarter there'd be about eight dances. There'd be one when the freshmen came during the first week. Different organizations sponsored the dances. In fact, we did, the faculty did have to take turns in chaperoning these dances.

Dr. Roseberry: We'd watch them go out the door and come back in.

Dr. Allen: Some of the dances, though, were very nice affairs. They were very nice--they had good music--not rock at that time. The girls had lovely dresses. They really were pretty affairs. To decorate that old gym really meant a lot of work, and these were really pretty affairs. The "sweetheart ball" in February was always a very pretty dance. There were many others. When we first came there were no sororities or fraternities on campus. They had some social organization. There was one of girls called "The Madhatters," and they spearheaded many activities. What were some of the others? They had some honoraries---they weren't national. Oh---what was it, ASPS?

Dr. Roseberry: I was thinking, though, what was that woman's name---she had a daughter named Mary, and she sponsored the Madhatters?

Dr. Allen: Beckwith, I think.

Dr. Roseberry: She did some very nice things. I couldn't just think of her name.

Dr. Allen: Dean Lintz, who was the dean of women here for twenty-seven years. She sponsored the Associated Women Students. And, when they did something---gave a tea or had the faculty for a Sunday evening supper, they really did it nicely.

Dr. Roseberry: They'd better have.

Dr. Allen: The girls got training in what I'd call the social amenities because what was put on was supervised and sponsored and the faculty had to do it. Of course, we came through a regime when we had to go to faculty teas and all of the other things, and we learned how to do it.

Susan Rogers: When do you think that the sororities and fraternities began to come in on campus?

Dr. Allen: Well, I think it was after the war---I can't really tell you---but, actually, I think it was the Madhatters that became one of the sororities at first.

Susan Rogers: Okay. Now, when they first started, did they have their own buildings or did they have somewhere to hold their meetings?

Dr. Allen: No, they didn't have their own buildings.

Susan Rogers: Did there used to be big fires, you know, that fireplace up there on north campus? The Campus Union, did they have big fires in there?

Dr. Allen: Oh, yes! One of the things that the faculty did with students, I can remember, for about three different years when I went out on a Sunday in the fall and the fellows would get the university trucks, and then you’d go out and cut wood, load the trucks and bring it in for wood for the fireplace.

Susan Rogers: Okay. I think you've answered most of my questions. I'd like to ask you one last thing. Was the Weatherford Road in operation when you came, and did you ever go up on that road, and was it a toll road? Do you know how much it cost and everything?

Dr. Allen: I don't remember ever paying a toll for that road. I remember going up on it several times on field trips, particularly with Mr. Deaver and the botany classes, but I don't remember ever paying any kind of a toll.

Dr. Roseberry: I don't think I ever went up that road. That's not my cup of tea.

Dr. Allen: We used to ride horseback when I first came---several of the faculty and groups of students---they were very good horses. They were brought every summer up from the valley and Bill Lorenz always brought a string of horses up. In the summertime, they really offered a class in---I don't know what they called it--anyway, we'd go out riding twice a week in the afternoon. We usually had a chuck-wagon dinner and I've ridden to the top of the peaks, and all around up there. There was always a group of students, we had anywhere from eight to ten that usually went riding with us. Dick Myers, who is head of the math department, was one of the students and Mrs. Odle, who is in the education department. There was a close relationship between the faculty and students. We knew each other, and it came to me as a shock about ten years ago when, for the first time at commencement, students walked across the stage and received degrees and I did not know who they were, nor did I have them in class. It really did come as a shock because, prior to that time, by the time somebody graduated, you knew who they were, what their major was, where they were from, and what kind of a job they had to go out to.

Susan Rogers: Did this mean that since you were so close to the students, did you do quite a bit of personal counseling with the students?

Dr. Roseberry: Oh, yes.

Dr. Allen: We didn't have any special counsellors really, but we advised our majors, and any student who wanted to come to us and talk to us, we all were counsellors.

Susan Rogers: I think you have answered most of my questions. Do either of you have anything you think I have forgotten?

Dr. Allen: I wish that, for the university, that there would be a project that would collect stories, short biographies of faculty members, who were here in the 1920's and 1930's because, they were really a group of excellent educators. They were good teachers, and they came from various parts of the country, and they stayed in this state a long time. And, I really think that they contributed a lot to the college.

Dr. Roseberry: I can think particularly of Dr. Hill, Mary Boyer, Peterson. There was also Dr. Tinsley.

Dr. Allen: Dr. Bellwood.

Dr. Roseberry: Dr. Peterson's mother had come across, I believe or, was it he?, in a wagon across the northern part of the <United States>. It used to fascinate me to hear about it. To me, I think that this would be interesting.

Susan Rogers: Could you tell me a little more about that?

Dr. Roseberry: Well, you see, I need time to think on that. I was just thinking on this sort of thing, you really should give somebody an outline of what you want before you come to them.

Susan Rogers: I'll tell you, we started doing it with an outline, but got no responses. If you would want me to interview you again, I'd leave an outline.

DR. ROSEBERRY: Well, my feeling would be to give me an outline on what to think about 'cause there's a lot of irrelevant things you wouldn't want at all. Now, for instance, when I came here I was told that this town was made up, and I came in 1931, was made up of more Harvard, Brown, Yale college graduates who were, in a way, "black sheep" from families in the East. The families didn't care too much about some of their activities. I think now that it must have been very casual stuff from what you see today. You came on to a good bit of material like that. Of course, we came up against such people as a man, Mr. Hochderffer, and, all of these interesting people that a lot of these faculty people knew. I never knew them too well, but I remember Bud Brown, who was supposed to be a black sheep from his family.

Dr. Allen: Yes, they're a lot of people, and a core at least, of people who came, I'd have to say, from cultured backgrounds.

Dr. Roseberry: They weren't the wild cowboy type, either. What they were, in fact, were people I suppose, who were breaking some of those rigid ties of the East. Have you every read Vanished <Arizona>?

Susan Rogers: Yes, I just finished it.

Dr. Roseberry: I was just going to say, you have got an example here, where her family never wanted that book reprinted, 'cause they were ashamed of it. But, you think of Dr. Peterson, who could really tell you some interesting things. Dr. Hill, who came in here, and Mr. Stern, who was a faculty member when I first came here, and a good many of those people, there was a great deal of interest to them.

DR. ALLEN: Miss Lintz, and all of those people, and we'd take off on the students, and really, they were hilarious. I've seen the students just practically rolling on the floor laughing because Dr. Hill came in one time, and she wore a big "A" sweater, and nobody every chewed gum in her class---I mean, nobody every chewed gum in her class. Nobody came in late---they got there on time---or else. Anyway, she came in with a big "A" sweater, chewing gum, and with a big bundle of books, and she dropped them all on the floor---and I mean---it was just that kind of thing. I think that that made the faculty more at one with the students, just 'cause we did things like that.

Dr. Roseberry: Oh, I can remember for two or three years that the faculty women had a softball team, and we always played the girls.

Dr. Allen: It wasn't so easy to go to <Phoenix>. It was, I guess, an eight to ten hour drive to <Phoenix> when I first came. We were more or less on our own resources.

Susan Rogers: Okay, you were talking about some of the people also in the community who were prominent. Are there any special people you can remember that you want to mention, or say something about? I know that you mentioned George Hochderffer. Do you remember anything about him?

Dr. Roseberry: Yes, yes, he's been gone for a long time

Dr. Allen: His book, of course, is one man's memories of <Flagstaff>, you'll find some other old timers, who don't agree with what he wrote, still, you could get a bunch of the faculty who've been here a long time, and they wouldn't all agree exactly. We don't remember the same things, and certain things don't stand out in our minds. Of course, Dr. and Mrs. Colton were very influential, and they left the East because they liked the openness, and the challenge that the West gave to her, as an artist, and to him as a scientist. There were people like that who came here. Of course, there was Dr. Lowell, who came before they did. There were lots of people who came into this part of the country. Mr. C.B. Wilson, who was a very prominent lawyer over a long period of time here. He had the most interesting experiences and he could tell stories about the early days of the Santa Fe, particularly, I can remember.

Susan Rogers: Can you remember any particular ones he told you?

DR. ALLEN: Oh, I can't recall any definite one right now. I do know that he would befriend some of the people who came through. Widforss, who was, perhaps, one of the best painters of the <Grand Canyon>. He'd come into <Flagstaff>, and he'd be broke, and he gave his paintings away. C.B Wilson, I think, had two of Widforss' paintings that had just been given to him. They had contact with the Hubbell family who had a string of trading posts out on the reservation.

Dr. Roseberry: I think that there are a number of people like that.

Dr. Allen: By any chance, have you interviewed Mrs. Bessie Kidd Best?

Susan Rogers: I have an interview set up with her in about two weeks.

Dr. Allen: She was born here, and has lived here all her life, and she was County School Superintendent here for 42 years.

Dr. Roseberry: She can tell the most interesting stories of anybody. She tells of going over the <Colorado>, and the <Lees Ferry> country. I don't know---is Mr. Gold in "non compos mentis", or is he still able to talk?

Susan Rogers: Oh, you mean Frank Gold? He's too sick to be interviewed.

DR. ROSEBERRY: That's what I thought. I wonder about Olive McNerney, she's been here quite a while.

Susan Rogers: How do you spell that last name?

Dr. Roseberry: McNerney. She would love to talk, but I'd give her an idea of what you want to know.

Susan Rogers: Was she a faculty member?

Dr. Roseberry: She was a school teacher here in town. She came here in the 1920's, I believe. The thing about Olive was that she knew all about the lowdown on everything.

Dr. Allen: She was the high school teacher.

DR. ROSEBERRY: She's quite closely associated with some of us. She was around a good many of the Babbitts, and, I don't know who all like that around here.

Susan Rogers: Did any of the Babbitts go to NAU or did they go somewhere else?

Dr. Allen: Most of them went elsewhere to school, but we did have some of the Babbitts here in school; graduated here.

Dr. Roseberry: When I've been teaching, I had Betty. I'm not right sure, though, but what they'd gone to school someplace else, and had to come back and get a credit at NAU. I had Betty and Emma Jean.

Dr. Allen: Mary Eleanor.

Dr. Roseberry: Oh, yes. I don’t remember. Did she go to school up here?

Dr. Allen: Mary Eleanor and Teresa, I had them both in class.

Dr. Roseberry: I didn't have her, but I did have Emma Jean and Betty D’Mura in class. The difficulty on a lot of this is that too many of these people who would have been interesting to you to talk to are now gone or in "non compos mentis." Now, Mr. Gold would have been quite a chatterbox if he was able. He used to sit by me down when I tried to eat my lunch.

Dr. Allen: You've interviewed Mrs. Switzer? She's like Bessie Kidd Best. She moved here when she was a young child.

Dr. Roseberry: I think a lot of them came here from <Ohio> or around <Cincinnati>, didn't she come from there? 

INTERVIWER: She knew the Babbitts; her father knew the Babbitts.

Dr. Allen: They came, those Verkamps and the Babbitts, and all of them came from <Cincinnati> here.

DR. ROSEBERRY: I think---the Riordans, I can't remember just who else. But there's nobody left up on the faculty now that we knew. You know, I don't know about Rollin Wheeler, Rollin Wheeler being interested in history here.

Susan Rogers: We interviewed him. He was a teacher up at the high school.

Dr. Roseberry: Oh, did you?

Dr. Allen: Mr. Deaver, who is now retired and lives down in <Cottonwood>. He'd be good on the college during the twenties.

Susan Rogers: What's his first name?

Dr. Allen: Chester Deaver. His son, Richard Deaver, is a New York life insurance man here in town.

Dr. Roseberry: His son lives out on---what's the name of the street? Isn't it Anderson Road? I was going to say, Dick could get you in contact with Mr. Deaver. He'd be good on your college business.

Susan Rogers: His son's name is Dick, right?

Dr. Roseberry: It's out on Anderson Road where they live and it would be a good way to contact them out there. Now, this Dean Lintz that Dr. Allen talks about is still living but she couldn't be interviewed. She was the dean of women when I first came. Everybody was plenty scared of her, too.

Susan Rogers: Is she still in the <Flagstaff> area?

Dr. Allen: No. She's in a home down in <Phoenix>. Well, these people are gone and it's too bad that we didn't get interested in some of these things because Rose Babbitt and her sister Margaret Welch, they were teachers up at the college before our time. And there was Mrs. Pollock, Mary Morton Pollock. Morton Hall is named after her family.

Dr. Roseberry: Mrs.---what's her name---Beckwith would have been good.

Dr. Allen: That just reminds me of something. I have sort of a biography of Dr. Colton but it's their life back in <Philadelphia> and I must give this to Mr. Irwin. I'll take it over to Special Collections.

DR. ROSEBERRY: The things that are really interesting about the faculty was the women fighting the men for some raises or doing such things as that.

Dr. Allen: We were in such a minority, but we pulled things a time or two. We'd go into a faculty meeting to elect a president of the faculty. We'd nominate several which always split the vote and, when it came to voting, we'd all vote for the same one.

Dr. Roseberry: We kind of made that up though, to do that. So much has gone on since the early days here.

DR. ALLEN: I think that there's a factor that's made a difference but I can't tell you the date. We had a separate board of education, three members. There was a separate board of education for the university and for <Tempe>. There was a great deal of rivalry because there was not much money to be divided.

Dr. Roseberry: What time is it, I've got to....

Dr. Allen: It's ten minutes to three. And, so, we went through a period when the other schools were going to do away with us, when our enrollment dropped during the war; there was no need for a school here--and, that kind of thing. And, the big change which, I think, has smoothed things out a lot was when all three of the state universities were put under the same board of regents.

Susan Rogers: Can you tell me about what year that was?

Dr. Roseberry: Wasn't it during Dr. Eastburn's time?

Dr. Allen: It was just about the time that he came.

Dr. Roseberry: That was the time they had the big---people literally got out and fought to save the school, is what they did.

Dr. Allen: Well, it was the loyal alumni of this school that really got out. One time they were about to close us and various things happened and I sent telegrams and wrote letters. The Governor said one time that he had a pile of letters from friends in <Flagstaff>---I thought he said something like two feet high. It's made it much better since we've been under one board of regents.

DR. ROSEBERRY: I think it's been good, too, I think Dr. Walkup has a reputation for being a pretty reasonable man. I don't think that he's ever gone after unreasonable things.

Dr. Allen: Well, because we were a small school I think we've been fortunate in both Dr. Eastburn and Dr. Walkup. Our budgets were never "padded" and the legislature knew it so that our budgets have gone pretty well. In recent years they have fared very well. But, even back in our poorest days, when they were going to close us up, our budgets weren't padded and the legislature knew it, and they knew that we made the money go a long way up here.

Dr. Roseberry: Of course, this closing business was kind of a political faction, and it "died aborning", anyway, as near as I remember.

Dr. Allen: Back in those days, there was enough rivalry between the university and <Tempe>, so that when it came to political things, each one would court us because they wanted Northern <Arizona> to side with them. We always could stand back and wait until we thought we could get what we needed and what we wanted. That was true for years and years. It's not so true anymore because we are under one board of regents and they look at higher education in the whole state.

Susan Rogers: I think that about does it.

Dr. Allen: I think so.

